O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O ye, very dear children, I have finished this book which is the end of the science of medicine assembled from its employment, and I have completed it by its exposures and declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And I saw in vision that I must complete this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely surgery.
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is fraught in our region and is strange to all, if the science is lost and forgotten, and nothing remains of it except for the little descriptions in the books of the ancients which the hands have performed.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this arises the error and the vanity, and the closures of the understanding and the displacement of the science.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	Or it seems to me that I must bring it to life together the ordination of this practitioner according to the way of exposure and declaration and abbreviation; and I will join together the forms of the instruments of cautery and other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of it, as it is necessary. And because no wise man of hands is found in our time, the art of medicine is prolonged.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And he must know who comes into this subject thoroughly the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so long as he can discern the judgments of the limbs, and the forms and the joints and the separations of them, and has knowledge of bones and nerves and veins and arteries and the number of seeds, and the movement of semen and its rest.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And thus Hippocrates taught us that with the hand we must not be lazy, but must work diligently; and the same in the art of healing.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We must say at the outset of this book that whoever is not learned in the things that are before him, if he is arrogant and does not humble himself; as I have often seen happen, many people ruin themselves through these very things that are related to this science and abandon both science and sense.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I have seen a madman who copped his testicles with a pincer, or pulled out the hair of a woman; and he bled so much that the woman died in his hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And thus another marvel which treats a stone of a bladder, and the stone was great; if it carried away with it a piece of the bladder, and remained in the hon for two days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I have already heard of it being called to treat, and I saw the disposition of the patient and the greatness of the stone, and indeed if it were cut out it would surely die.</start_of_turn>
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And thus another marvel which treats a limb broken in our land, and with the bruise caused by the wound; and the physicians of this land do not know how to treat the bruise upon the wound as these stars are held together by strong ligature, and do not allow the wound to bleed at all, and leave it thus until it is finished; and they command that it not be moved, and that the limb be entirely freed and the bone and marrow be lost forever.</start_of_turn>
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I come to him and hasten to loosen the limb; and when I find it dislocated, it is without pain and without feeling any discomfort.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But in every way the corruption has already been confirmed or the limb has become deformed, and it cannot be healed; and the corruption continues to grow as long as the limb remains whole and intact.</start_of_turn>
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And thus too with other matters which undermine the body, such as tumors, boils, and inflammation caused by the malice of its master.</start_of_turn
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a wound caused by a melancholic tumor, it is only useful to touch it with fire if it is not in some part already corrupted to such an extent that everything corrupted must be removed.</start_of_turn
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And thus, take heed, for the work of the hands has become divided into twelve parts: that is to say, there is peril in many things. I will show in each chapter where there is doubt and peril.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	For you must take care that your limbs remain whole, so that no evil word can be spoken of you. If you take your weapons in custody and begin your ailments lightly and firmly, and use the best way, then by the grace of God you will come to health and be well; and let the curable diseases depart from your heart with peace. Stay away from those things that make you doubt, and trust in your arms that you may go from this world to the next with glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	The alien whispers in the ears of his attendants: "Do not take me for a madman who is mad about nothing; for I am not remembered as a fool.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatise in three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter deals with fire cautery and surgical cautery with water-based medicine, and this chapter orders from the head down; forms of instruments, and instruments for cautery, and everything necessary for the work
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter deals with fracture and piercing, and of abscesses and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and this chapter orders and the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter deals with restoring dislocations and strains, and similar matters; and it is ordered from the head downwards, and from the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	So, as we have recalled from the work, it is necessary to say what is the quality of the aid and the danger of neglecting complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of the aid, and the danger, is the longest word and the most subtle science and the secret response; and concerning this, many speak, and they agree with this; and I find that their words are insufficient, because I reduce the length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that the fire cautery helps universally for all complexion or when there is matter, for since there are two complexions: that is to say a complexion that is warm in sense of matter, and a complexion that is dry in sense of matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For in complexion hot and dry mixed with matter, some say it brings no relief and declare that cautery is of great aid; others say the opposite: that cautery is of no value in disease except when it comes from heat and dryness.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of a man and his moisture with the complexion of the fire, you find the body dry.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree to this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have never found it to be otherwise by experience.</start_of_turn>
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And every way, there is no fire that does not yield to me more than that which has been proved by experience, and which knows by long experience the chapter of cauteries, and the variety of humoral conditions, and the causes and dispositions of their diseases, and the issues and the space of their tensions; of other humors we have no fear, even in cold and moist diseases.</start_of_turn
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the others yield to the cautery and agree with it.</start_of_turn
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know this, children, that fire cautery is more effective for certain ailments than burning medicines.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For the fire is simple, and brings no further pain than to the limb that is being treated, and harms no other part besides that.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Medical preparations come from one member to another by mixing, and cause diseases in the limb with great health; and by chance it often happens that the patient feels unwell. The fire of life for its height and for the goodness of its substance does not make me do this, unless there is excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	The fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	Know ye, son, that it is necessary to agree in what tense the cauteries should be made, and their precautions.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	I say that the cautery is permissible in all tenses, for the harmful effects that are coming from it are overcome by the aid of the cautery; and besides, if the cauteries are for necessary pains that are urgent and cannot wait for a greater harm to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And think not, my son, that because fools do, it follows that the malady which is cured by cautery has no remedy; for he says it is so. But he lies, for cautery is nothing but medicine which moves the complexion and dries humors which are the cause of pain, and is more useful than medicine for hastening its value and for the virtue of its work and its lordship.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And know that no disease ever departs according to the complexion of the patient and the course of the disease and its virtue; and are gathered in it the superfluities by the acquisition of meats and similar things, if these are not administered with cautery when there is little superfluity and moisture, for indeed cautery is better for pain than meats and similar things, and part of the pain does not return again; but this is often the case.</start_of_turn>
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand that because cautery is called behind medicine, and it is true; but they do not believe that cautery is better than medicine, but their understanding is false, for indeed cautery is behind medicine because whenever we administer other treatments for any disease and they do not help, then we administer the cautery, and it is better.</start_of_turn>
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, although cautery is behind medicine, it is not according to the intentions of fools.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients say that gold cautery is duller than iron, and they say that fire is only useful for the quality of the gold and for its fineness; and they say that the lead of the cautery does not cause harm, but this is not true, for I have proved it, and I have found that it is seen in some men; and gold cautery is worth as much as iron, as they say.</start_of_turn>
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And indeed, when you burn the instrument of gold, you do not know how much it is tarnished by the color of gold, and when it is so cold; and if you burn it too much; if there is too much fire; and thus there is enough hindrance.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason we use our fire cautery, as we have learned it in our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or you have commanded this chapter from head to toe, for this reason that the way should be easier to find.</start_of_turn>
dou cautere olivaire	olive oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	These olive oil cauteries are useful for moisture and cold, for there are many diseases caused by a condition called "soda," and by the abundance of humors that descend from the head as sweat, and in the ears, and for many other complaints such as toothache, earache, and neck and throat pain, and even for many diseases that arise from cold, such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is such that the patient is purged by means of a soluble medicine which modifies the head of the joint, two or three times, according to what the physician deems useful and agreeable to the patient's custom; and then repeat the head of the joint of the patient.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	Then he makes him sit between your hands, and put his hands down on his feet; after that put the root of your thumb on the root of his thumb between his two nails; and there or will come your two middle fingers, if it bleeds from the base then withdraw the cautery which is called "olive", for this is the form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put out the sign of ink, and make descending and extracting your hand back and forth; then withdraw your hand slightly, and renew the cautery until you see the bone somewhat; and if you do not see it, continue the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you; after that take one moment of balsam, and put in awe and soak a cotton pad inside, and take out the bone, and leave it for two days; after that put on a soft bandage. And leave it on until the scab has become bony; after that cure the wound of the burn which is called "tetrafarmaçon", until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And they say the ancients, that the more time passes over a wound, the more it purges; and for this reason they aid the wound with movement.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they say that none of these men say that we must leave the cautery on for so long that part of the bone is burnt, and then we must renew what is burnt on the bone, and it must be cured.</start_of_turn>
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And others say that we must leave the cautery on for so long as a woman puts in her girdle for that the humors issue out loosely; and we must leave the wound open for a long time; and then we must cure and dress it.</start_of_turn>
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two ways of cauterizing do not seem to me to be good for all things, for in some men or if there is fear of pain; and I think that I ought to leave it; for the head of the shoulder is easily loosened by the continuous solutions of nature, as we have seen in other members; and even when the pain is slight by nature, the first semblance of cautery is more salve and merciful for me, and for this reason I do this thing in this manner.</start_of_turn
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	From the ancient pain of the head.
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When there is chronic pain in the head that lasts a long time, the patient must use herbs, pills which are called «cochie», and vomiting of the head, oils and poultices; and if we make the cautery as we have said before, it is of no avail.</start_of_turn>
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that if the patient’s condition is strong and not too weak; then the cautery must be performed as we have said above.</start_of_turn
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After the cautery is done on the bone of the head as we have said, and you have done the cautery of the vein which is called the «vasselz»; and that is where you put the sponges; hold your hand so that you do not see blood until the bone: the patient feels more great pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of that later; and it is recommended that the cautery of the horns be more subtle than that of the middle of the head, and that is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	Dou cautere dou chief,
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	Dou cautere dou chief,
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	When in a part of the shoulder comes sudden pain, and the disease is extended up to the armpit, and the limb is expelled by medicines that are modified, and other cures have been made as I said in the division of diseases; and all this has not profited: therefore you must make cauteries in two ways, that is to say of medicine and fire.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the cure of inflammation while he is still sane; and if you see that he does not recover from this with any of the medicines I have written or if you wish to treat him with other medicines that are not mentioned.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The fire cautery is as follows in this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	The fire cautery is as follows in this manner.
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "closed" because its head is made in the shape of a loop or it has a slight curve, and in the middle there is a small appearance; and put out the painful limb, and hold your hand and touch the burn with a slight movement until half of the thickness of the hair is burned; and keep your hand still so that the artery does not burn, that is to say that it is blistered, and drain abundance of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After having put on cotton wool around the limb, take it out after two or three days. Then put on moist cotton wool in the burrow and cure the limb of swelling until it is healed. And if you wish to cauterize this abscess with the cautery which is called "cultellare," at the very end, and keep the artery in that abscess which is not ancient.
de emigraine	After having put on cotton wool around the limb, take it out after two or three days. Then put on moist cotton wool in the burrow and cure the limb of swelling until it is healed. And if you wish to cauterize this abscess with the cautery which is called "cultellare," at the very end, and keep the artery in that abscess which is not ancient.
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you cauterize an abscess as we have previously said in the chapter on diseases, and it does not benefit, and you see that it does not suffice with just the cautery, then you must abstain from the cautery which is called "cultellare" while it is still green; and if you must remove the limb leaving a mark of half an inch long, and you move your hand once, and strain so that you do not cover the artery and do not feel pain; and be wary of the jaw that bites when you move it, and that it does not cause more damage than the pain and spasm, and be wary of the evacuation of blood from the artery when it is cut, or cutting causes great fear and discomfort to those who do not know how to handle it, and who are not experienced and learned; and leave the work in peace; but I will tell you how to staunch blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it is in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	If you notice that the former cautery does not suffice for the ailment, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the other side as well as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed; and if you see that, administer the cautery that we have said or the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has a pair of scissors; and this cautery is better than the previous and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	If you notice that the former cautery does not suffice for the ailment, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the other side as well as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed; and if you see that, administer the cautery that we have said or the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has a pair of scissors; and this cautery is better than the previous and more helpful.
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When the ear is affected by pain from cold, and there has been no relief from medicines and other cures that we have mentioned in the division, and the pain does not subside, then apply this cautery which is called the “needle,” for this is its form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After pricking all around the painful ear, or around the joint, if the pain persists in both places, then loosen a little from the root of the ear until you have marked the length; and take ten points around the ear; then cure the length as soon as it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	After pricking all around the painful ear, or around the joint, if the pain persists in both places, then loosen a little from the root of the ear until you have marked the length; and take ten points around the ear; then cure the length as soon as it is healed.
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture that must be cured by cautery is not fierce except for those that move from moisture, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not make any cautery that resembles that which comes from drying and swelling of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this semblance of torture that is made of fumes of hydras and purges of head and gargling, know that it is worth nothing; therefore, you must cauterize the patient with two cautery irons. One in the root of the ear, the other at the temple, and the third at the junction of the two eyebrows. Place the cautery iron in the part that opens well and make it cauterize at the head of the ear below the tip of the earlobe, and another at the temple as long as one eye. And leave the cautery iron in place until half of the hair is burnt; this is the form of the cautery.
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it is the semblance of a cutlass that we have placed before you, but it is a more subtle and effective remedy than the knife; after treating like this, as I have said before, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is ancient and you cure it as we have said, and it does not profit, and the patient does not have fever, then you must make three cauteries: one on each corner of the head, one in the middle of the head, and one in the part called "vasselz" as we have said before, and the last cautery on the back of the stomach; and it is cured as we have said before
de litargie	De litargie.
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	When lying down. The patient must be given large doses of wine and cooling pills to soothe the brain; afterwards lie the head of the patient down and put on the crown of his head a patch of rue that is written or treat with poultices; and that is the manner of the fire cautery: as I have said.</start_of_turn>
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is sane, well and good; but if not, two burnings of the head are to be made by removing juice until the col is reached, and there should be space between each burning of two large ones; and the cure is to be like the others. If you see that the patient is suffering, and the patient is gasping, make one burning in the middle; and if there are several, make two more on each side, and cure until he is sane. And the burning which is called the olive, as I have said before.</start_of_turn
de la froidor dou chief	From the cold of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	From the cold of the head, it must be known that the head must be freed from hair and that which has been said previously; after which, when the patient’s head has been raised, then make the cautery between the nape of the neck and behind the ear, and in front of the collarbone; and if you must do more than this, and the limb is moist and the patient is fainting, and the sickness is violent, do three cauteries on the spine of the back; and let it remain as long as the hair is black, and keep your hand still; after which, cure as long as it is safe, and be the cautery which is called “olive” which has been said previously.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The fiery cautery must not be used except in cases of phlegmatique inflammation; and first of all modify the head of the year and other treatments that we have mentioned in the preceding chapter when the patient is large and suffering from excessive medical treatment.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a feeble patient who cannot bear suffering, make him garglement and chew, modifying the head of the year often with bones of flesh; afterwards raise the head up to the middle and make one cautery as we have said before, and one cautery on the vein and on the spleen; and if the patient is strong and suffering, make cauteries as we have said to those who have paralysis and softening of bones, on the spine of the back and neck, or the olive cautery as I have said.</start_of_turn>
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is feeble, make one subtle cautery as follows:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When melancholy is the cause, superflous or corrupted humors and large phlegm arise, then indeed we cauterize with certain cauteries as we have said to the paralytic.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	When melancholy is the cause, if the superflous humor descends to melancholy and the body of the patient is moist, then let him drink something to cause the brains to be relaxed, as is done before in the division.</start_of_turn>
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that, take the patient’s chief; then make a circle of lint well made, like a circle, and put it on the chief; and hold the patient’s limbs crossed, and keep them well secured from all sides; then bring the flame and burn a little barley chaff; and keep the fire temperate so that the patient can tolerate it; then remove the circle from the chief and let it cool; do this for the patient once every week with another good government, until he is healed.</start_of_turn>
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or if you see the burnings made by doing more pricks all over the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This way of cautery soothes the brain immediately; then put on moist cotton wool in the wound and fat of gelline.
de l’awe des eulz	If you see the burn cauterized by making several pricks throughout the burn. This method of cautery soothes the brain instantly; then put on moist cotton wool in butter and lard.
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the sign of the evacuation of blood first appears, as I have said in the division, then immediately order the patient to drink something that will solidify the head and keep it away from all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe more times when fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After that you command him to rest his head, and you cauterize him around the head, and make three cauteries on each temple if the swelling of the blood has descended from the head as two together, or if it has descended from one side; and cut through all the veins and arteries that are below the eyebrow, and let the cautery be as long as the width of the temple; and take care not to remove too much blood, for if there is too much blood loss, if it is necessary, stop the bleeding with a piece of leather like you do.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I shall teach you concerning the extraction of arteries and the incision of the cautery how you shall extend it; and in no way shall you make the cautery or the lancet pierce the joints of the marrow bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	And I shall teach you concerning the extraction of arteries and the incision of the cautery how you shall extend it; and in no way shall you make the cautery or the lancet pierce the joints of the marrow bones behind
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are ancient and accustomed and are on the veins, or if you cut the arteries that appear to be in the front of the head; and it is seen that these are cold, fleumatic superfluities, then you must make the cautery as I have said at the beginning of this chapter: namely, cauterize the head and two cauteries on the temples, and two cauteries or lancet the joints of the marrow bones; and if there is need for more, if you must cauterize further from the eyebrow to the tip of the nose with every small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	For the pain of tears through the eyes,
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you have taken the medicine as we have said in the division, and it has not helped, then give the patient two fingers of wine; after that raise the head and make cautery or mix of olive oil; and make three cauteries of the cautery which is called "clavilis" on the two nipples, one at each breast; and be careful not to burn the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	This is the form of the cautery which is called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the skin of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then the cautery of this cautery which is called "olivare".
de coi ci est li forme:	The fire cautery is as follows in this manner
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that you must perform cautery upon the hairs of the armpits, let them grow as long as the hairs of the armpits themselves; and do not leave the hand but firm until the third part of the hair has been burned, as I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	And if you see that you must perform cautery upon the hairs of the armpits, let them grow as long as the hairs of the armpits themselves; and do not leave the hand but firm until the third part of the hair has been burned, as I have said.</start_of_turn>
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Never before have I seen that the hairs of oil have been converted to beards, and prick the oil, and it makes cautery in two ways: that is to say by fire, or by burning medicine.</start_of_turn
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they are born and even, then the physician should put the patient in a safe position; after that, mark on the skin of the eyes a figure which is as much like a flame as possible, or as the beginning of a sign from the hair; then he should put a moist cloth in butter and a little salve on the oil, and then cover the cautery with this form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing on the mark that you have made, and doing this several times, so that the burn is neither too deep nor too shallow; and the sign of the work is that you see the membrane withdraw, and the hair is raised to the point of the oil; then you should keep your hand still, and let them rest for two days; then put a moist cloth in butter until the swelling has gone down; after that, apply an ointment until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after that the hairs grow, and the papere is softened, then restart the cautery on the same place as before; and if the hairs are plucked out, burn them as long as the papere returns to its natural state, and be even, and do not prick the hairs with the oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The burning cautery of medicine is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow large and even, then make parchment of the shape of a bay leaf; then take soap of France and live chalk, each a third, and grind them together well; and make it thick, so that it does not reharden, then put it on the shape that you have made like a bay leaf, and put the papere on the eyes; and if the disease persists in oil only, you must open in oil only, and if in both; and put cotton wool soaked in oil around the wound; and the head of the shoulder must be in its natural position and your thumb showing on the medicine, and press once and let it move every time the patient feels a biting of the medicine, for he feels biting just like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, if the medicine has reached your thumb.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the bite is passed, if lift the limb of the shoulder, and reward if you see the skin raised as much as it was raised by the contraction of the fire or by incision; and if it is still, it is well
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, if you recall any medicine from before or the medicine has not worked, as long as your works are equal and your eyes are fixed; then put on a moist cloth in the burrow until the hairs are gone, and afterwards cure the wound which is called "dyafenis" and others, as long as they are healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you are confident that you can manage your work well with great care that it does not require any medicine, as your eyes remain fixed
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the wound becomes soft after it has bled, and the hair pricks in the oil, if you start the medicine again on that limb which has softened due to the wound, as you did before; afterwards cure until it is healed; this is the way of the fuelle of the myrtle tree.
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	Know that the souls of men are diverse in greatness and smallness, and according to that are your constraints; and do not be afraid to take another way to that which is studied by this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Of the treatment of fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatment brings no benefit, then you must cauterize according to this manner
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to hold his head still; and hold his ears between your hands in such a manner that he does not move them, does not lower his head; then put a wet cloth or vinegar juice on the oil; then burn the cautery which is partly: and keep it over the head as if it were a goose feather; gather up what has been cauterized if you see it, if there is a point from the one ear to the other; and if you see that there is a burn similar to a burn; but whatever happens, that which is over the head is worth more than your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula until it is over, and draining the pus, and drying; and if it is closed, if the wound, and drain the wound; then put the cautery on hot and hold your hand over the cautery at the part of the thumb next to the oil, so that your hands do not tremble; and put the cautery in the grease of the oil, and hold it firmly.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, that would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If that does not suffice, if you repeat the cautery once more, and if you are in doubt, let it remain for three days; after that, put on moist wool in the wound and treat with desiccant ointment until it is healed, and if forty days pass and it is not healed, put on corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and leave as it comes in your chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a method of cautery for fistula of which none of the ancients spoke.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	When there is a fistula, and open the cavity; then put into the opening I camel's hair as much as this is the shape:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and I make to the quantity of a third of an ounce; and hold your hand or gauze firmly, and do not move the patient, only that the melted wax does not come into contact with it; and it is advisable to put on the patient's oil a moist bandage of wool or cotton: the wax will thus adhere to the vessel of the fistula, and the patient will recover with great marvel at the health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery as we have said, that is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	And if that does not happen, if it is necessary, one must perform a perforation on the nerve and restore the fistula to its proper place as it should be in the body.
des crevaices en levres	If the fistula is cured by the cautery as we have said, that is good. If not, if you must, administer a perforation to the nerve, and bring the fistula back to its normal place as it should be in its proper place.
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	If the fistula is cured by the cautery as we have said, that is good. If not, if you must, administer a perforation to the nerve, and bring the fistula back to its normal place as it should be in its proper place
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you have treated these cracks resulting from the divisions we mentioned, and the cure has not profited, then you should perform a small cautery culture according to this fashion:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you have treated these cracks resulting from the divisions we mentioned, and the cure has not profited, then you should immediately perform a small cautery culture in that area until the pain ceases; after the cure, keep the limb still until it has healed.</start_of_turn>
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the armpit.
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When the abscess comes to the root of the arm or the elbow, or the shoulder or the root of the teeth, after making the opening and the wound becomes swollen and forms a fistula; and you should cure it as we have mentioned in the divisions, and it will not profit: so it is necessary that you have a small cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after you have cauterized the opening or perforation of the fistula, and keep your hand still until it has healed at the front and behind; and do this once or twice, after the cure of what we have mentioned in the cures, until it is healed; and if it is cured thus, that is good; but if not, you must uncover the limb and remove the corrupted bone, as you will find in this chapter.
dou movement des dens	The movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you have cured it with medicine, this is of no avail; therefore put the patient’s hand in your own; after that withdraw the cautery which will form afterwards in part as if you were putting on a pincer; and put the cautery into the tooth socket immediately, and hold your hand until the patient feels the heat coming from the root of the tooth; after that withdraw your hand and resume the cautery as you please; after that fill the patient’s mouth with salt water, and keep it closed for an hour and a quarter.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in part, when the teeth which were moving are confirmed, and the soft gum is restrained, and the moisture is corrupted, it dries up.
de la dolor des dens	De la douleur des dents.
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When toothache comes from cold, or there is cold or heat, and medical cures do not help, then it is necessary to perform cautery in two ways: cautery of the nerve and cautery of the fire.</start_of_turn>
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cautery of the burn if such be that you grasp a burn of grease, and the end in a spoon of iron or pewter; after taking cotton and wrapping over the tip of a rag, and the boil in grease boils, and put upon the aching tooth immediately and hold until it is cold; and do this often until the remedy comes to the root of the tooth, and if you see if there is still grease and cotton in the grease, and put upon the aching tooth, and put on the iron again until the fire comes to the cheek of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	The cautery must be held as if one grasps a nail or an arachnids; let the fire not reach the patient’s mouth; after the fire has been kindled, lay the cautery on the tooth and hold the hand until the fire is cold; do this often, for the pain will be great as if from the same or the following day
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	One must ensure that the patient fills his mouth with good burr in the haste of this cautery, and then hold tight; and that is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make the cautery as you please, and according to what you have seen fit; and this is the form of the burn.
des scrophules	And the size of the wound on the thumb and the moisture, if it is less severe, because they are of little blood. And if there are any of these wounds or chieftains who have no moisture, and of these wounds which I cauterize or chieftains of an old woman; and find the wound just like a hard stone, rough and white, and cannot break it; and if no blood appears, we must make the wound just as well as if it were a stone. In other wounds coming or chieftains, forasmuch as these which come from the head of the fetus and have roots of the ears, the opening must be made every day to the most dependent part of the limb; and the cure must be made as it should be.
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the lymph nodes are filled with phlegm and cold moisture, and are not subject to digestion by medicines, then evacuate the cautery needle beforehand; for two wounds will appear from the fumes to irritate the cautery of the other side; and place the cautery hot on the abscess once, or if it intermingles, until it reaches the front of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, put in the cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it in place for three days; and put on a wet compress over the wound until the swelling has subsided.
Li forme de la cainne:	The formation of the abscess:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When moisture prevails over the veins due to cold complexion, it is necessary that the patient be first purged by dissolving medicines; after that, perform the cautery at the root of the throat, and keep it so that you do not go down to the stomach, and do not go too deep but just a little bit
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that, do another cautery at the joint of the collarbone at the head of the scapula; and let the cautery which is called the "clavile" be as we have the shape before; and cure the limb as we have said above until it is healed.
de la toust	When moisture prevails over the channels of the pores, and even when this comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be first relieved by solvent medicines; afterwards perform the cautery at the root of the throat, and keep it so that you do not go further than the throat, and do not burn more than is necessary. Afterwards perform another cautery at the joint of the collarbone at the base of the spine; and let the cautery which is called the "claw" remain as it is; and cure the limb as it has been said above until it is healed.
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When moisture prevails over the pores and the patient has neither fever nor sweating, and the ailment is ancient, if you perform two cauteries on the forcele [jaw] in the front and one between the two nipples; and let the cautery which is called the "claw" remain as it is as it has been said above.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see, do the cautery by pricking all the cautery which is called "points" because their form is like this in the ear disease; and let the points be up to XXX, or until bent.</start_of_turn>
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After that, cure the limb as we have said above, and let the cautery be three times according to this form.</start_of_turn
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because of that, these cauteries are lighter, for these that you make at .iij. together.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	because of the dislocation of the shoulder.
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterwards, support the patient on their back and chest; then take hold of the thumb which is within the armpit with your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated, if necessary, grasp the cautery which has about an inch of length: thus...
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	...and burn the thumb until it reaches the chest, and the burn would come out with three cauteries in total; and for this reason the cautery is made with the cautery which has about two nails, for the figure of cautery is like two nails; and the nerves are according to the fineness of a thread and this is the form of the cautery which has about two nails:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And never is the suture placed upon this nerve because there are seven cauteries there.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	Then put on the cautery, broil the wounds with oil; then rest the patient, and do not move the limb until it is well comforted.</start_of_turn>
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if there is a dislocation below, whatever the cause, then do the cautery on the thick part of the "clavile" cautery, or several pricks.</start_of_turn
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and the moisture is bony, and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When the stomach brings cold and moist humors as long as they stain its complexion, and multiply the diarrhea to it, these are customary cures and they do not help; therefore it is necessary that the patient rest on his back, extend his legs and arms.</start_of_turn>
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	After this, make three cauteries: one on the heel, two on the hip bone for the amount of two nails; for every cautery mark, close the wound with a needle, and make two cauteries on the two costae as long as the figure of the cauteries is at a right angle, and has some space between each other so that they do not join together when they swell; and let the cauteries be so strong that they draw out the two parts of the bone, and let the figure of the cauteries be as described above.</start_of_turn
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you see him cauterized with a great cautery in the stomach in this fashion; and he who has fear of this cautery, cauterize by pricking and marking on the stomach. As much as you see of the hair; then cauterize the remainder of the hair which is called "poins".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the wound that we have seen before, while he is still conscious.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver comes with pain of cold and moisture and great swelling, because it is forced out of its natural position by the humors; and the patient is cured of what we have said in divisions, and he does not profit from it, if he is not anointed on his navel; and sign of hair three cauteries according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, to push away the spleen, the liver or the kidneys; and there be space between each cautery the thickness of an egg; and let the cautery be long as the nail of the thumb, and do not press too hard with your hand over the whole cautery; and let only half of the burn be visible, and the patient should lie on his side; and if he cannot, let him lie without moving, and extend his legs, and keep his arms crossed; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if your will be, if you cauterize these cauteries of little sweetness, if you are subtle and prudent in the art, and take care that you do not burn all the hair, for you will make it dry all over; and that it does not come out of its place, for the hair is very subtle in that place, and the nails will see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When it has burst into the liver, and you know whether it is in the flesh of the liver or in the gall: if it is in the flesh, the patient feels little pain; but if it is in the gall, the pain is violent.</start_of_turn>
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And when this treatment is finished, if you think the patient is cured of his head; then sign with the touch of the hand over the wound or the burst, and then burn the cautery which is like a thread, for this is its form.</start_of_turn
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And I cauterize thus far as the hairs are long and even, and come up until the root is strong; until the wound is fully healed; after that, cure as for ordinary wounds until they are healed; and I advise you that this cautery should only be used by one who has studied for a long time in the art of medicine, and by whom these diseases have never occurred before.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Therefore, he should not dare to work, and I think that it is better to leave it alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	of the pleura.
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancient said that we must make for pleuresin cauteries of root of aristologe, and in part thus: take a root of aristologe long, the greatest that thou shalt find, and be dry, and be as great and as long as thy two hands; and the grease in oil, and the mark on the fire, and cauterize. I. Cauterize between the nipple and the collar, and II. Two small cauteries in descending on that which is below the beard; and III. Cauterize between the fifth rib and the twelfth, declining behind a rib. I. Cauterize at the pit of the stomach, and I. Another above the stomach, and I. Between two ribs, and II. Have two ribs below the pit defend the cautery that is between two ribs; and do not press me your hand, but make it open as when smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And they say that no ancient person uses a fire cautery resembling a razor, and the eschaufet and put between the ribs, until it comes to this incision; and great pain follows, as we have said concerning the abscess of the liver
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear or the patient is dead now, or an abscess comes which cannot be healed.
de la mice	of mice
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse from what we have said concerning the divisions of the cures, and it brings no benefit, then there remain two methods of cautery that are both good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	If you do this three times, or four, lidding as much as the length of the hair, as the shape of the burn of the palm of the hand which we have said before; and do not press your hand on all the burn, and let the patient rest on his back; and another method of burn is if you remove the burn that has two hairs, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and hold the shoulder where the hair is, or the curvature of the patient’s body comes towards the left, and raise the elevation that you have bound to the shoulder according to the shoulder, according to the length of the limb, and the burn must be according to the width of the limb.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After that, if two nerves are inflamed until the knuckles are perceived from the other side, then draw out the cautery quickly, and there will be three left. If you see that, if you have cauterized all three nerves, stop the cautery at three nerves.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After that, when the wound has bled for a long time due to tension, and this is just as true for the other wounds mentioned earlier.
de ydropisie	De ydropisie.
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	The cautery is not worth the hydropique, except for the method which is called "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you treat according to the methods we have mentioned in the divisions, and your cure does not help, then you must make three cauteries around the belly, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, two behind the shoulder blade on the spine, and one on the heel; and keep the cautery very close to the bone of the knuckle
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leaving the cautery open for a long time to drain the pus, do not leave the dressing on the patient after the cautery; and healing will be expedited, and both joints will be bound together with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the belly cautery is like a nail which we have before shown; and the olive-shaped one is like that which is shown here
de l’enfleure des piez	of swelling of the parts.
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the nails are swollen in the hypochondriac and are full of yellow bile, it is fitting that you cauterize on the back of the thumb between the ring and little fingers; and hold your hand with the cautery towards you.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not go too deep into the wound, because it would cause the yellow bile to spurt out; and let the cautery be in this shape:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After that, make two incisions on the thigh; at the tip of the buttock. And let the incisions be long, one of them above the knee and the other below, between the thigh; and leave the incisions open along their length to cure, that they may be healed in peace; after that, perform the other treatments that we have said.
de la menoison	After that, make two incisions on the thigh; at the tip of the buttock. And let the incisions be long, one of them above the knee and the other below, between the thigh; and leave the incisions open along their length to cure, that they may be healed in peace; after that, perform the other treatments that we have said.
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the solution of the belly comes from cold and moisture, as the retaining and digestive virtue which is the stomach and the intestines is evacuated, and cannot be cured by means of treatment; and you see the patient well suffering and very weak, if you make a great burn on the stomach as it has been said above or a burn of the stomach, at the burn that circulates; and three burns around the abdominal cavity at all times.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	If you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, perform a cautery on the armpit, and indeed cautery on each side, and three small cauteries on the abdomen below the large one; for the cure is beneficial when there is good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	If you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, perform a cautery on the armpit, and indeed cautery on each side, and three small cauteries on the abdomen below the large one; for the cure is beneficial when there is good aid.
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When the hemorrhoids are founded, or several, and are old and are of thick cold humors and moist, and are cured as we have said in the divisions, and it does no good to cauterize: three on the spine of the back, which is all that is sufficient for the almonds and almonds in triangulating, and one cautery below the buttock two; and if you think that the stomach is cold, and the meat is not cooked, and you see swelling of the face, then you must make a great cautery on the stomach, as it is said before, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen with all the cautery nails; and leave the cautery open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treating the wound until it is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	If you think the stomach is chilled and the meat is not cooked, and you see the face puffed up, then you must apply a large cautery to the stomach, as it is said above, and another to the liver, and another to the spleen throughout the staple; and leave the cautery on for a long time. After that, cure the wound until it is healed.
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you deal with the thelul, if you see the cautery which appears to scratch, then grasp it firmly with your hand and put it right over the affected area; and leave it there until the bleeding stops by itself. Do this once or twice; and if there is much thelul, if you cauterize each one as we have said; after that, cure the wound with useful remedies until it is healed; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the outside, you will have more help.
de plaie mal curee	Of a wound that is not properly treated
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure the size or opening, as we have mentioned before, if there be any ailment that cannot be cured except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When no fistula comes, and is swollen and discharges pus and corrupt moisture, if the doctor has made an attempt in vain, and has kept the wound moist with every means possible.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After removing the cautery which seems to have raised the wound, and has placed it in the fistula as much as it can tolerate, and resumes the cautery until the burnings that were caused by the fire are consumed, once or twice or thrice, according to the amount of blackness required; and beware the nerves that are nearby, and the large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	When the fistula comes out to the bladder and the intestines, if you are aware of these structures, do not make the fire deeper than necessary; think that it is not always necessary. After treating the wound until it is healed, and if the structures are relaxed and the tissues are taut, then you can stop the bleeding entirely; but if the tissues are not taut, stop the bleeding when the wound is almost healed, and corrupt the bone at the same time; just as we have said about this matter.
de la maladie des reins	Of the kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain from swelling comes with abundant vomiting, and does not abate with the help of a woman, then it is to be known that you must cauterize on the kidneys both on one side and the other side above the navel; and if we cauterize them in the middle, if there are two cauteries in a line, it will be more helpful.</start_of_turn>
de la vessie	Of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is swollen and weak from pain and moisture, and the patient retains urine, then you must cauterize on the lower part of the bladder above the navel, at the place where the hair ends and the skin begins, and make two or three cauteries as long as a bean; and make one cauterization at the back or two if necessary; and make a cauterization of the navel as described before.</start_of_turn
de la marris	De la marris.
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the marrow is cold and moist, and does not allow me to conceive, and the flowers are corrupted and their endings are late; and when they come, if there is great pain: then it is to be known that it must be cauterized around the bone, as we have said or cauterize the bladder, and two cauteries behind the loin; or the cauteries are applied to the navel, as we have said.</start_of_turn>
de la hainche	De la hainche.
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When viscous moisture descends to the thigh bone, and by this cause it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and is found to be swollen with pain, if it is known that the patient must cauterize the patient above the thigh bone at the circumference, and mark in front of the limb around the thigh if it twists, so that the thigh is within the circumference; and if the cauteries are made like those which we have cauterized the stomach.</start_of_turn
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if these cautery treatments are not present, make two cauteries of the olive tree, and let the cautery be as strong as all the others; and cure until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	And if these cautery treatments are not present, make two cauteries of the olive tree, and let the cautery be as strong as all the others; and cure until it is healed.
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes into the groin, due to cold and moisture, the patient is cured of this by what we have said in the previous section; and the cure is not worth the disease which is old: therefore it is necessary to purge the patient of the foul humors or other solid pills that are similar.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After the fire cautery; and one must repeat the cautery two ways: that is to say with the application of medicines and with fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cautery is according to two methods: one of which is as follows: burn on the hip bone three triangular cauteries as in this shape, and make them deep and great, and put between each cautery a thickness equal to the diameter of an olive, or use olive oil; never burn in the middle of the hip bone, for there are three according to this shape.
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see that the fire cautery is done on the circumference of the circle which we mentioned concerning the dislocation of the hip; but make part of the manner that the circle contains the entire hip, and all the thickness of the thigh is parallel to the circle.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the manner in which it is done for sciatica, when the pain persists in the hip, and does not reach up to the thigh or leg
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	If it comes up to the thigh and the leg, if the patient says that the pain persists, then make two incisions here; at the ankle make three incisions, one on the left side. Either make the incisions small or wide as you please; and if the patient feels that the pain extends up to the knee or thereabouts, burn there wherever the pain is most intense or at the point where the pain is felt.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if he has come to this, if the pain persists from the knee to the thigh, let him perform cautery with the blunt or circular cautery, and keep him well guarded in all his cauteries, that you leave neither the cautery nor the burning of nerves and great arteries, and that you cause him no further pain or contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	I have seen many who have made incisions at the ankle joint and left the limb entirely hanging free, and the bones were fractured in many places and were perforated and corrupted throughout.</start_of_turn>
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a solution of the belly from which death is expected.</start_of_turn>
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts together, make cautery in both, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And if the pain is in two parts together, make cautery in both, according to this manner. Make a mark like this on the skin at the hip, where this is the manner, make one like this at the head and as large as a hazelnut of a doctor, or less, and be between nails, or from one nail to the other at the space of a barleycorn; and let the nails be over two parts, and be as nails, and have one hand of fire well made; this is the form.
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let the hair grow until it is all red and soft, and then place it on the box of the aching shoulder; and let it burn for a while; and then cauterize once. Leave it for two days. Then make an ointment of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; after the cure of the swelling until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that our methods often use this cautery because of its quick effect, and we see those who use it; and all these boils are cauterized, which can cause suffering, and there it is where care is needed.</start_of_turn>
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The burning cautery of medicine, if you make a mark between nails where the edge of the door descends, and be of spider or iron with a broad end, and in height have two nails, and between each have the quantity of the thickness of an olive; and be obvious front and back, and join together according to this form.
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After placing the basin of the shoulder on the patient lying on his side, press your hand flat on the basin of the shoulder; then pour between the two circles of the arm warm which is scorched by the fire one inch, and leave it for an hour with tension, and offer the patient the heat and the burning sensation of it.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is true that there is biting like fire; and when the biting has passed, grasp your hand with the instrument and lift the arm gently, and leave it for three days, and put on ointment as much as the black of the scab is ossified; and leave it for three days that it may heal properly; and this would be the last aid after the treatment of wounds as long as they are well.</start_of_turn>
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has extended to the thigh or to the leg, take I instrument that holds the arm according to what you have done in the shoulder immediately; and this is the manner of the warm arm, and I have written or treated of its rectification in medicine.</start_of_turn
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	Take alkali and live broth, equal amounts of each, grind them together, and put them into a new pot.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And if there is little loss of blood and it is administered in the midst of medical treatments and other cauteries of other members Because it makes parts useless like fire, and if there are other medicines of which we cauterize the base well with beeswax and mastic and charcoal with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galiens tells us of a cure by which some honourable men were cured of pain in the groin and sciatic vein, and he praised it, and said that no other cure had been found, and that they were healed at once when this cure was made, and he bathed as he was taught afterwards.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And he adds somewhat that you take two handfuls of green fresh butter and grind it with a little fat, and put it on the groin and thigh and leg where the pain is, and bind it; and leave it for three hours, for by that time the patient does not feel the burning sensation anymore.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then make him enter or bathe while the limb is slightly flexed, and then make him enter or lie down, and the pain will go away entirely and will be healed
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And such matters that no one must use fire cautery for such medicines, except after the evacuation of bones.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And thus Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with a piece of glass, if it is of little size; and must be done cautiously.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take lint and soak it in much oil, and put it on the pit between the thumb and the great toe and the one that is called fossicle
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After that take a piece of glass dry and burn it until it is charcoal, and put it on the lint, and leave it until it is stained; and do this again and do not stop doing this until you think that there is no more pain; and this manner of cautery is called "cautery of glass".
de la dolor dou dos	of backache.</start_of_turn>
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, or from sitting or percussion or from too great an evacuation of blood, or from similar symptoms of cold spreading matter, of none of these symptoms is the fire cautery of any value, save for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	When the patient is devoid of stinking pills or other similar things, we must make three lines signed with a mark on the back, loin or where the pain is located; and make three or four cauteries according to the virtue and the quantity that the patient can endure; and the cautery must be made according to the cautery which is called "poins"; and if you see this, make two or three cauteries at the middle cautery according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this disease comes as a small wound, and the sign of its beginning is that it has burst open in the loin when it comes on; and there is doubt and fear; and you find at the back of the spine on the back and on us its appearance which comes after the others.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see that and you see it healed, if you cauterize at the cautery of this circle according to this fashion.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	If the fire cautery touches some part of the spine excessively.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	If you see that it has cauterized around the spine at the point where the cautery has pierced two or three lines, and that the points are close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After treating the wound as far as it is necessary for it to be healed, according to what we have said above, and beware that you do not move the cautery over the nerve which is in close proximity to the wound
de la dolor des jointes	of joint pain
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When joint pain arises from moisture that has spread throughout the limb, and when the pain originates from within the bone, it is called "podagre" properly. And when the cause is cold and the disease does not yield to medicines, it is often cured by cautery in this way: make a mark of the cautery around the joint of the limb, and apply the cautery as follows:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is need that you prick on the face of the bone, if you are to cauterize all the way through with the cautery, you must declare "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come up to the joints and others, and this happens many times, if you are to cauterize each joint three times or four times on each part, with the olive oil; and if you must do more, do so, but do not keep your hand over the wound for longer than necessary until the sensation of pain has passed
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend down to the groin and back, administer the cautery as we have said in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are as far as the hands, if you make points at the navel two lines; and if there remains no pain at the navel, if you make points on the wrist and on the nail of the hand; and if the pains come down to the buttocks or down to the elbows, if you cauterize some part, and make the patient drink and take medicine.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you make him drink and purge phlegm, he will be healed with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	If the oes does not lose its nourishment through the incision of the vessels, and dries and does not yield aid.
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the routure comes, and the bowel descends like stones and it is new, if you see that when you attempt to cure it, it does not mend itself; and that it causes things to leave the belly, so that the pain descends from the belly; then make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his shoulder tight until the bowel is repaired, and keep his arms at your sides, and mark with your finger the routure above the shoulderbone, and at any sign that it resembles half of a circle below the ribs; then withdraw the cautery in this form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	As long as he is soft and evacuates sensation.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then restrain the bowels in their place; and he holds your hand so that they do not return backwards; and give the patient good compresses, and put a cushion under his hips and one under his wrists; then put the cautery on the sign at all your hand, and keep it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, do it again until you reach the bone; and be wary that the bowels do not protrude when you are making the cautery; that you do not burn him; and that through this the patient does not die, or any other evil
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And as for wounds that do not reach the bone at the cautery, your work is in vain.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And you must know that the cautery of small wounds must be subtle in measure according to the quantity of hair, and that of great people also great in measure; after three days cure the abscess until the scab becomes bony; after that cure other matters until they are healed; and keep the patient lying down for forty days on his back until the wound is well healed; and you must know that its nourishment must be continuous, so that the boils do not come out when he stirs to go to bed.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	After forty days, when he wants to get up, give him a well-made broth, and let him rest for forty days; and give him good rest, that he work little and beware of too great drinking of wine and eating, and of too high a diet; and when he has learned this he will be completely healed
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I shall speak of the treatment of the heel in this chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the evacuation of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When wounds come out of other parts and are known, and you see that they do not grow further, if you do not cauterize them with the cautery, they will remain as much as before; after the treatment, as we have said; neither the former doctors have said that it should be cauterized with the cautery at three angles according to this form.
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but first mark the place with ink and make a line along the width of the wound, and another at the bottom, and hold your hand firmly over the cautery needle
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauteries are lighter and more fluid.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of ancient pain in no limb.
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes in any limb, or the shoulder or the hip, and this pain persists for a long time, and the medical treatment is not of use, then it is advised that it be cauterized with the cautery called “points,” and the cautery should be done according to the length of the limb, its thickness and weakness, its toughness and its tendency to twist and its pain
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If he is well after the first burn, it is good; if not, repeat the burn upon that one, for it is customary that it must move to the neighboring part, so that you can make the burns while the patient is well.
de meselerie	When pain arises in any limb, whether from injury or from sitting, and the pain persists for a long time, and the medical cure proves useless, then it is recommended to cauterize the area using the cautery known as the "points." The cautery should be performed according to the length of the limb, its breadth, its weakness, its toughness, and its twisting and painfulness. If the first cautery is successful, well and good; if not, repeat the process. Indeed, it is customary to perform the cautery on the area that is closest to the painful area, so that one can make the cauteries until the patient is cured.
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The diseases do not yield to burn once or twice with great aid, and even the diseases that come from the corruption of humors and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	Can you see the burn being made? Take care if the disease is at the beginning, and if it is cured as we have said in the division, do not linger, and you doubt that the corruption does not spread throughout the illness, then make five burns on the head: one on the new head, and one at the front towards the eyebrows; and two on the two horns, and one behind on the cheek; and leave the hand as long as the burns come up to the bone, and as long as the scabs fall out so that the vapors of the humors can escape; and burn on the mouse according to what is before you
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if there is a mixture of moisture everywhere; and it appears openly, if you must use these cauteries that we have mentioned or chief, namely a cautery on the top of the thumb, two cauteries on the spine of the collarbone, three cauteries on the spine of the shoulder, one large on the elbow and one other elsewhere, two on the two thumbs, two on the scapulae, two on the flanks, two on the Achilles tendons, and one on any joint of the hands or feet, and on the pits of the hands; keep away from the nerves that are behind the calcaneus, so that you do not burn them; and never make the cautery on the bones of the heel or the bones of the stomach or the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And the wounds that when more fire cautery is made, more aid is given, and profit is made for him; and the wounds that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as when he feels it, because the flesh is already corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cautery be great and small according to the members and the joints, according to what you find in the handling of herbs
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After treatment with flour poultices several times with honey and other cures until they are healed
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When swelling comes to any limb and is cured by medicines and oils and plasters, and is not well, then make cautery on the limb according to the greatness and smallness of the limb; and let the cautery penetrate deeply as much as possible; then cure with ointments until it is healed
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And never do we cauterize at the hand, the foot, or the back, at the exit of nerves that move the limb, and thus if it is bony it swells; and in no way should anyone interfere unless they are skilled in limbs and the exits of the moving nerves from the bones.
de albaras	When swelling comes to any limb and is cured by medicines, oils, and plasters, and is not completely healed, then it is done to cauterize on the limb according to the greatness and smallness of the limb; and either the cautery is made at the root of the thumb or at the tip of the ring finger. Then it is cured with ointment until it is healed. And at no time is cautery done on the hand, foot, or back, at the issue of the nerve that makes the limb immobile, or if it is bony swelling. And all this is done without any hindrance if one is skilled in the limb and the issue of the moving nerves around the bone.
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" is present, and medicine is of no avail, then it is done to cauterize with a needle once, according to the quantity of the area, until the swelling is bony and has changed colour; then it is cured with flour of times and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and without colocynth and alum, a part of each; and all this is mixed together, and bound up with a bandage, and left to heal until it is healed
li cure de chancre par cautere	The cure of chancre by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a boil first appears, and you see it stop, if you cauterize at the circumference that seems like a circle, all around the boil.</start_of_turn>
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And all these people say that we must cauterize also in the middle of the boil; and in no way does it seem good to me, because I fear that it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already seen several times that it is better to leave it alone; and the right thing is to cauterize around it, at the cautery which is called the "circle", as we have said before.</start_of_turn
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling that cannot be cured
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When anyone has an ailment called "adubelati", and it delays in healing or because of the excessive heat it causes or because of the excessive blood in the patient when he is decrepit (that is, too old), or because of foul air; and you see that it is urgent to heal: then cauterize around the mouth of small cauteries by pricking; and leave it thus.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will haste to heal.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it turn with the entire cautery, if it is hot, cauterize the cautery again so that this is the shape:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the middle of this ailment called "adubelati" until the cauteries have perceived the cold, and make the cauteries such that the patient feels a tingling sensation in part as the process progresses.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Leave it thus until it is perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	The fire cautery. Instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another disease that is called "corrodens" is nothing but the softening of limbs, for it causes the limbs to swell up like dry bones.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in the limb which can suffer from fire cautery, then shave the hairs closely with small and large clippers, as it is suitable for the limb or the disease; after cauterizing all parts until you have eradicated all corruption, and nothing remains except for the bone itself.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	Then leave it for three days, and put on the cauterized limbs, let them be broiled with oil until the burnt hairs are ossified, and all the corruption is gone
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of wounds that secrete pus.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	If after three days the hair does not grow back, it is good; and if this does not happen, repeat the cautery on that which remains corrupt.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	This remedy is never sufficient to cure a medical ailment in place of fire cautery; but all the same, fire cautery is of greater aid, as I have already said in the division: take as much as you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times it happens that when a wound has festered, a disease called "clos" appears according to our understanding, which is a large and burdensome burden that makes the patient weep blood from the wound
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	The cautery for this disease is done in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is to say, fire cautery, and hot water cautery
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	If you burn with fire, if you are rash, I burn the hair in like a needle of wool; it is made of good iron of the measure that it can penetrate the head of all parts, and there must be subtle margins; after that put all around on the head of the hair, and twist your hand all around the head until it comes to the front of the head; and leave it there for three days until it begins to soften; then make an embolus of wild mallow seeds with silk, and leave the embolus on all night, and close the wound tightly and it will be scraped from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure the wound of swelling by applying pressure until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if there are converts by boils, and many times happen and in hands and in feet, if you can consider that you must bring an aquaplast of hot water; and it is in part like this: take a hazel or iron pin or a needle of wool, and put it on the wound and the clot; that is to say, poke the warts; and put the hazel on so that it tightens all around, then put a little bit of hot water, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand while the margin of the hazel comes to the root of the wound, and can find the hot water way deep until the root; and give the patient a little sip of the hot water an hour; then leave it like that, and it will discharge all at its roots
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	So make another, until you have scraped all these things from the bone, then cure the wounds which are caused by hair.
li cure dou trembler	You have not provided any text for me to translate, so I am unable to provide a translation.
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When the body trembles from cold, or from a quartan fever or from another, if you make four cauteries on the spine of the back, one cautery between the shoulder blades, and one cautery at the waist and one on the stomach at the olive cautery; if you leave them on, the trembling will cease and the patient will be cured of the cold.
des pustules puans	When the body trembles from cold, or from a quartan fever or from another, if you make four cauteries on the spine of the back, one cautery between the shoulder blades, and one cautery at the waist and one on the stomach at the olive cautery; if you leave them on, the trembling will cease and the patient will be cured of the cold.
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	At no time does the bone bathe, or boils, or abscesses swell, which come from corrupted matters.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	If you can do so at the first, when they appear, make a cautery on each head of the abscess: a subtle cautery with tinder of Myrtle, because the tip should neither be grasped by the fire, nor by long Aristolochia root, or by the lenticular cautery
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And never begin the cautery when they appear, according to this manner, but break the excess from which they come, and they are healed; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is cut.
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	When the artery is cut, there is often great bleeding from the artery at the wound which comes from the surgeon, or from the incision of the abscess, or from the cautery of the limb, and similar things; and it is a mournful thing to watch.</start_of_turn>
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And whenever this happens, if you are in a hurry to put your thumb on the wound of the vein, and you strain too much without calming your thumb, and no blood comes out anymore; then take olive oil cauteries of various sizes and make them red; then press down, that is, large or small as it is suitable for the wound and the limb in which the artery is passing, and put the cautery on that vein or hold your thumb there, and hold the cautery as long as it is necessary without letting it go.</start_of_turn>
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if there is bleeding again when you remove your thumb from the vein, and the cautery is finished, take hold of another cautery that is on the fire immediately.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease to do this one after the other until the limb is restored; and beware that you do not damage the nerve that is nearby, and that no other harm comes upon the patient; and take notice that when without displacement of an artery, it is not possible to fill it up properly even when the artery is large, except by one of the three methods that we have mentioned: or by cautery, or by extraction when it is not otherwise treated, or by strong ligation of thread, or by medicines placed upon it that have power to restore blood flow. And let it be firmly held in place afterward.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever brings about the restoration of the limb violently with cloths or with the laying on of burning things, or other similar things, if it does not prove helpful, does harm.</start_of_turn>
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if there is no other remedy and there is no medicine present, if necessary put your two fingers on the wound of the vein as we have said, and keep them in place until the bleeding stops; and do not move the limb, but moisten it with cold water often so that it may be cold to the touch as long as the limb is frozen and swollen and resting; and make incisions in front of this where cautery and medicines must be applied.</start_of_turn>
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Ci encourag li secons livre des cures de taille.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	Now we have said or previously in the first chapter that every disease in which it is necessary to perform cautery of fire, or of applied medicine, and the methods, causes and instruments, and forms of cauteries; and in this chapter we shall speak of those matters in this way that we find them more conveniently in this chapter through this way.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And thus, as I begin this chapter, it is necessary, my son, to learn that in this chapter there is more peril and fear than in the previous chapters of the cauteries, and for this reason it is necessary to take greater precautions.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you that you must not act rashly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many people come to harm through their recklessness.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	if they come from those who have already suffered so much from their disease that they move lightly from fear of the disease, and from the greatness of their malice; and of these we must have fear.</start_of_turn>
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And from these there are those who tell you: "Wait, I am ready"; and the disease is desperate.</start_of_turn
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	I advise you only to do what those tell you who have this custom, but put more caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not act foolishly but thoughtfully of what you are certain, and of what you have already taken and lost; and use prognosis and indication in the treatment of your patients so that salvation is either converted or continued; and this will help you to obtain good fame, glory, and memory over time.</start_of_turn
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, our lords, you must understand and rejoice, and if you yearn to be inspired by the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selon ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’à piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.
dou chief plein d’aigue	Or I have commanded thee this chapter by dividing it into chapters, according to that which is before or the chapter of cautery, that I have commanded thee from the chief to the feet, forasmuch thou shalt find more easily that of which thou hast need.
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Saiches that this ailment comes out many times as soon as the child is born, and when the bail is strained too strong the head of the child; and never comes from any other cause save that which does not go away
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen such a disease vanish except in childhood, and in all that I have heard, the patient always died; for this reason I believe that it is better to leave the work in parts rather than to cure it.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I once saw a child in whom the bone was completely split with pain, and the head grew so much that it could not bear; and I believed that the moisture was so great that it would kill the patient, and when it is collected between the bone and the flesh, between the marrow and the bone; and the work is such that if the moisture is between the marrow and the bone, and the incision is small, you must make a wide cut; and as long as the moisture remains, the form is like that of a spasm
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is deeper, and the incision is larger, if you make two incisions in the shape of a cross, following this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	If moisture swells the bone, and the sign that you see the head of the bone protrude from the chest, and it sharpens when you press it with your hand from within, and it does not return: if you suspect that the head of the bone is fractured, you must make two incisions as follows:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, drain out the moisture with all your might.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	Drain the blood clots and pus from the wound, and pour wine and oil, and leave it until the fifth hour; then remove the dressing and cure the wound with stitches and ointment, and leave the dressing in place, and give the patient dry food until the limb is comfortable and healed.</start_of_turn>
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	Another method of incision is to look or open the greater wing of the scapula, and the assembly of the edge; for it is never before; never behind; never to the right; and never to the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.
de reume	When the bone is fractured or the vein is opened, and the cavity is filled with liquid, do as you please; but beware that you do not cover the artery; let the blood flow freely, for if the patient dies from excessive bleeding and evacuation of moisture.
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When there is no known disease which is called a "catarrh" which has pus or blood, and the disease is ancient, and the medicine does not profit, then the only cure is to cauterize with that which will not cover the arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	It is necessary to do this, for if you see the patient raise his head; after he has rubbed his limb with a rough cloth until the arteries open, then draw out the patient’s head from under the dressing; then look to see if the vein is open, and if so, put in two needles at the two ends of the vein, until the size of the vein reaches the bone, and this is done by grasping the head of the vein with the thumb and index finger.</start_of_turn
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	If you see it, hold the sponge below the artery and close the wound above, cutting as much as .ij. inches across the middle.</start_of_turn>
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	When the vein is closed, if blood spurts continuously, stop it immediately.</start_of_turn>
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	If the artery does not open despite feeling, if you must measure the quantity of the space of three fingers, then mark its edge and proceed until the bone; what is to say that if there is six cubits, and sometimes more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the refilling of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains on the point of the spur, if the copping that was made behind the post remains, then strain the wound and bind it, and cure it until it is healed.
de emigrainne	And if the artery does not open on feeling, if you know that two fingers’ breadth will suffice, mark the spot and proceed until bone; what may be forced out with blood should be done so if it be more than two fingers’ breadth, and less if possible. According to what the patient can bear and the filling of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone point where the stitches were placed, if the tape that was put around them has not held, then strain the wound and tie it up, and treat it with oil until it is healed.
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When ancient dropsy comes with acute catarrh, because of the tears and the choleric humours in the temples and the ancient sode are lost and similar things, and it is treated by means of medical cures and all that does not benefit, except for the cauterization of the arteries of the temples.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And thus the method of extracting them is that if the patient makes the hair of his temples grow long, and understands the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is not put back as quickly as in some men who are too cold; and if it is put back, the patient must raise his head from some covering, then rub the limb with no rough cloth, and pour cold water over it until the artery opens clearly; then take the spatumile, which is its shape:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then loosen the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then pull it up as high as the nails, and remove the hair well from the area that is below the armpits; and if the artery is small, if the nail has at the tip of the elbow, then cut that part according to the quantity of two fingers.</start_of_turn>
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not held firmly, if it leaps out without warning in every way.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And pull out blood from the groin to the elbow, just as much as is necessary; and if the artery is large, it is convenient to bind it with two strong threads of silk, so that no blood will appear in front of the wound, and let the blood drain naturally; then cut away the surplus that is between the two threads in that place, and if you see that, if you wish, you can cauterize with a cautery needle until the hair is cut off; and that is the best remedy, if the patient has no fever and is of a warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the fire cautery is useful for finishing off moisture: because of this it is of more use against moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	For it is useful to extract the arteries that are filled with much cotton and put on well-made bandages; and when you remove them, if you are cured of dry medicines that cause the growth of hair and bandages, as long as you are sane; and if you do not have a staunch for the artery as you should when you cover with cautery, or you use the hand of vitriol and strain it from your hand, which is without stain; and if you do not have that, if you must remove the limb, you must do so until it is frozen, and rise the limb with cold water until it stops, and strain it as it should be strained; and what is more tender and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this cautery cutting through a third part, but the cutting should be well spaced to ward off more length of heat.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instruments are too tense, it holds less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	The fire cautery must have between the joints a space of one inch. Then, when you have marked the area with needles, let the loop of the forceps burn over until it reaches the bone, and grasp the vein with the forceps; and keep the bones separated from each other because they are not soldered by this cautery in any way. This is the form of the fire cautery.
des larmes	The fire cautery must have between the joints a space of one inch. Then, when you have marked the area with needles, let the loop of the forceps burn over until it reaches the bone, and grasp the vein with the forceps; and keep the bones separated from each other because they are not soldered by this cautery in any way. This is the form of the fire cautery.
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes descend from veins that are above the root of the head, and it does not profit any medical cure in doing so, and you see the patient’s face swell up, and feel pain in his front and gait like a madman; and although they are tense and moist if paper towels are placed over them, and are shaken off by the heat of the tears, if there is no other remedy for this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	For if it is not firmly held, if it suddenly leaps out without warning in every way. And it was formerly called " bruise cure" and you must make the patient who has this disease let the hair grow long and even, then make three incisions or an even front according to the length of the front; and let one of the incisions be as long as two teeth down to the jawbone, and the others two costal bones by the edges of the paper; and keep the incision of the arteries that are as two costal bones by the edges of the paper; and hold your hand from the continuation of the two mandibles, and be careful not to make a wound of the amount of three teeth through the joint; and have learned a piece of sponge and a cloth of cloth to wipe away the blood, then bind the dressing with two parts of thread, which is the form:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	from the incision which is over the temple down to the second incision; and scrape out all the marrow that is between the two incisions to the top of the bone, then make the other half of the wound down to the other second, and then take out this piece of cautery.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If in the first fissure the instrument which is called the “cultellaire,” and which is very well trenchant on one side, and on the other side is smooth, is not deeply trenchant, and this is its form:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And put the knife edge towards the marrow at the knuckle, and the heel of the knife towards the bone, and keep it firm until it reaches the middle fissure.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut away all the blood vessels that descend from the head as long as the incision is continuous until it reaches the knuckle, and then complete the incision in the middle fissure until the other edge; and then draw out the blood equally, express the marrow from the bone taken; then put in the wound a patch of fine cotton, and put on moist cloths soaked in wine and oil and wool, and keep that the post-incisions do not swell; and after three days remove the thread, and give great doses of cold water, and treat the wound with basic ointment with rose oil, and other treatments for wounds in general, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
dou reume des eulz	because of the swelling of the abscess
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When no acute cautery is used, you see the pupils tense and small, and the vision blurred; and the hair on the head prickles, and there is great pain, and the patient coughs; then drool from these accidents as from those matters and this cautery does not come from many veins, but from many wounds.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And command the patient to raise his face, then make a great incision from the hairline to the eyebrow, and another down large enough.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And commence from the incision of the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision reach the bone; and pull away your hand from the nerves of the temples that move to the cheek; and when the bone is exposed, if there is blood, drain it all with a sponge, and then dry between the two layers of the incision and put in cotton wool, and try to hold in place; then cover with moist cloths soaked in wine and oil, and keep it from moving; when it is stable, if you think, rub the bone until it begins to grow, and then cure with drying things that make it callous.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	Partly in this way: take three parts of wheat flower and three parts of colophony, and make a poultice; and administer it to these wounds to harden all around.</start_of_turn
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the swelling of the ears.
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	Everything that causes swelling of the ears is one of three things: grains, or pus, or stone or other foreign bodies; or seed, as in cases of peas, beans, or barley; or a flowing liquid as in the case of fever and chills and other things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it hurts in the earlobe or any other way that does not seem to agree with the ear, do not put it under pressure, if put the ear to the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the stone, if no drops of violet oil or linseed oil remain, then order the extraction; and make him cough up the viscera, and stamp his nose when he coughs, and put into the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and hold the ear down.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Many times blood comes out by this treatment; and if it does not come out, order the extraction of fine pins, for this is the form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If the stone comes out by itself, that is good; if not, prepare for extraction with small needles of double curvature; and if it does not come out by this, take a pinch of the flesh and tear a part of the ear very little, and stop the bleeding that comes from the wound with wax if necessary; then the pain will go away, for many times it comes out by itself as we have said; and if it does not come out in this way, take hold of the flesh around the wound and press on the stone or whatever it is, and the pain will go away.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If these things do not suffice, if you are in a hurry to make an incision at the ear base as well as at the apex of the chalazion vein, and if there is spasm, do not hesitate to make the incision first at the front of the head; then draw the patient’s head between your hands and turn the ear downwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear, at the fatty tissue or bone depending on which is easier; and let the vein bleed out as much as necessary, and evacuate the pus from the wound until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is grains that are swollen and inflamed, administer extraction; and if it cannot be extracted, administer sponge-rubber according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and order the incision of that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not do this until you think that the grains are moistened by the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces; then extract the pins with tweezers and pliers, as we have said, so that the extraction is aligned
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	When it is acute, that is when the shoulder dislocates in the ear, the patient must immediately apply pressure with one hand, and fill the ear with plenty of cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And if there is any swelling on the same ear or the pain is still there.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If the joint is dislocated due to this, it is good
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If not, take many pins according to the length of your finger should tighten and lighten, and push the hairs away with a hand; and put the patient’s hand or finger under the ear, and pull out from the pieces of the other side, and pierce with a needle from the other side of the ear; and do not stop making this needle pass through the bone until the pain is all gone, and when the joint is completely healed; and if you see that the joint is still dislocated, take hold of one of the bones in the ear, and push the other bone with the hand until the joint is properly aligned; then do the rest of the bones until the pain is all gone, as we have said in the stone
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the tooth, if it is of small size, as with a flea and other things, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of large size, we must feel it, and it is the easiest thing to extract the tooth that is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms from the ear, when you have cured it as we have said in the division or treated with distillations, the cure does not help, if you look at the ear in the sun: if there are no worms, if you see only subtle wounds, and if you do not see any, take the tweezers which are like this:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And let the cautery be broad and deep.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And let the burn be rather subtle at the ear according to the extent of the patient's suffering, then afterwards proceed throughout the boil; do this often until you see it break through.</start_of_turn>
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not obey by that, if I push into the boil of cotton as I said at the stone; and if they do not come out with the force that we have said, if you administer distillations that the old people have proved in the incision of worms, and you will find them or treat them with distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all these instruments, as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And let the silver or gold be made into small pieces, and over these let there be poured a distillation; and let there be pressed from within the instrument a piece of lint well made for this purpose. If you see that there is taken one hair and wrapped around the point of the ear immediately with cotton wool; then pour in your oil or juice, and what you see of your medicines in the ear; and let the ear be closed. Then put back the lint into the cotton wool all around, and press your hand firmly until the oil is distilled or almost from the ear; and let the patient feel within, and let the distillation be neither too hot nor too cold, for the medicine will not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the swelling of the ears.
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without a mark on their ear; and the same thing happens at home by bursting of a wound or a hair growing in the ear. Such bursting never comes without leaving a mark on the ear, if one does not look; and never happens without leaving a mark.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	When it comes out without leaving a mark, if one does not look, it is a sign of serious illness in many conditions; and in this case one sees that you put the ear of the patient in the sun; look inside: if you see the opening, if the opening has all that surrounding it, that is its form.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And whether it is yellow or greenish in front and behind all around, if it does not bleed the ear; if the opening is of a hair or a piece of the ear, if you have subtle scratches, and the wound is slight, as long as that hair is all bony.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the boils are pressed in the ear, take a subtle grasper and burn a little at the fire, then put in or remove the earwax.</start_of_turn>
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the swelling which the patient feels at the ear, pierce lightly, and keep your fingers away from the ear; then put in the ear a pledget according to the size of the opening, and pour in the oil of Egyptian origin.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do not do anything until the wound is healed, or take a sponge and soak it in rose-colored liquid, and sprinkle it with powdered vitriol; and if you see the ear fleeing, it is likely that you have torn the sponge and must insert another sponge soaked in oil of roses and beeswax until the swelling is bony; then cure it until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if there is discharge of blood comes, immerse a sponge and cover it with cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other cures that will harden the loosening of blood which are either to perform distillations.</start_of_turn
de la char des papieres	De la char des papieres.
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This is the end of the provided text, and I am unable to translate the remaining portion as it is not included in the given context.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if without remedy, if the burn with the lenticular caustic is left on, and the burner after the incision is worth moving; and many times they must be repeated, for nothing remains of their root. And when they are burned by fire, if they are burned through those roots, they do not return anymore.
de la gresle	De la gresle.
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times come out of paper things that seem to glitter in their form and in their hardness, and for this reason this disease is called "granules", and is an accumulation of large moisture in the substance of the wound; the work is like this: take hold if the granuloma moves from one side to the other, and this is a light matter to know; then make the opening wide, then gently push aside the soft part, then take hold of the wound and close it.</start_of_turn>
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you do not perceive the sensation of closing the wound, if it does not grieve the patient; and if the wound is large, if the mass has a curvature, and the cure until it is healed; and if it is small, do not use force, for the swelling will restore itself quickly and cause harm.</start_of_turn
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the granulin descends into the ear towards the upper part, if you reverse the papere, and bring the granulin to a few tweezers, grasp and press from one side to the other; and if the papere is loosened by the incision, this will cause no harm; and when the granulin is grasped, if you leave the dirty oil, cure the body of that which is drained until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the pus.
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	The grease called exinach is enclosed in papers of parchment which are wet, and this is more effective against certain people who are envious; it causes great moisture to their eyes, and from this comes the tearing of the morning; and they cannot look at the light of the sun because of this, for the tears hurry to their eyes; and because of this they lie with their faces down, and sleep, and the papers of parchment are wet on their eyelashes which causes them to swell and appear covered with exinach which breaks out in oil.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the limb towards your chest and feel the exinach between the bones.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	The manner of the work is that the patient puts his head in order; then take one sheet of linen and make a circle around the quantity of fat in the chest part, and put it on; and press on your thighs from one side and the other, so that the fat is assembled together in the circle; then make in the middle of the moisture at the spiddle trenching a wound not more large than the wound we make to the vein; and make the leather firm as long as you see the fat; and in many positions comes fat from the wound, according to the shape of a white piece of fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Extract the thick piece of marrow between your thighs at the waist, and twist your hand to the right and to the left as much as possible; and keep that you do not touch the wound, that you do not come near to the oil until it is finished, that you do not stain it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if it exits not at the commencement of the incision, if you enlarge the incision slightly as far as it will open; then take out the foreign body as we have said, and moisten the bandage with oil and water, and put on the limb, and strain from bending.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if such people exist who crush themselves and put on it to corrupt the moisture which is remaining
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure it while it is still healthy
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it comes to the vein being cut, if the cure for the swelling is to drain as much as is sane.
des poilz des papieres	hair of papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When paper is born with hair attached other than its natural state, and is enclosed, if it irritates the eyes, it causes various diseases like tears and softening of paper and glue, as well as the destruction of the eyes; the cure for this is in three ways: either by applying cautery with fire, or by medicine with water, according to what is before or alongside the cautery, or by incision and suture or by thread, according to what I shall say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	You must place the patient’s head in your left hand, then pull the paper from the oil at your left hand side; if it is converted, that is good; if not, if there is an awl at all.i. thread from above; either cut the margin of the paper or the hair will be pulled out; then take one thread from below and pass it through all the paper, and pull it out at the scraper; then make in the lower part of the paper, from the bottom of the hair, the hair that is attached, with all the surrounding fat, from the great tear until the little one; then draw out one thread and put under the paper a little fold of cotton and bandage, and sign on the paper a figure like a mistletoe berry, and it is sufficient that the figure be according to the quantity that you see elevate the paper which is assigned to you.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if it comes to the vein being cut, if the cure for the swelling is to drain as much as is sane. If there is much discharge of purulent matter from the wound, as much as two lines below the wound, and from the great toe to the little toe; and let there be a puncture mark at the root of the hair, then insert the ligature at one of the two angles downwards, then draw the ligature tight; then suture the two layers together with a fine needle and silk thread, and dry the wound, remove the excess thread from around the two edges, as you see that it must be done; and if this does not succeed, leave the suture and the thread for three days or four; then cure the wound by stitching with dry and constricting things, because the pus will return to the bottom of the wound and reunite the edges, but the suture is useless (as the old people say), and that is dangerous; and if there is another method: let the patient sign the pus with a mark that is like the berry of a myrtle, as we have heard, at three inches distant according to the shape that is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then cover what is above with small forces equally according to the form which is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	If you cannot hold the teeth firmly, and the matter is not equal, take a needle or two and pass one thread through the great loop and the second thread through the small loop, and gather the two threads evenly; then stretch your hand evenly, and stretch all the skin above where you have marked, as we have told; then gather the two layers of the wound together with sutures, and cure until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, if you apply cerate and similar soothing ointments. Never again shall you find that the hair of the papilla has been converted: if you use what we have said about the incision; but the sutures in one and the other are more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The cure for carbuncles is as follows: convert the beard hair and the hair of the head according to what has been said, and then make two incisions each as long as the beard and wide enough for two fingers; and take two threads of the same length as the beard. Then assemble one to the other securely over what rests on the beard oil, and strain the two carbuncles from the two ends; and leave it in place for a few days. The skin that has been strained will become soft and wrinkled and will disappear, as long as it is treated by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it is late, if the wound has great force, then cure until it is healed; and when the wound is closed, and when the papilla has risen, the hair will no longer grow; and this is the form of two nails you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width.
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The work is like taking a subtle needle, and there is i.e. a silken thread; then gather the hairs and do not let one touch another subtly, and let the length of the threads be as long as a palm; then order in the chase another subtle thread of silk briefly, and do not knot the chief of the thread; then put the patient's chief in its place; and let there be sunlight so that the work is clarified, for this is a subtle and delicate work, then withdraw the needle throughout the chase to the root of the hair, and make it bleed profusely until you have bled out all that is natural; then remove the hair until there is only one or two or three or more remaining; then remove your hand as much as the vein escapes throughout the chase with the natural flow of blood.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	If the chase is treated and the hair does not bleed with it, if you draw the chase to a close with all the thread that you have ordered, until the chase vein bursts from the root and you see it through the sight of the oil; then if you draw the chase and the thread, close the oil and leave it closed for two days or three, until the hair has bled out and the burden has ceased; and if the hair is small, if you accompany it with a long thread of natural wool, and leave it until it is elongated and then take it away.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the corruption of the oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this ailment which is called "aleacrati" or the corruption comes into being, if there are two methods: one natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And there follows from a wound, or a burn, or a cautery, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	The way of working in this is that you make the wound close, dry the flesh, put in some flaxseed, and keep it until it is healed; and do not do anything but use for its treatment things that dry and restrain
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, if the disease returns worse than before; but there is need of softening things, as with rue or chamomile; and vinegar or salt and poppyseed and mustard seed boiled in no oil, and they enclose a bandage, and treat it thus
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasure of your treatment is that you must take care that it does not heal differently from the way it was before; and this work that we have said is not fierce except for addressing this disease, that it does not come back differently from the way it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	Of the cauldron that comes in the oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease which is called «axacrati» is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	This disease arises from wounds and cuts and burnings and similar things; and the cause of this ailment is that if you take an awl, because it has two edges, and the point in the flesh, and it causes the left cheek to swell so much that the vein is split in two at the height of the cheek; then the cheek is raised up to the awl, and there is a large wound at the awl's point.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound returns as it should, that is good; but if not, take a saw and place it in the wound, and turn the wound, and make two incisions or break two bones in the wound; and if there are two incisions from two angles of the incision that you have made, make one angle so that when they are put together, the figure looks like the letter that has no ‘I griesche’; then break that bone according to the quantity of its costae and the degree of swelling, of what has caused the wound, then join the two broken parts with a thread of silk; then apply the remedies that we have mentioned of mollifying medicines and bands, until it is healed
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	If the sickness comes from a fracture or a suture or from cautery, then it must be made that you make a clean incision all around the hairs of paper; and as for what is above, separate between the two books of a thumb, as I have said; and must be done according to the form of the sickness, for it is diverse in form, and the learned men appear to know everything from head to foot how to restore the figure to its natural shape; and the patient himself, according to what is suitable for the work and for the instruments in various arrangements.
dou soudement de la papiere	If the sickness comes from a fracture or a suture or from cautery, then it must be made that you make a clean incision all around the hairs of paper; and as for what is above, separate between the two books of a thumb, as I have said; and must be done according to the form of the sickness, for it is diverse in form, and the learned men appear to know everything from head to foot how to restore the figure to its natural shape; and the patient himself, according to what is suitable for the work and for the instruments in various arrangements.
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	If this fracture has occurred at the shoulder joint in such a manner that the limb hangs suspended with the palm downwards, and is unable to move or perform its natural functions, if it must be that you extract the bone from the palm of the hand, and elevate it upwards; and that the edges be bound together, as long as the surrounding skin is not too tight and does not tear the oil; and that your incision, which you have made to reassemble, be slight, so that the limb returns to its natural shape; and that all that has been reassembled be bound together, and that no more oil be added to the wound, but only a little sweet water and vinegar; and after that put between the limb and the oil a cloth of linen, and cover with oily wool in abundance; and finally put on a bandage of wool and other soothing things until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	De l’ungle de l’oil
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Saiches that the nail is in two manners: it is nervous and seems like tough fat, and another which is not very nervous, but seems like white moisture frozen, that when it is touched with iron and is cooked through, there are pinpricks; and both seem to swell towards the great tear, and rise up so much that they cover the whole eye and the light and movement of the oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of incision is that the patient places his hand in his bosom, then grasps the eyes; and keep your hand on his wrist, and then break the nail with pinpricks of small double curvature, and stretch it upwards; then take a needle, and put in one hair of horse, or of sheep, or of beef, and one strong thread; and double the point of the needle once and fix it in the nail, and pierce through the whole needle, and tie the nail with a thread and stretch it upwards, and support all around the nail the cost of the nail that surrounds the nail-bed and the hair to the hair just as far as the chief, and then close the remaining part in the root of the tear with all the small forces, and leave the natural tear or the tear itself; and in no way stretch the nail only with the needle and the thread, as we have said; then support all around the nail the surrounding area that is this form:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And keep that the sponge does not touch the fleshy cloth and break it, and that the needle does not pierce it; and after the incision, pour oil a little ball of butter, and give him a decoction of alum, and leave it until the other side; then cure what is left of it until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot push back the needle, and the thread does not pass through, many times it is cured of this semblance of nail; and as I have said in the division, if you see it covered, if you pour oil on the patient, and take the sponge more slight in this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And withdraw the nail gradually, and if you see that it does not decrease point and that the edge is pressing, if you distill from your mouth into the oil decoction of alum and red alum and butter, and pour oil until the other side; then repeat the other work as before, until it is completely healed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing opposes you in oil, as with an abscess, then milk, and cure the abscess first while it is healthy, then resume the work as before, while it is healthy.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	If there appears fat floating in the oil at night, with great swelling, if you suspend it in vinegar, and cut off a part and not the whole, that blood does not rise; then distill in the red oil of colera, which is made from litharge.</start_of_turn>
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that comes from the navel.
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	The fire cautery instructs the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But it is necessary to nourish the cure with a weak oil of natural origin; and in an accident, in the work of fire; and do not burn your hand in any of these works until you see that the limb is suffering from that work.
des voines des eulz	From the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	The veins are red that are covered with oil, and endure the gaze of the eye and burn the oil throughout the days.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	The master must first look at the oil when it is placed on the wound, for indeed the wound is fierce, and there is no other disease stronger than the wound; therefore the master should take hold: instruct the patient to put his head in order, then suspend the veins throughout their length as he deems fit, and be double-handed as much as he can in this fashion:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And two veins by degrees in one limb according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then suspend these veins gradually by degrees in one limb according to this form:
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you are unable to collect all of this in that hour, make a poultice on the oil of soothing things to ease the pain of the eyes, and leave it until the pain is relieved and is secure from after-pain; then begin again according to this manner which is before, until it is healed; and that is the way of the forces.
de la fistule de l’oil	And if you are unable to collect all of this in that hour, make a poultice on the oil of soothing things to ease the pain of the eyes, and leave it until the pain is relieved and is secure from after-pain; then begin again according to this manner which is before, until it is healed; and that is the way of the forces.
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The mire so named "arissati" fistula: when you cure it by cautery and medicine with burning water, as I have said before, and it is not completely healed, if there is any moisture remaining in it, then you must make an incision on the after-pain, there or wherever it must measure, and drain out all the moisture, until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is fractured, and you see the corruption and darkness, if the limb has all the signs, it is called an "aspre chief"; and is made like a nail, that is, a fractured bone, and is pointed out like a lime when it is in this form.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And put on the limb the fractured bone, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand until you feel that the corruption is fixed; do this only once, then restore the limb of drying medicines.</start_of_turn>
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the vessel is soldered and char has not yet appeared, and the body of the vessel is soldered and remains closed for XL days, and it does not heal and is not removed, and other evils do not come, the quills are deemed to be sound; if this is not the case, and there is no other remedy except to open the fistula once more, and by sharp instruments, and when it has been discovered take hold of the iron as it is described above, and let the angle of the iron be at three angles, and the wound must be narrowed down as much as you see fit.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then put your thumb on the bone below the thumb, and wipe your hand with oil. Then pull your hand back until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it through that which comes from inside when you hold your hand on your thumb; and as soon as the bone comes loose and persists, if there is matter on the thumb; if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	Then place your thumb on the bone below the armpit, and wipe your hand with oil. Indeed, draw the forearm back until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it through the sensation that comes from below when you keep your hand on his elbow. Then restore the dry medicine, as I have taught you, and when the wound heals and the pain subsides, if there is still matter in the elbow; if it is a lighter matter for the patient.
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the wound opens all the way and does not cause discomfort in the chest, neither does it cause any reduction, if you are to bind the patient; then the same, then apply a compress or bandage in a counterclockwise direction to draw out the wound, then apply oil. Indeed, make an ointment of beeswax, aloe, incense, and ochre, and then strain the oil and apply it with cloths and bandages; and keep the cloths in place if you take cloths of sufficient size, and two layers in every three, and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity of wound there is to mix; then strain by means of a piece of strong cloth that forms, and restart the compress in a clockwise direction to draw out; then hold the compress and leave the oil strained for a while and night, and if it is softened, if you strain it out; then keep the bandage in place after the wound and the nut, and if you see the oil returning, that is good; if not, repeat the application of the bandage and cloths and the ointment and the compress until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	Dou derrompement de toile uvee.
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When the dislocation comes in the shoulder, then open [the joint], and comes forth like a piece of resin; it is expected to see [it]. If you see it covered, the work is like biting an awl into the root of the limb up to this [point], then comes out another awl or there is a double thread of the limb; and make it slip, and leave the first awl as it lies; then join the double thread and bind a part of the limb around, and strain it well, then pull out the awl and put on oiled lint liberally over it; and leave it until the thread has bled with the limb, then cure the oil of comforting things until the wound is healed; and never is the wound restricted by the limb cheese-nut from a circle of wax, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound shows great swelling, if you pierce at the fatty tissue that comes out with the oil, and correct the moistness of the albumin and pull out the wound, and put into it as much as possible; then pull out the awl when it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	De la bowe de l’oil.
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease which is called "alcunnati" is not fierce but like water which is gathered in oil, resembling a descending wound, and it is not actually a wound; and the manner in which it appears is that you make the patient sit on a comfortable and straight chair, and take hold of the chief between your hands from two parts, and move it until you see the water coming down towards your eyes; then either bind it tightly and do not let it go down or break the light, and see the patient do the things as he wanted; and if it does not go down after that, say that it is like a wound, and that when the water goes down it is not visible as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you make the patient sit between your hands, then take the sponge and place it upon the cornea I by the course of the conjunctiva with the cornea and the crown, as long as the eye is closed; and when it comes out, distillate in hot aqua vitae mixed with honey, or aqua or fenugreek is boiled and honey, then be cured of another remedy until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	Des aigues de l’oil.
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have seen similar symptoms of fevers in division, and what is useful to perceive; if in this case according to the statute.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	You must make the patient sit between your crossed hands, far from the light of the sun, and bind the oil healthy and tighten it strongly; then put the bandage of the oil in your left hand if the eye is left, or in your right hand if the eye is right; then take in your right hand, if the eye is left, the instrument which is called “almagda”, or in your left hand, if the eye is right; then place the point of the instrument below the crown by the thickness of a barleycorn in that which there is the greater amount of oil, then turn the instrument which is called “almagda” properly, and restore your hand until it breaks through the oil, and feel that the “almagda” has come to the empty thing; and it must be that the measure of the “almagda” be at the height of the measure of the space from the plumule to the end of the black spot; and that is the crown of the oil; if you see the bone in that bandage by the clarity of the cornea, then take out the instrument until the oil is gone, or the water is gone, and then express the marrow afterwards.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If he feels the pain increasing now, if he sees the patient in front of him and the instrument in his oil.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After a little rest, if the pain returns the second time, put the force with the instrument, and when it is firmly fixed and does not rise, if it is strained too much around the hand and forearm; then loosen the ligature gently by rolling the thumb and little finger back a little.  Then put in again a little of the oil that was taken out.</start_of_turn>
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put on greasy oil or lint soaked in rose oil and a lot of eggs, and tie with pure oil.</start_of_turn
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Yes, and if there are any of our friends, put on a thick dressing with a lot of eggs.</start_of_turn>
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the almagda cannot enter the oil because there are parts of bone that have too thick the hairs, then you must take the instrument which is called the «alberit», which is like this in shape:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And therefore pierce only the conjunctive alone, and do not advance too much into the marrow, but make it firm; then put in alum [powder], as we have said; and when the work is finished appears to the patient the sleeper awake, in whom he lies on his back in the dark; and let him have no movement, and take legs of meat, and do not move his head to the right or left, and bind it as seems fitting until the seventh joint; then loosen from this same house, expel the sight, and make him see nothing, and then restore the limb to its place until the seventh joint; and do not attempt this except at the time of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you make him comfortable, for it is known that the pain increases greatly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	When the palm of the hand comes away, loosen the oil before the seventh joint, and hold it from that which causes the abscess; and when it is quiet, loosen the sight and put on his face a little ointment to cover any joint, and keep it in that same house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then he departs from home to home, and when he arrives he changes; and the women that no disciple must interfere with in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us from Iraq, who told us that in his land when a person is in pain, they make a great meal and perceive the pain as a joy; but we have never seen or read about anything like that in our land or in the books of the ancients; and it is a new thing to us
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the signs of the shapes of an almond, for those who do not know them; and they are like peas in rows:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And their heads are of this same subtlety, and their backs in two angles like a bow.
de la char sor le neis	From the armpit on the neck.
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	Never are born or cast various hairs, for there are some that seem like scorpions at the mouth of bones; and if there are such or if there be hair entangled with foul matter of a black color, or if there be hair of a white bone color.</start_of_turn>
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In that case of these hairs that are white and do not entangle, it must be that you make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; and cover his nose, and vomit the urine onto those hairs, and drive them out; for it is better that you support the thin gut with one hand, until you are sure that that hair is entirely bony.</start_of_turn
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	If nothing remains to hold it, if the opening has been made with too little force, if nothing settles; and if it swells without stopping, or if it hangs loose, or if it is an abscess, then grasp it firmly as if it were possible; and if it is a malignant abscess, hasten and cauterize it while it is not stained and all the pus has gone, then throw or pull out the contents easily and with speed or vinegar.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If he does not wish to work, and moisture comes to his palace, the nails that were once sound; if moisture does not pierce as it should, nails that are in the bone below, because the instruments do not come down to the root: therefore it is necessary that you put in one thread of linen a good inch, and grasp it with your hands, and leave between each nail an inch or less; and put the patient’s hand with the thumb at the bottom, and press so that it comes through the mouth; and many times they do this to the children, and it is a light thing for one who has seen it done; then take the chief that comes from the thumb to a hand, and the other chief that comes from the mouth to the other hand, and pull one after the other until they are even with us who are holding.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And be it of silver or of gold, resembling an overlarge lamp, if like a cord; and if you see it, make a closed cord, and the instrument will be flat to purge the tooth; and have one hand on the chief to hold it when oil or no liquid is being burned.</start_of_turn>
de la char sor le neis	From the armpit on the neck.
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times there arises at the root of the neck a disease which is called "telul", and it grows and becomes very great all of a sudden, so that it is visible to see; and for this reason it is commanded that you should begin to compress it at the beginning, and break the bone thoroughly, then apply the cautery or burning medicine; and if you delay in compressing it when it is great, if you take hold of it firmly, from a dark color to a pale hue, if you do not touch it with iron, for it is a thorny abscess, for when you touch it even once, there comes great harm to the patient; and if the abscess is of soft touch, not of dark color, you can see that you can easily compress it, if you leave the patient and compress it without fear, and cure the limb of dry and restraining things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the neck is cut and bound.
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Do as much as you can until you are certain that the cartilages that are causing the continuation of the disease have been cured; then draw out the thread, wipe away the blood, and moisten the thread with Egyptian balsam; and reinsert it as before. Repeat this for three days or more, until the cartilages have eaten away everything that remains of the disease; then put in or withdraw a cauterizing sponge for a certain number of days until it is healed, and if there is need for sedatives, use them. This is the form of the instrument for purging the head, for from it are distilled the oils and medicines or not.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it happens for no reason that the wound is fresh throughout its entirety; then join the two layers to a rib, and hold them together until they are healed; and if the layers are already detached from one side and the other, then you must support all the parts around it until they heal, and reassemble the two layers to a rib, and hold them, and sprinkle upon them powder of dragon's blood and incense; and put upon the powders a piece of dressing of strong or another dressing that will stick, and leave it until it discharges by itself, and cure it of oozing until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of making the bolster is that you assemble the solution: either with needles, as we have said in the belly bolster; or with thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	of the detachments of the fingers.
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	At the hands of a master, the book has teeth like sharp grains of wheat, minor and greater; thus it is right that you must break the teeth, open each socket, and take them as pincers and grasp in the front part; then apply the paste after the incision of the vitreous membrane, until it is dry; and then remove it easily, and cure the part with dry things until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	From the root of the gums.
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times blood appears on the teeth of the gums, which are often called "albules"; if you hold them steady and grasp their root, and let the blood flow out or the blood clot; then put out the vitreous membrane, or other drying and restraining powders; and if the gum comes back after the incision, and this happens many times, if you grasp it a second time and cauterize: if it does not come back even after the cautery; these are the signs of the instruments that cover it.
des sordens	Des sordens.
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Once are assembled at the chief of the teeth, in the mouth between the gums, teeth which are lazy and dull; and never are the teeth black and yellow and hollow, until the corruption comes to the gum, and they are biting; if you make the patient sit between your hands, and his head is straight, and open the teeth or the gums open, until nothing remains; and then make black and green, and yellow and other spots, until they are whole; and if that has happened at the first reason, it is good; if that has not happened, if you repeat the second and third time, until you have done everything; and the teeth that have to be extracted have various forms of instruments to remove them, as that which the work shows, because the raisers of the teeth which one must withdraw have other forms than those which one must put between the teeth; and these forms and others are seen with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you cure the tooth of its pain that you later withdraw as much as you wish, because it must not make me do it; for it is a substance that is very bitter, therefore we have no excuse for neglecting to remove it.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	When the patient is constrained to do something against his will, then you must be certain that he will obey.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Many times the patient groans in pain, and cares whether it is great or little, and makes him groan; and all this while the pain does not depart from him because of the illness, for we have already wanted to do this to these scoundrels; and when you are certain that he will obey, then you must support the limb firmly to protect the joint from all sides; then move the limb to and fro at the first part and part, until it is well dislocated; and then firmly grasp the nails. And let the patient groan between your knees, and hold him firmly so that he does not move
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After that, stretch the tooth directly forward until it snaps; if it does not snap, take none of these instruments and hold it loosely in the cheek, and move it as you did before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is pierced and bent, if you can, fill it with cloth, lace or gut; and if you strain it gently, do not break it while straining; and must cautiously wipe around the gum with a scraper for the tooth.</start_of_turn>
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	Take care that you do not break it, and leave some of it, and return to the patient by the severity of the root, more pain than before.</start_of_turn>
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	Beware that you do not do what the ignorant healers do, who break the limb every time without any reason, and do not bring any benefit to anyone; but they cause many to die from the root of this great disease from the fractures that they break, as we have often seen. And when the tooth is extracted, wash the wound with wine or vinegar and oil; and if blood comes, which often happens, apply a piece of vitriol; if that does not suffice, cauterize.</start_of_turn>
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The forms of the instruments, indeed mute them at first, whether with long points and broad handles, that they do not double in number when you draw the tooth; and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And be of large size if they do not bend while drawing, and be of iron well made, and be tipped with teeth to hold.</start_of_turn>
de la racine des dens	of the root of the teeth.</start_of_turn>
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains immobile at the shoulder, if you must put out the wet cotton swab that is in the wound, do so with care lest you break the bone.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	As long as the limb is flexible, because there are teeth that are hidden "algis", which makes the head of the shoulder appear like a beak; and they must be removed in the same way as with a lime, and this is the form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not suffice to withstand all these tensions, if you must uncover the bark entirely around the root, and place the instrument which is called "althali," which is to say a palainche, from which it is known.
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And be strong and firm so that it does not break me, and if the root leaps up by this, that is good; if not, if you aid me with all your instruments, from which these forms will come afterwards.
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you use this instrument which has teeth, from which it is known.
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	And other instruments which are before the teeth, and this instrument which appears like a great clamp, of which this is the form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And other instruments which are before the teeth, and this instrument which appears like a great clamp, of which this is the form: let it be known that this instrument is so strong that it cannot break, and its jaws like those of instruments for teeth; and with other instruments which are not mentioned here; the master surgeon will himself find the instrument which is appropriate for each case, according to what his work and the disease demonstrate, for there are many diseases for which the old methods do not teach any instrument because of their diversity; and if it breaks at the root of the bone or any other bone, or if it moves, if it seeks these instruments that it must be used, as I have said, and to aid it with gestures, for this is its form.
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let it be known that it must be strong and well-held to hold the bone, that it does not escape, but that it can hold and restrain; and then restore the limb of medicine that is appropriate for this, and if there is inflammation in the bone, and it is small, if the grasp has all these instruments:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears does not follow the natural curve, and the form is bad, even in women of fair complexion, if one should know that it is necessary to extract it since it cannot be saved or comforted: then one must remove it; and if it is close to the tooth, take hold of this instrument which is like a small beak, and if it is of iron without a groove at the top.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the socket often swells and swells up in the hands for the duration of the tooth, and because of this one does not move the others, and if it appears one can limber it if one files a piece of the file to the shape of this:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And it is like when one files nails; and while filing the tooth slightly, if it does not move too much, when the work is finished at the end there is no rasp, and when it is dense enough it bites the tongue, so if one limps the sharpness until it is even, so that it does not bite the tongue or corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the teeth loosen.
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the front teeth loosen, or by percussion or biting, and the patient cannot bear the weight of these things without groaning, and you must cure them with restrictive medicines, this is of no use; for if you must restrain them with a golden thread, because the silver thread turns green and becomes foul, but the blood does not move at all; and let the thread be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of the space between the teeth; and if you see that the teeth are aligned, if you take hold of the thread and pass it double between the two front teeth, then put the head of the tooth between the teeth mentioned above, if there is one or more of them, until you see it is straight up to the sound tooth on the other side; and then repeat the covering up to the part where you began, and strain your hand skillfully and cautiously, until it does not move; and let your thread be fixed to the root of the tooth if it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then grasp the head of the humerus with one hand and the other hand gather the bones together, and put them back between the teeth; and hold them so that they do not slip; and let them rest as much as they can, and if they slip or the bone is fractured, if the strain of another bone; if it should remain and serve its purpose, and this is the form of a tooth and the figure of the arrangement of the two upper teeth and the two lower teeth, as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth aches, if you put it back in its place, fresh from fresh, as we have said; and let nothing interfere that is not wise and soothing, and never make the shape of a tooth of whalebone, and put it back in the place where the defect is, and strain it as we have said, and keep it tight and serve for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	De coper lou liien de la lengue.
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	Sometimes the cause of loosening the tongue or the jaw is not birth, or by an accidental wound; and the work is such as you would offer the mouth of the patient, and take hold of the tongue, and then grasp the large nerve, until the tongue is freed from its place. If there is duration or difficulty, and this is an indication of a wound, if there is swelling and grasping of the large nerve; and keep the wound from being too deep, for the artery that is loosened; and when you have done this, if you lift the limb of water warm and easy, or cold water, and then put the tongue back in its place with a slight tension; and hold the patient’s hand tight, so that the limb cannot move.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if blood flows from a vein, take out the clot with a forceps; and if it does not go away, cauterize with the blunt cautery, which is good for this; then treat with other remedies until it is healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you see pus color or black or hard, if the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is a sore; and if it is declining to swell, and there is moisture, if it evacuates the clot, and you wipe with a fine sponge, and deliver from a part and from another; and if it does not go away from your work, if you put on a broiled vitriol until it is dry, and then return to your work until you have finished all the work; then lift the limb easily and gently, and treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	Des apostemes de la gorge.
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Sometimes blood flows from the gullet, which is called a "godath", and the swelling has two almonds in size; when you treat them, as we have said previously, and they are not healed, beware: if it is a hard abscess of little size and dark colour, do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	If it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron; but leave it alone until it is dead, and then you will take it out, or it will break by itself; and if it is of a pale colour and the root is thin, if you have brought the instrument to cover it, but look first whether the abscess is firm and calm
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Therefore make the patient sit before the sun, and his head be upright, and hold his tongue with your thumbs between his hands, and press the tongue downwards to its entirety; for thus is the form. And be of silver or gold as subtle as a needle.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	... and you see the boil, take the sponge and press it into the abscess, and hold it firmly for more than you wish; and do not pull out any hair with your fingers, then put the cover on the instrument, as it is formed, which looks like a force; and if the chief is crooked, and one place is higher than the other, and they are very painful, and is made of iron or tin.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	If you do not have this instrument present, if you can manage with tenailles, know that this is the shape:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	If you do not have this instrument present, if you can manage with tenailles, know that this is the shape: cut an almond from one side and the other; and when you have grasped one almond, grasp the other in the same manner, and after the incision, gargle the patient with hot water, hot and easy, and if blood appears, gargle the patient with hot water, or extract pomegranate seeds or rue marigold, or similar things, until the bleeding stops; then cure as long as it is healed; and never again does an abscess appear in the throat except for the two almonds, if you grasp them just like the two almonds always.</start_of_turn>
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman with an abscess that was inside her throat, namely a small abscess; and she had a severe constriction in her throat, so that she could neither breathe through her nose nor drink or eat, and she would have died if she had lingered in that state for a moment or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so high that it had forced out two stones through two holes that were not there before
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	Then I took hold of her again, and put one hand on her incision, then I pulled her out, and pulled out a great piece of flesh; then I put the other hand in the other hole that was not there before, and I closed her mouth and pressed her tongue; afterwards I put the incision back into the abscesses, and closed one part, and only a little blood escaped; and when I had stopped the bleeding from the vein, the woman began to drink water and then wine, and she continued to spit out of that abscess for a long time; and the abscess came back to its place and filled up her body as much as I had taken out; then I bound it and cauterized it inside her throat: and when I had finished with these parts, only God knows what happened to her afterwards
de l’uve	De l’uve.
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When the limb descends at the shoulder, and it flees and is elongated, if it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is broad and round, it is called "shoulder".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is sutured as we have said in the division, and the suture does not profit, and you see that the wound has healed, and it is subtle, if it is necessary, you must close it; and that which is round and compact and is not elongated; and that is bloodstained or reddish or black, if you must avoid the incision of the latter.</start_of_turn>
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger for the patient.</start_of_turn
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Therefore, when you see it, according to what I have said, with its color and its length, you must make the patient sit in the sun, and stretch the tongue with the instrument that we mentioned before; then insert the ointment into the limb, and pull it out, and close with two sutures that I have mentioned in the incision of the two nipples.</start_of_turn
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And you must know that you should not cover more than the superfluousness which is beyond the natural limit; for if you do more, you will grieve the voice and the words; and after the incision, use what we have said about the incision of the two almonds, and cure it until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has fear of covering, you must know that you should use something to support the cautery in the painful area.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	The method of cautery must be gentle and not severe
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And the patient should put his head in a comfortable position, and then press the tongue against the instrument that we have mentioned or the treatise of cautery, and hold it with a live hand, so that it is neither too thick nor too thin; and use the handle of this instrument, as it is formed:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is a hair or something put on the medicine, as the hairs of a spoonful, put the instrument on all the medicine above the navel; and the patient should be sitting on his cost, so that he salivates and the mucus comes out of his mouth from the medicine inside, if it does not go down to the throat, and the coughing; then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it on the navel, the amount of half an hour, until you see it limp and the biting of the medicine is appeased; and if you see that, take cotton and wrap it over any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and withdraw the instrument with all the cotton in the cautery, until the cotton is burned on the navel; and do this often, until the cautery is perfect, then leave it dry and clean the cautery after three or five days. And if you must restart the medicine, if you restart it, and after the cautery wipe around the navel with cotton wool, and cover what is around the medicine; and be raised with cold water, and be cured of hiccups until it is healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than incision, for it is treated by fumigation according to this method. Take camomile, rue, origanum, ivy, cloves, and vinegar and assemble them all or any of them in a pot. Put some oil in it and boil. The pot must be well sealed with strong earth, and in the middle of the pot is a tool that should be hooked according to this method:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And be it of silver or of gold, or be it one of the bones broken in the mouth of the patient until the vapor rises to the eye by the caning, until the eye is mortified; after that, repeat often, until the eye is dry, and keep that you do not do this at the beginning of the event of the hot cautery, for many things will happen; and do not do this unless the hot cautery is declining.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, if you take a caning and put within the head a speck of egg, so that the patient’s mouth is not too hot; for the speck of egg does not make the vapor rise up through the mouth, and this is a good cure altogether.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times it has happened at the throat of an os or fish bone, or nothing; so it is therefore necessary that you should perceive what you see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you see the thing; and what does not appear to you and is returned to the throat, do make the patient vomit the sickness as soon as the meat is cooked in the stomach; by chance if the thing is expelled by vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a lettuce root, or a piece of dry bread; and join the sponge to the thread and then transfix it. And when it comes back, if it is swollen, then draw it out again; and if it does not come out by itself, take a hook according to this shape:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instrument curve at the head if it can more easily enter the gorge, and keep the head raised up; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, that all may go well, do not push the bone inwards; and it is better that the patient move the instrument, because it is either stiff or the matter is putrefying; if the epiglottis is swollen, or if it is forced out with all the instrument equally, as much as it is forced.
de la sansue de la gorge	And let the instrument curve at the head if it can more easily enter the throat, and keep the head raised up; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, that all may go well, do not push the bone inwards; and it is better that the patient move the instrument, because it is either stiff or the matter is putrefying; if the epiglottis is swollen, or if it is forced out with all the instrument equally, as much as it is forced.
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	Never is medicine without sense, as I have said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when this does not help, then look into the throat of the patient towards the sun, and then press the tongue to the instrument that I told you
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the limb without support, if it has all at once a slight twist, or if there are subtle tensions that are worth as much.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	If that is not enough, take a moderate dose of wine, and give it to the patient to drink, then give some more or force-feed the wine until it is vomited.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient groans with acute pain throughout the whole time.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take a full look at the cold water, cover the mouth, and make the patient swallow, and move the limb frequently; if the limb feels the pain again, stop immediately
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	If it does not stop, if as we have said, if you fumigate the patient with asafoetida, with the instrument that I have mentioned in the fumigation of the eye; do this many times, for it will be of use to the patient
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And as for fumigation, if you take a pot or there are charcoal briquettes in it, cover the area with a gauze coverlet about a span wide, and in that hole put the head of the instrument; then pour the fumigation, and the patient puts the chief of the cane in his mouth, closes his mouth, so that the smoke does not go out, but comes out through the anus; and the anus will now evacuate, and if it does not evacuate, repeat the fumigation many times; and the patient will suffer thirst, will gulp down dirty and foul things, and will not drink water; and then he will inevitably vomit due to this treatment.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the form of the instrument is thus that, as we have mentioned, when it is seen, it resembles tongs with teeth to enter the throat; and it has the shape of a beak of heron, and it has a rough lime, so that whatever it grasps, it cannot let go; and thus is the shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	the surgeon of abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	The symptoms of boils are, as it is remembered in this book, diverse in perforation and size; and there are two ways in which they appear, one of which is similar to the other, and the other due to moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And thus it is for the legs or if they are bound.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the afterpains of the head are different from those of the foundation, and the afterpains of the bone joint are different from those that come at the joints, and the bones judge in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if the afterpains must not be perceived, as long as the limb hangs limply; but if there are such things as must be perceived when they are stiff, and do not hang limply, as with an afterpain that is beyond the joints
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when the afterpain comes from the joints, and it is left as long as it hangs in tension, by chance if the limb is fractured and the nerve of the joint is ruptured, which is the cause of contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	When the incision is made too high on the principal member, and if you delay the perforation until it is measured, it will go to the principal member; or if it is made too low, if you do not pierce it when it is measured, it will cause fistula.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	It is necessary that you take out the pus of the abscess that is dead according to its companion; when the pain is calmed, the swelling has gone down, the redness and the heat have disappeared, the throbbing and the pain in the head of the abscess, and other signs; and that you make the perforation or drain the abscess more dependent on the abscess, and the place where it is; and that the perforation is long enough for the abscess that is at the hands or feet, or in the joints and nerves and arteries, and for all the bones that are equal or there is no swelling.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In such cases, according to this member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when the incisions are in flesh, if the puncture is delayed until it is confirmed in digestion, as we have said
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you pierce it before this, if it has become prolonged, it swells the body with poison and is full of bad breath; and by chance you harden the flesh and deepen the wound of it.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if there is no support perceived according to the large load of the pain, according to what the limb has to bear.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And you must provide small supports, small incisions; and in great supports, great incisions, and many cuts according to the magnitude of the support; and if there are such supports or you must keep the wound clean and covered; when it is as thick as a drape and soft, if you must make as with bubbles: and if there are such ones that are cut at an angle, and such ones as we must cope with the ivy gourd, as with angering supports; and if there are such ones or we make a round size, and other sizes and similar covers.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Whoever has no head, if there is a superficial swelling of the support, you must pierce it straight through; and you must pierce when the support is great, and it has grown greatly, and you must pierce, if you do not drain all the swelling in that hour, but drain a part; then squeeze the support until the swelling is gone, then drain nothing further; do this many times with great care, until the swelling is gone; even if the patient is of weak virtue, or a woman in childbirth, or a young child, or an old man decrepit
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Leave this section blank.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if blood flows from the wound during your work, if you perceive cold and ease, and moistness I drape it, and draw out the offending part many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if blood continues to flow, if you perceive calm and cure, and the powders that I have mentioned in this book, and if it is a wound that needs stitching, and if the limb or the abscess is very painful, then you must put on attempts and cover with wet cloth in wine and oil; and if it is raw, and the limb is fleshy, then you must put on wet cloth in water and oil, or in wine and oil, until the third part of the joint, as we have said; and then remove the abscess and dry and cure it, as it is necessary, until it is healed
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And this must be known throughout in the treatment of abscesses: or as I have said previously concerning the precautions before treating abscesses, so be it in this chapter.
des soros	And this must be known throughout in the treatment of abscesses: or as I have said previously concerning the precautions before treating abscesses, so be it in this chapter.
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Or when the head of the arm comes out slightly from its place, and is held by our fingers as in a thread, like the joint of a goose, and there is a resemblance.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	Or when there is fat and such things there, or moisture like blood; and if there are such things that are hard and bony at the bone, and there is no doubt that the artery is not opposed to it
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of its size is that you must expect all the instruments which are called "instruments of entrance," from which the form comes afterwards, whatever it contains
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, if it goes down by its length.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is evacuated, leave nothing else inside the belly which contains that moisture, because it returns to its place when nothing is left inside; then put wool in Egyptian style, if it is present; if not, in water and oil, and apply the dressing, and leave it until the other side; and this will correct what was remaining crooked.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And thus, when the wound begins to heal, as before, the second day, and the third, until you are certain that it does not swell any more at night; then cure the wound appropriately, as it is right.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the wound stays moist without fat, if you cut it in this way, long; and let your ointment flow, and the pus from all parts, and put all your care to drain for the scald or where it lies; and if the artery bleeds in the opposite direction, do what I have told you afterwards.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And so do with an abscess if it is perforated, and cut and cure as I have told you before
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And the size of the perforated abscess and the moisture, if it is smaller, for there is little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if any of these abscesses or swellings exist or if there is no moisture, and if these are old abscesses which I cauterise or swellings of an old woman; and find the abscess just like a stone, rough and white, and cannot break it; and if it has not burst, it is just as well to make an incision as with a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses coming from the head and neck, for those that come from the teeth and ears, the opening must be made every day as long as necessary; and the cure must be made as it is convenient.</start_of_turn>
des scrophules	And the size of the wound on the thumb and the moisture, if it is less severe, because they are of little blood. And if there are any of these wounds or chieftains who have no moisture, and of these wounds which I cauterize or chieftains of an old woman; and find the wound just like a hard stone, rough and white, and cannot break it; and if no blood appears, we must make the wound just as well as if it were a stone. In other wounds coming or chieftains, forasmuch as these which come from the head of the fetus and have roots of the ears, the opening must be made every day to the most dependent part of the limb; and the cure must be made as it should be.
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times it happens that the abscess comes to the collarbone, and it causes swelling, pain, and no other part or limb is affected, and it is moist, and is enclosed with the other.</start_of_turn
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And if a carbuncle is properly within its sheath, as when it does not protrude and is not incsed at the head, as we have said; and the appearance of these carbuncles is many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	And there are some who contain moisture, and if they have malignancies that do not wish to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	In that case where you see a good arrangement of bones at the touch, and it is similar in color to bone, and is soft from the tip to the root and is neither red as the artery nor pale as the vein, and is not deep; if you must cope with it, you must break off a piece of the bone, and the soft tissue surrounding it, and lift up two fingers of the hand as we have mentioned in incisions at the head; and the pain will go away and will not return, and so be sure that you do not cover the nerve or the vein, and do not cause excessive swelling or bruising, that the hand does not escape, and does not make a sound before you cover what you must not cover
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	If you puncture the vein or artery, and this does not allow you to work, put in the wound a piece of vitriol burnt to a cinder, or some powder which remains bloodless, and strain the wound; and leave it until the swelling subsides, and soften the wound, and begin to move.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	If the swelling has subsided, if you resume your work, as long as you can complete it; then if at your duty there remain small swellings, if you grasp and press them down.</start_of_turn>
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is in the root of the swelling a large vein, if you cannot do anything but grasp that swelling at its root, but bind it with a strong double thread, and leave it hanging loosely; then use the wound of fine cotton soaked in Egyptian balsam, and then suture.</start_of_turn
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you have removed all the pus, if you must now gather the two layers of the wound, and close them now, since there is no longer any excess due to the size of the abscess.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	if you must now cover the root of the joint, and stretch outwards, and close as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	The swellings which hold excess pus, pierce them out or they burst dead; and pierce as before was said, depending on the matter, and mix with ointment and similar things, so that it fills what is left of the corruption; and when the wound is well drained, if the ointment cure engulfs hair, as long as it remains sound.</start_of_turn>
de squinance	When the wound is well drained, if you apply an ointment dressing covering the scar, as long as it is healthy.
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The old folks used to tell of the tailor of the gorge; but I have never seen it done in our land, and that is what they wrote in their speech.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	As for those who are quarrelsome, it is necessary that the epiglottis, which is called the " epiglottis," be freed; and this cannot be done without causing pain to those veins and blood vessels which are around the throat, or in the gullet or in the tonsils.</start_of_turn>
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the chest of the chest cavity, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to prevent loss of blood from the strangulation.</start_of_turn
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	It must be known, when we wish to split the epiglottis, that we must split it from the outside three circles or four small incisions through, between the two circles or in the quantity of the incision on the surface; and if it is close to the epiglottis, that there be no hair, and the blood vessels are long enough.</start_of_turn
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is fearful, then he must stretch the skin of the throat to the chin, then cut the earlobe as far as it reaches the nape of the neck; and avoid the blood vessels, if you see nothing, and then close the wound as we have said; and demonstrate by the section of the smoke of the nape that the pulse has ceased to beat from the broken bone, and by the absence of speech; and leave the wound open for a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed and it is doubted that the strangulation has ceased, assemble the four limbs of the wound together from the root, and bind them all tightly with the cartilage; then administer medicines which cause the flesh to swell, until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	The abscess does not yield until the throat is thoroughly distended, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the default is abandoned.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Then close the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound; and thus they keep him from dying. And in this way they command the old man to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease has passed, and it has passed in three days or four. And then they command him to suture the wound and cure it, until it is cured; and I will tell you what I have seen.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw that a woman took a knife, stuck it in her throat, and swallowed part of her windpipe; and I fled called for help, but I found her as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the blood that was issuing from it, and saw that it had penetrated neither vein nor artery except for the throat, and that the wound had caused this.</start_of_turn
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hastened, and closed the wound, and cured her until she was healed; and the woman did not suffer any further, since she returned to her senses after the operation; for in the cutting of the epiglottis, I did not find any fear
de la grosse gorge	of the great throat.</start_of_turn
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	These abscesses are called "throat hernia," and are great abscesses the color of gall, and are very common in women; and there are two kinds: natural and accidental; or naturally there is no cause.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accidental kind is in two ways: one is like fat as we have seen, and the other way is like an abscess coming from an artery; there is fear, and one cannot do anything fierce except for little things, and it must be proved and sought after throughout the whole process: if you find it like pure fat and not on any vein, if you touch it, as we touch our nails, and pull it out whole, if there is no blood; and encircle well around, and cure as it should be cured until it is perfectly healed
des nous	And encircle all around, and cure it as it should be, until it is perfectly healed.
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	Many ways are there for us, of which I shall speak of all; and behold, I shall tell you all the difference that is between health and sickness.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that the cause of dislocation is heat and fever that persists, as long as the inflammation has not passed, and is accompanied by swelling; then rest the fever and the heat.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With little health there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and contains I sap, which is its own sack and is like the color of gold, and begins just like butter, and becomes large; and they are like wax, or grease, or moisture, and the color of them is as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is appropriate, when you come to the cure of this wound, that you first inquire about the instrument which is called the "entromissoire", according to its form or chapter which follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the manner of the inquiry of abscesses is that you take more moisture inside than you find in the abscess, and twist your two thumbs and great toes, until you feel that the instruments have perceived the knot, then that it be according to the greatness of the abscess; then draw out the entrament, and take care that the spurge does not burst
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If moisture comes suddenly, as it often does with other incisions; and if afterwards the surrounding tissue does not yield moisture, that which is fat, then do you make a cross [incision] and take hold with your fingers, and gently pull downwards from the navel to the hipbone; and if you do not manage to pull it out whole, tear it out in pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if nothing remains, if it comes back often; and if a little remains, and you do not grieve, if you employ on the wound some corrosive powders, hold the wound steady, and put on soothing things around the wound, and treat the wound in other ways until it is healed; and if it is great, cut out two fingers of the wound, and treat that which engulfs the bone.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	If the vein swells against you or otherwise compels you, if you hurry and employ the broth of vitriol, and leave it for three or four days, until the wound has healed, and rest the swelling of blood; then return to cover what remains that has festered.</start_of_turn>
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	See here the forms of the entromittent instruments, and there are three kinds: great, medium, and small; and there are three squares which are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb", and there are three kinds: great, medium, and small, to encompass the fistulas; and they are like needles which are used to sew up wounds, and are of saffron, iron, or silver, and must be of a yellow color which is worth a pearl which is black, and are of three kinds: great, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the size of the perforation.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The shapes of the hooks are like the seeds of plants, as you see here: great, medium, and small; and if there are hooks which have two curves of three kinds each; and if there are hooks which have three curves, and are of three kinds each; and if there are hooks which have two curves, and a single curve only, and are of three kinds each; all these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The head of the humerus being fractured, it is torn from one side only, from which we draw the vein without cutting it; from these interruptions are the nerves restored in sheaths, so that the patient does not lose them at the opening of the abscesses; and there are three kinds: great, small, and medium, as you see; and we do not use them for any other purpose except for bones like the leg, arm, elbow, and wrist, and similar things; and no other instrument is ever used except for the graspings like those of fists, following this fashion, to keep the blood:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And one must never put it back in the same place where it previously sustained the veins, arteries, and never again in like fashion:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Under no circumstances does the swelling of the testicles of certain men abate when they begin to become corrupt, so that they seem like testicles of women; and they lie limp and flee, and anyone who sees them cured must believe that they have been cured according to this fashion from line b to g.
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Then scrape off the fat, and use the medicinal salve liberally; then sew up the two layers of the wound with sutures, and cure until it is healed; and if the mother’s milk flows, and it is softened by its greatness as with women, if there are two ribs below, by two similar incisions; so that one holds the other at the end of one and the other, so that the greater line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. up to the line .g.; then scrape off the skin between the two layers, and bone the fat, and insert what we have said of sutures and powders, and what is necessary for the cure, until it is healed; and if it is not healed, or the incision is not completely made, because the patient does not want to rest, or for the discharge of blood, if it is necessary, that you fill the wound with moist cotton in corrosive order. And leave it until it has eaten up the remnants and the fat, then cure until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses of boils
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come from the armpits are like hard scrofula, or there are bones there, and there is only fluid in them.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When all the bones that are in the appendage are emptied, if one employs the wound of fine cotton, and leaves it until the other side, then close all the cotton, and cure the wound that comes from that until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	If the abscesses resemble small carbuncles, if one does as we have said in cutting carbuncles, and if the wound is in the bone, if one joins cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	Of the course of the artery.
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is blocked, and the skin is swollen which is above, if there are many abscesses there, and also blood escapes from the vein and an abscess; and if the surgeon knows that it is due to the artery, if the abscesses are long and firm, if he feels them when he touches them, he knows that it is a drawing; and if it is due to the vein, if there is a running discharge from the wound. It is foolish to suture this abscess, just as when it is full of pus and boils, abscesses and boils on the heel or on the ankle or in the mouth of other things, and is very great.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The fire cautery instructs the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
des apostemes des ners	Then put upon one drapeil moist in wine and oil, and mix with cures of tents and unguents until it is healed.
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Then put upon one drapeil moist in wine and oil, and mix with cures of tents and unguents until it is healed.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this often happens with adjuvants and the two thighs or when there is a dislocation, for which the post is painful, and its color resembles the color of saffron, and is in multiple positions causing pain; and when it is strained, if the patient feels pain, and does not feel the pain of the saffron, but rather faintness like a cold sweat; he mutters from all sides, neither going forward nor backward, neither upwards nor downwards, and that which is in the joints cannot be covered with iron: by chance there comes a contraction; and if it is the arm or the chest or the front, it makes the skin wrinkle like a scab.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, if it has one support, and grasp it at the root; and if it is large, if it hangs in the armpit, and swells, then fracture the bone and reunite the wound at the suture, and cure until it is healed
des grosses boces pendans	Until the swelling subsides and the wound is scorched, unite the bone and close the wound at the suture. Keep the dressing in place until healed.</start_of_turn>
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	Never has it happened in the belly and nowhere else, and is a disease which is called "fungus" because of its appearance like a foot, and is the root which is subtle, and the head is large; and there are some small and some large drops. I saw a man who had two or three of these in his belly which were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had a thick root, and were split open, and corrected the moisture accordingly.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I saw them [fungs] and found in one XVIII ounces weight, and in the other VI and a third, and the work in the incision if it is that you look if the patient is moist, and the color of the artery is pale and moist and has a thick root; if it reaches the large spleen, and if it is in your presence, do the cautery with fire.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For in the armpit, there often comes too great a discharge of blood; if it does not go away, if you haste, then do you burn; and if you see the patient groaning and fainting from the incision of the flesh, take a good thread of silk and bind the artery as we have said, and leave it for two days; then bind it, and do not cease to drain the thread of silk until it stops the bleeding; and ask it from him how he feels. If the roots are exposed, if he has fear of the same on the other side, but take care to cover half of it, then burn it so that it does not return; then cure the wound and keep only that part which is of dark colour and little sense and milk-white.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an abscess that is inflamed, and I will come to the cure of the abscess later on.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the shoulder is swollen it is painful.
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If swelling appears, it comes from burn of wound or split of bone, and is on the belly and in the flanks of some blood, as it happens in other ways, or blood that clots in veins or arteries according to what is before, or from windiness; and if it is by the route of the bone and by the discharge of the bowel, if it is the colour of the abscess, it is a slight thing with little pain, and opens from various issues.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	When it comes from the discharge of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when pressed with the hands, if it returns and comes back, and by chance if it is caught, and grows out with water and great work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to moisture, it is a light matter, and open easily when you press it with your hand; do not constrain me. And if it is due to blood, if it is open by these signs, the abscesses are great and hard, and are fixed according to quantity. And if it is due to air, if it is blown towards the toucher, and the work if it is that you see that it appears due to the blood of an artery or a vein, or air.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If you must leave the cure.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I have already said or as the chapter says, concerning the abscesses of the artery and the vein.</start_of_turn>
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if it appears due to the intestine or the spleen, if you must command the patient to hold his breath, and be stretched out straight, then mark with your finger all around the belly; then command him to grasp between your hands, and bring towards the middle of your belly that which you have marked at the greatest circumference; then bind the other half of the abscess with a strong thread or a strong silk cord firmly, and if necessary we shall tie it; then open half of the abscess and bring your thumb and index finger to the navel, and look at the intestine; if you find it caught in the thread, if you pull it out, bring the intestine out through the belly; and if you find the spleen, if you grasp it at the navel, and cut off the excess; and if the artery or the vein is making you do the opposite, if it goes well around, then return to your work and take two needles, and bring two strong threads, and pass the two needles through what you have made in the cross that you made to pierce; then strain the abscess for three periods over the needles, and if you see, break the needles, and leave the limb until it swells, and cut the dead tissue by itself; or you can drain it when it is small and swollen, and cure it in the way that we have said; and stretch the abscess as we have said; and remove the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the limb of what is necessary, and close the limb.</start_of_turn>
dou chancre	And draw out the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the cause of this that is causing it, and bandage the limb.
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have said in the division concerning the signs of the chancre, and how one must treat it with medicine, and how one must shun the treatment of fire; and we say that the chancre is like a tumor in the marrow, and has great caution in its treatment, and the old men say that when a chancre is in the bone or can be pulled out like a tumor in the marrow, and in the flesh, and similar things, and it must be completely eradicated when it is in its beginning; but when it is great and old, if one cannot approach it, for I know of no cure for it; nor have I ever seen it cured before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And as for the work, when it is in the bone or can be pulled out, as we have said, you must purge the black bile from the patient once; then make it whole if it shows any swelling; then drain the patient; that is, give him good liquid to make the work; then extract your nails or the tumor, and the head of all parts, and the bone of all parts, without leaving anything in place; and leave the wound open, and press your hand or anything else firmly against it, and if the blood flows from the artery or vein, do not cauterize it too much lest it be stained; then cure it with other remedies until it is healed.
de ydropisie	De ydropisie.
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	Nos avons dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et celle qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let the incisions be of two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	And let the incisions be of two parts, a point, and let them not be made too deep lest they reach the intestines when they are sutured, and do not clot them; then look if the bile is lodged towards the intestines: if so, make three sutures on the left side of the wound; and if the bile is due to the disease of the liver, make the incision on the left side of the wound; and if it is due to the spleen, make it on the right side, and do not make them deeper than necessary for the patient to rest on the incision that the fluid does not flow from that weak limb; then pierce all the leather with the instrument, and draw out the thread, and keep your hand over the wound as wide as from the nail to the wrist as when you are grasping the quantity of an nail or as much as an inch in diameter; then pierce the skin as wide as the width of your thumb, and that is the limit of the water, then withdraw the instrument, and there is your wound.
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it is like a silver coin turned upside down, and is of barley or barley straw lighter, and has at the upper part a little hole; or it costs one part, three holes; and two of another part, and one of another; and the head of the shoulder is cut off like a nail, and this is the form of the incision which the writer makes to cut off the nail.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	At the top is the marrow, if when the instruments come to the point of sharpness, if it is now on the instruments; empty out then half or a third part, for if you empty more than that at once, by chance the patient will die from the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he will vomit, or he will approach death; but empty according to the quantity of his virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue tell the patient, and his pulses; then take out the instruments and retain the blood, and it is retained now by the spur which stamps the hole which is on the facet, as I have said, that you pierce according to this method; then repeat the instruments the other way, if you see the patient suffering from this, and give him a small quantity of blood. Do this for neither the first nor the second time until it no longer remains but a little blood.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	If thou doubtest of the patient, and thou seest him emit drops of blood, if the cure of the sepulture or sand cautery, and by drops of sweat or bath and sun, and dost abstain from food; and dost administer dry medicines until he is cured, and cauterize upon the stomach and upon the liver and upon the spleen after the extraction of the blood, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the belly of the limb.
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Never are children born without a mark in the belly, or the mark is small, or it is not well placed in its place
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If the physician persists too long that he cannot perceive all the humors very subtle according to this shape:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then put or prick the subtle humors of the bladder, and bind and hold them for three days or four, and when he wants to urinate, if he keeps the bladder closed, and he urinates, and then he can be set free; for by chance it cannot be closed, because the urine that comes out forces it open.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	If the cause of the opening is slight, if it is treated with a poultice, as we have said, if it swells.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have the opening inside their limb are pale, for none are born with the opening at the root of the limb, for they cannot urinate before they elevate their limb high; and they cannot endure this because the matter cannot come down to the marrow, and this is a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the way of the work is that if the patient lies supine on his back, then stretch out the head of the shoulder and the arm as wide as a pen, if the navel is pierced in the middle, as it should be; and hold back the discharge of blood that comes many times, and if it comes, if the stain of this blood is seen, cure the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	Des pustules de la verge.
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times these boils appear on the verge, and are a sign of foul matter; and there are both malignant and benign ones. If you wish to remove them, you must first apply a subtle ointment, then lance and crush them all, then apply a soaked cotton swab in Egyptian order; then bind with a diafinicon until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the swelling is malignant, dark and purulent, it is necessary that you apply cautery to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have grasped it, and if the swelling is at the root of the limb, and has some in the belly and some outside, it is necessary that you reduce the swelling which is inside first; and when it is reduced, if the cure is outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you cure the whole [wound], if it is not firmly held in place, the head of the shoulder will be perceived [as dislocated]; black bile and corruption will ensue in his head or shoulder; if you can remove all that is black and corrupt, then apply honey and flour made from pomegranate peel and sometimes, cure it with other treatments until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if blood comes away, if you mix lunar cautery with this method:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cautery helps in two positions together: that is, at the discharge of blood, and at corruption; and if the head of the shoulder is corrupted and retracted, if you swallow or induce vomiting, the patient will urinate; and when the hair has fallen out at the root of the beard which has not been shaved, or if there is wound or incision, if you can then singe it with the instrument that chews, as long as the tendons are loosened, and deliver the head of the shoulder from all parts; and if this is burdensome, if you can then touch it with the thumb and index finger of the other hand, then smear gently between them, and put on a bandage of fine linen moistened with cold water, which will not move away from its place.</start_of_turn>
de la circoncision	from the circumcision.
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not merely a continuation of other wounds; although when we make this work of our own free will, and do it properly, if we make it better, it is the lightest in health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the old ones did not speak of circumcision in their laws, because they did not use it in their customs, and we have only what we have learned through experience
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have seen the greatest part of masters and physicians who made circumcision around here, with force and all their skill; but when the urine escaped through the pores because there were two holes, and by chance if we cut off these above and left those below, the patient fled.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or la recovient coper, and the pain is doubled, and at the movement which is done too roughly, the point of the limb is not securely held; and by the movement of the bone by chance escapes the needle, and repairs the work, and many times they are born again without having had to move them and I desire it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the movement which is made there is force throughout the whole thread that I have proved to be beneficial in the experiment, for the forces tear just as well from above as from below.</start_of_turn>
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you press your hand, if it is equally taut in all directions, but the thread is well stretched around the skin; and if the movement is slight at first, as if you were reminding a child, if he understands, do not force him to tighten the thread too much around the limb, but simply bind it loosely around the limb; then make it firm between your hands or pull out the nails that the fetus cannot see, neither any of the instruments; then put your hand on the limb and sigh or groan, and draw it up as high as the head of the limb is elongated; then thoroughly cleanse the area that is collected, then tie the limb with a double thread, and tie it loosely from one end to the other; and hold for two turns at the pouch and the index finger, and hold between the two threads, then withdraw the groan from the fetus and draw out the head of the limb; then leave the blood to flow freely, as it is proper; and sprinkle with powder and on the powder a bandage glued with a piece of egg yolk boiled in rose water, confirmed with rose oil and rosemary, and leave it on until the other cure is complete.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The shape of the forces at the circumcision is thus: the two thumbs are tense and extended, and the fingers are as great as the thumb equally:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The pain of the mundane if it comes from the incision; therefore it is necessary that you extend your fingernail, even if the wound makes a postscript; and hold it equally, and if you do not wish to hold it at your fingernail, if you hold it with your teeth, and then hold it.</p>
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they trespass for two days, and that which is beside the bone is inflamed, if you leave it as long as the swelling subsides, and the redness is slight; if you hold it as you wish, and keep the bone from the part of the limb, it will cause neither damage nor pain.</p
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cure then the limb of things soured with wound of powder, as we have said or treated with powders, and if we hold too tightly, it will go away, if it does not already; cure then as we have said, until it is healed.</p
dou retenement de l’urine	Dou retenement de l’urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The urine is retained if the stone, or blood congealed, or bile, or purulent matter, or other things which we have mentioned in the division, are present; and if the urine does not flow freely, and you see that the stone is in the navel or the neck of the bladder, if it is possible that the patient is bent over his knees; and that they put their feet on the back, and extend their belly from the part under their back, and restrain the patient as much as they can; and then the neck of the bladder is constrained to the expression of the stone above, so that the urine is desliie; and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, if it is possible that you administer an extraction with all the instruments which are called "siringues", in which this is the form: either of silver hammered out like a sparrow's beak; or the caine of a palm of long and a half; or hammered out.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And thus the manner of extracting urine is such that you take two threads and bind one to the head of the bladder or of cloth, and pass the thread through the bladder; and drain the excess of cloth and pass until you reach the head of the bladder, then join the bladder with oil or butter and egg yolk, and make the patient sit on the edge of the bed, and raise the bladder and the testicles with oil moist and oily with olive oil and urine; then put the bladder steadily into the testicle as far as it reaches the root of the testicle, then double the testicle downwards towards the buttock; then withdraw the bladder again until it reaches the bladder, and feel the patient urinate until it is empty, and this must not be done except in the case that the urine is leading or going in a different direction. Then draw the threads all the way out, and the urine follows the thread, then withdraw the thread, and correct the urine; and repeat the bladder until the bladder is empty, and align the patient.
des maladies de la vessie	Des maladies de la vessie.
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When urine or blood comes into the bladder, or when pus is assembled there, and you see urine and medicines distilled, if you do everything that is called the «clepsedre», which is its shape:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	She is closed, and if there are three holes: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and the head of the shoulder is grasped by whom the doctor commands, so that he stamps well the limb with addition, if we can manage to remove the moisture, and push as much as necessary; and when you see the medicines dripping from the bladder, put the chief surgeon in the moisture, and drive out the one who is in front; if you drive out the moisture from the surgeon, and then push strongly the one in front; if the moisture enters the surgeon, and comes to the bladder now, if the patient feels it; and this is the form of the subtle cluster which we clusterize the bladder: if this is the case:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	She is closed, and if there are three holes: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and the head of the shoulder is grasped by whom the doctor commands, so that he stamps well the limb with addition, if we can manage to remove the moisture, and push as much as necessary; and when you see the medicines dripping from the bladder, put the chief surgeon in the moisture, and drive out the one who is in front; if you drive out the moisture from the surgeon, and then push strongly the one in front; if the moisture enters the surgeon, and comes to the bladder now, if the patient feels it; and this is the form of the subtle cluster which we clusterize the bladder: if this is the case; or of silver or gold, and the shoulder is higher; and two veins are swollen at the breast or the armpit; then take a bladder of a goat and put the moisture which you see clustering the bladder inside it, and tie between the two breasts a strong double thread, and burn one of those moistures on the fire; then bring back the chief of the cluster to the limb, and strain your hand over the bladder with all the moisture that comes out, until the patient feels that that moisture has come to the bladder; and if you do not have the bladder, if you take a piece of parchment, and make a circle, and pierce it round about the edges; then pass the thread strongly through these holes, and assemble the circle as though you were assembling a doll, and put inside it what you see of oil, moisture, and water, and tie it up with the instrument; and do as though you had made the bladder, pressing your hand until the moisture comes out of the bladder.
de la piere	Of the stone.
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already mentioned in the preceding parts the methods of dealing with stones, and their extraction with medicines; and we mentioned the difference between a retained stone and one that is not, and the signs of each. In what case should we perform an incision for a stone? In the bladder and the kidney; and I shall tell you openly and concisely.</start_of_turn>
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that a stone which is retained in the bladder is often the cause of vomiting, and this is a sign that the bladder is greatly irritated throughout its substance; there is open hazing, and the patient feels great pain in the belly and has many vomiting spells, and then grows pale; and from these vomiting spells the foundation is loosened; and it is light for the patient to recover from vomiting until the age of three, and is much more difficult in the elderly, and is like that in young people and old people; and the cure for the large stone is easier than for the small one.</start_of_turn
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, if it is necessary, first purify the patient by vomiting, to bring out all the evil that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it never happens that we are able to explore the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the limbs and loosen and move them downwards, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder; and it never goes up again; then make him sit between your hands as if they were his thighs, and his hands should rest on his buttocks, so that the bladder is fully descended downwards; then inquire and touch inwards; if you feel the stone in the space, hasten to cut above the stone immediately.</start_of_turn>
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not yield to the toucher on all sides, then take your left thumb and put some oil on it, if the patient is old, or your middle finger, if the patient is young and robust; and press firmly into the foundation, inquire about the stone, and when you feel it with your thumb, if it is at the edge of the bladder; then press firmly on your thumb, and the stone will come out or you will see it cut out.</start_of_turn
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend with his right hand the testicles upwards, and with his left hand to grasp the skin covering the testicles in the part where the size is taken; then insert the speculum covering, since this is the shape:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And enter between that which is between the hooks and the foundation, do not mix in the middle but at the cost of the left nail; and be right upon the stone, and your two be either adés or foundation, and be the size of a thumb if it be wide by default, and within narrow, according to the quantity of the stone, do not make it too large; for by chance the press if it must be on or the foundation, that it leap forward in work; and nails that are part of the stone or have angles, and margins: if it be grasped to insert; and if there is part that is squeezed, it resembles a gland, round, from which is issue is slight.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	And if there are angles and margins on it, make the size greater; and if it does not leap, it is necessary that you stretch upon the tendons which are like a file at the head, for the muscle to stretch the stone if it escapes; or you can grasp the instrument with a curved handle at the head; and if you do not know how to engage it, if the opening is large, and if the stone is not properly engaged, if the stone is strained by vitriol; and if there is more than one stone, stretch out the greatest at the neck of the bladder first, then join it up, then the body must force, and the small ones afterwards if there are more of them.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is much swollen, if you cover it with silk, it will make a greater wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	And if it is much swollen, if you cover it with silk, it will make a greater wound. For in this matter two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or the urine comes back because the belly cannot hold it; but whatever you do to try to drain it, or to remove the stones, as long as you do not complete the work, when you have finished your work, if you apply incense and aloe and blood of dragon, and tighten it, and put on a wet bandage soaked in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to calm the burning; then raise the patient up on his chest and do not loosen the ligature until the third joint.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you release it, if there is much swelling of the limb due to oil and water, then treat with ointment of beeswax and ointment of alum, until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if there are urine-stones in the wound and corrosion, and blood clots in the bladder, and either because the urine is retained, which is known in this way without leaping with the urine: break off your urine in the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will burst the bladder, and carry it away; then wash the wound with water and soap and oil, and give the patient every kind of help you can, until he is healed; and know that all the things you do to cure him, bind the two stitches, and gather the medicines on the limb.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small, and it is either a passage of the kidney or a stone, and is fixed, and the urine cannot issue; if the doctor who performs this treatment does not listen to me many times, they will hear of the size of this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already seen this proven to be true
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take hold of the iron as described above and make it so that there are two angles fixed at one end in a loop:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then I take a thread and I pass it around the kidney stone near the bladder; so that it does not go backwards into the bladder; then I pull the thread gently until it reaches the stone; and I twist the thread at the root of the stone and the stone itself, until I can see the stone from the other side; when the urine comes, then I press my hand over that which remains in the bladder of the stone that is inside the kidney
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the fracture is great, and the bladder spurts with the urine, and the patient cries out; if you are unable to do this by any means, then take a thread and pass it through the navel and out, then pass the bladder towards the navel between the two ribs, and draw it out, loosen the thread, and bind the blood clot which is in the wound; and cure it until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	If you cannot do this for any reason, take hold of one side of the bone and the other above, then draw the limb over the bone between the two joints, and then extract it forcefully, loosen the ligament, and massage the blood clot which is in the wound; and cure it until it is healed.
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	When the bone is loosened in women, and this does not happen often, if it happens once, the cure is grief, and is hindered by two things: the first is that the woman is a virgin; the second is that one cannot find a woman who is truly virtuous, even among the most chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	If by chance you cannot find a woman who is well skilled in this work of hands; and if the woman’s stone is more deeply embedded than the man’s, for it is there that you must make a deeper incision, and there is great danger in that. And if it is necessary to do this, if you take a small measure that is well known, and prick the belly, and if you do not find it, do not cast aside the subtle measure; and present a woman who is well skilled in life, or a woman who is skilled in a part of the work, and command her to do what you command of the inquiry of the stone; and look well whether the woman is a virgin: for if she is, you must push out her butt or foundation and inquire the stone; and if she finds it, if you constrain her butt with your left hand, and command her to hold her butt or with the patient, and desire and press her left hand on the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If it is true, when you move the hip from the groin to the knee, as far as it reaches the thigh root; then clamp above the knee at the thigh root and discover the marrow cavity there where it is usually seen, and feel the knee in that part; and do not move your thumb above the knee or below, and let the size be small at first; then gradually increase the size, if you feel the knee become larger than the wound until the knee can bear its burden, and that many kinds of knees are like this: small and large, blunt and spiky, long and rounded, and which have rain.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	if it is true, when you feel the knee bones are out of place you will know it.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	and if it does not go away, if you put a piece of broken glass on the wound and hold it for an hour until it is stained; then return to your work, until the knee is strong, and have the instruments that I told you about for extracting the arrow from its home will help you in your work; and if it does not go away, and if it is a vein that has been cut, if you put powder on the wound and bind it tightly with bands, and do not attempt to move it again, and leave the knee alone, except in an emergency where the patient dies; then cure the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	When the color of blood has subsided and the limb is relaxed, if you return to your work while the wound is still open, as long as the wound is still bleeding.
de hernie carnouse	De hernie carnouse.
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Ramice aquouse is nothing else but an assembly of moisture or white fat, which is as soft as the kernels of corn, that contains the yolk; and it is called "syfac," and never is it properly within the yolk, if we take care that it is not otherwise. And it is the skin of the kernel between the white fat that we have said. And these do not move together.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the formation of this ramus is from weakness and comes from the kernels, and the matter is spread out.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And never if percussion comes upon the joints, and this moisture has many colors: either a pale yellow, or without red, or black, or pale blue, and this is more; and these are signs of corruption of this assembly, for if it is pale yellow or white as we have said, if the abscess is reinous, I would say long as a sausage, and it does not open the joints, because there is moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture in the flesh itself, if the abscess is reinous with a portion of the yolk, and because of this it is thought that it is another sausage; and if the moisture is between the skin of the joints and the white substance, if one feels well; then when you know the color of the moisture, if you see that it is throughout, from which it appears that the shape is as before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to this, therefore, which follows the introductor, judge of that which is within.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we licure by fire, if it is commanded that the patient be sound as before and the restoration of his limb; then we bind him upon his back, upon something high, and put under him a bundle of cloths; then we sit upon his left side, and command the minister to sit on his right side, and extend the arm up to one of the two ribs which are two fingers distant from the navel; then we take the sponge soaked in liquid, and we cut the skin of the ribs among the bones up to the navel; and we make our incision straight, dividing the skin of the ribs up to the white fascia; and we burn it secretly as before; then we pierce the fascia with a needle at one large hole, and we drain all the fluid, and then we put in our sponges, and withdraw the needle; and do not touch the bone of the ribs, but only the fascia; cut off all or in pieces immediately the cost of it secretly, for if you do not cut it well, the fluid will return; and if the urine spurts from your work, if you leave it in its place when you have completed the work of the fascia.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the abscess corrupted by another disease, then you must tie up the blood vessels that are suspended, doubting the decay of blood; then cut through the abscess thoroughly, drain the pus, and cure it as we have said.</start_of_turn>
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	If the swelling is gathered in two parts together, like two branches; if you press the other part as you did the first equally, then wipe away the blood, and put in the wound a piece of clean linen soaked in oil of roses; and put upon it another layer of linen soaked in wine and oil, and put on the two nails, and put under doubled cloths, and bind it up as it is said above.
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two cloths, and use coarse wool thread as said above and assemble them by stitching in the armpit; and one of the nails grasps on the foundation up to the shoulder, and the other at the side of the shoulder; and the other two nails on the two angles, and assemble everything so that the restriction is in the loop of the armpit; and never is this branch of cautery treated with the size of a sword, and only take one surgical cautery, and press the skin of the nails, and if as we have said, if the white spot that contains the blood is discovered; if you take the cautery as said above, and pierce that spot as we have uncrossed, and burn it with this subtle cautery.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And look at all the ways you can, until you are done; and keep that the fire does not touch the yolk; and save that this work is more salve; and move that you keep the incisions of blood, and more delicate than the works of size; and if anything hinders you, or incisions or other things, if you can cure what hinders you, according to what is said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the patient is pale and does not wish to wait for this work because of its horror, if he suspects perforation, as I have said, and as soon as you are certain by the meanings we have said that the aquous solution is lying, if you make the patient sit on a low seat; then pierce the abscess at the lower part with all the surrounding area wide, and make the perforation long and thin; and if the wound is large, so that all the blood flows out; then put cotton on the wound, and tie it, and leave to drain the remaining blood, and cure until the wound is healed; and if the white bile does not allow the blood to drain from the wound, as you must drink a penny or the instrument with which the blood is treated from the hydrophics, because it is like this; and enlarge the wound, and save that the blood returns, and reassemble after six months or when the wound is healed, and when it is reassembled as before, and thus the patient will pass his days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	The hairs that are in the root of this limb are numerous and cause fear in many; for I believe that their value is not in leaving them; and I shall tell you the work and the resemblance of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	Therefore, when the abscess comes or bursts, and there are stitches; and this is often the case
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	It is known by excessive rubbing and swelling, which is spread over the bones, or by percussion; and the colour of the abscess is like that of fresh blood; and there is no pain, and it is painful; and by chance it is one abscess that is grasped, painful and bloody, and of a dark colour, and never comes from any artery, or swelling of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is not from an artery, if it is known by the position of the abscess, when you press it with your thumb; and it must not be touched by you
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	He who is made of the swelling of a vein is known by his arrangement at the expression of pain in the thighs, and can well make the size upon this semblance, and upon the other limbs; and is that you press like a key against the coions, then the egg is up, and the thread is from white silk, and delivers the yolk from all parts of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the egg is already soiled with these limbs, if you can then only draw the egg and press; and if it is at the silk or in the blood vessels, if you can deliver all that is thick, and press round
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if it is towards the socket, or within the blood vessels, if you must deliver all that is tense, and round off the edges.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is done, if you apply a bandage of coarse wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then cure with other cures until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess covered with a covering resembling a berry, with the softening of the coions, and the patient groans greatly when he goes; and the cure for this disease is well known as before, and all that we can say about it is what the ancient ones did
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	You must make the patient sit on the left side of the chair, and then hold the suspension of the collarbones to his chest, to all the vessels that are below the ribcage, and grasp them firmly, and extend them outwards; then pierce with a needle through the tough tissue between the vessels, until they are uncovered, and then drain from the front, as we said in the extraction of the arteries from the temples; then insert a needle or there is a double thread, and tie it to the first loop or the knot has come loose, and tie it to the other end; then close tightly around the middle, according to the length of the hair, and remove the corrupted moisture; then cure the wound as usual or apply a bandage, so that no vessel is cut other than those which naturally bleed from the collarbones; for in this case there will be no harm, and if all the vessels are cut, it is better to remove the collarbones from all the vessels; if he does not lose his nourishment from the incision of the vessels, and if they are dry and do not bleed further.
de la routure dou syfac	If the oes does not lose its nourishment through the incision of the vessels, and dries and does not yield aid.
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The event of this branch is by section which comes or syfac, or extension on the belly in the part of the spleen, for which the intestine descends from that route to one of the coils; and this route is either the syfac or the extension of the latter, and comes from these two modes of motion: by percussion, or jump, or pressure, or the raising of grief faix, and by similar things; and the sign that this is the extension of the syfac is that there is a pause and a pause, in long tension, and does not come immediately; and the apostemes are equal until towards the navel, for that the syfac presses the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the sign is when the jaw is fractured, that it suddenly causes pain in the ear, and the swelling is different from the normal, with the skin taut and pale, because of the escape of the intestine and the swelling of the jaw.</start_of_turn
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And never do the bones move with the intestine, and is retained when forced, and causes great suffering to the patient, even when pressed.</start_of_turn>
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these fiery cures with fear, for fear itself suffices.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	If you command or the patient instructs that the intestine be held in the hand towards the depth of the wound if it can enter; then either saw above the collar between the hands, and hold the thighs; then stretch the thumb over the top, and cut all the skin of the coils along; then push inwards the leaves of the size of an almond according to what you must master to open the wound, and so that these are the same as those that make it impossible for it to go further; then stretch the syfac that is outside the skin of the coils, as long as the thick syfac is discovered from all sides; then put your index finger in that which teaches the coil, in that which is between the white syfac which is outside the skin of the egg, and between the second syfac, and depart that which is behind the egg, and between the second syfac; and because it moves the hand of the side of the coil, and put the white syfac at the top of your left hand, and hold the egg towards all the syfac towards the size; and command the minister to extend the egg upwards, and unhook that which is behind the ligament; and ask at your sides if there is any intestine or white syfac hardened, and if you find nothing, if it is at the bottom of the wound; then take a needle or there is a thick thread made of X threads, and put it in the back part of the syfac, which is after the skin of the coils; after the size, then cut the ends that appear from the threads, until there are three threads; and assemble them one on the other in the manner of a cross, and bind the syfac, of which we have said that it is outside the skin of the coils, with a strong thread of two parts; then cover the ends of the threads, and bind them in two parts, so that no vessels which support them can enter inside, except for the wound that remains; and remove the thread according to the first thread along two fingers of that, and after these two threads leave the syfac that is outside the coil the greatest of a finger; and after all the rest according to the roundness that the egg carries; then cut in the part that is outside the skin of the coils, as much as it is without repair, and bend it over, as we have said before; then apply coarse wool soaked in oil, and put in the wound, and apply the thread that we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	Never cauterize the flesh except as I have said after the incision, in doubt of bloodletting
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For in this work, there is often the evacuation of blood, and leaving the vein open until it bleeds; and if it delays at the root, if it arises from a hot wound, put on what we have said, until it bleeds; then cure the wound with another cure, until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	De hernie carnouse.
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this limb I have never seen anyone who could cure it with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients say that it is made just like the twig which joins the nut, in part like that you bind the veins, after the size above loosely to the outside; then press inward, and cure the abscess of that which causes it, until the veins bleed; and cure it as we have said, until it is perfectly healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Never comes rupture among the angry ones, as we have said, and open the eyes; and do not feel any intestines as stones, and if there are, that is enough, and repair them all the hours; and all of them if it stays too long in this place, if you believe the wound or the swelling, until the intestines come out; and this comes from the stretching of the sinew which is angry, as we have said, because it is extended, then softened and inflamed the eyes and open; and cure it if by cautery, as we have said before; and never cured by iron in this manner: and that the patient lies soundly on his back between your hands, then press the eye of the rupture swells with the large of three two; and then remove the swelling that is from the outside of the leather that covers it, then take the thread and bring out the eye appearing from the swelling; and press at the bottom of the belly, then cut out the two eyes appearing from the swelling on the top of the thread, and cut one and the other; then remove the head of the thread, and do not cover the swelling or extend the yolk of anything else, as I have told you in the cure of the root of the intestines; then cure by the cure of wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you have closed the wound, if the swelling and cure the wound, as long as it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The swelling is constrained, and has no apparent cause in the course of treatment, and the cautery is mute in this limb, and more proximate to safety.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin of the nails
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin of the nails becomes soft in old age, because the nails themselves are softened, and it is seen; and it is necessary, when it is seen to be cured, to make the patient lie on his back, and to remove the soft skin from the natural skin; then join the two layers together with a suture, and if you see that, leave the excess of soft skin at two or three sutures; then close between the sutures, and cure as with the other wounds, until it is healed, and cut the thread.
dou chastrement	Dou chastrement,
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	The wounds which are scraped off in our laws, and for this reason I do not wish to speak of them in this book; and it is not necessary to force them except for two cases: the first is that the witness to the wound responds when asked, and the cure of the wound; and the second, because we often see best friends of ours being forced to swear by their attendants, as with oxen and sheep and cats and other beasts.</start_of_turn>
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say therefore that swearing is done in two ways: by attraction, or by incision.</start_of_turn
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the one that we do by attraction, we make the best sit in hot water, until the joint is softened and flexible; then we grasp it with our hand, until it is set and you no longer feel it.</start_of_turn
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	From the limb's fracture: command that you hold it firmly, and press the skin of the nails on your left hand, then bind the suspension; and place a bandage over each wound as many times as necessary until you have firmly secured them; and leave no wound open or any hidden wound which is outside the blood vessels; and this method of treatment is milder than that which is done by traction, because traction leaves no trace of the nails, for which reason it desires luxury; then cure the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermaphroditism is in two ways as follows: one if between the two nails appears as the figure of a woman, or if there are hairs, and sometimes it emits urine in the urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other kind is in women, and has on the navel as a beard and two nails.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the treatment for boils and carbuncles is that you lance the boils open all, and treat them like other wounds; in the second method, for those whose urine spurts through the pores of the buttocks, if there is no other cure.
de la tentigene	Hermaphroditism is in two ways: one if between the two testicles is open as in the figure of nature in a woman, or if there is hair, and sometimes in the urine is held back. And the other way if in women, and has on the navel as a beard and two testicles. And the cure for the swelling and fame is if you crush the testicles completely, and the cure is like for other wounds; in the second way, of men whose urine spurts through the skin of the testicles, if there is no cure.
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	The tinder is a boil on the natural part [of the body], as long as it is too painful to see; and many women have it as much as a hand, and that is the cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary that you keep the superfluousness of the tinder at your hand or armpit, and grasp it lightly; and do not go too deeply, for there is risk of bleeding, and that is what causes death; and there is another disease that arises at the mouth of the marris, and the swelling, and by chance spurts out, and is similar to a cow’s foot, and for this reason it is called the ancient “plague of the cow”.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you have grasped it, as we have said, hold the limb steady until it is healed.
de erratique	De erratique.
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	If the nature of the woman is not clearly perceived, or if the wound is small; and it is natural by birth, or due to an accident of illness that comes with it; or it is caused by a sudden injury, or by a swelling or scab, and is made by a wound in the marrow, or in the cost, or in the eyes, or in any other place; and if it breaks the conception, and the birth, and by chance the flowers have come to have; and the knowledge of this is by the attention of the dance.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If swelling appears close to the surface, if you desire to the two or to the root
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is a swelling of the spleen that is close to the surface, if you are in a hurry, and the spleen is ruptured; put your two index fingers together, and the patient should lie on their back, with their legs spread; then the two levers are formed, as long as the spleen is round, and is over the swelling; then take oil, and soak the wound in it, and put it on the limb, and hold the patient still, until the swelling subsides.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the scapula is hard and thick, as you must keep it from pressing against the cartilage resembling a ivy leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the swelling is of cartilage, if you suspend it at the navel and keep it pressed; and have medicines that are staying in place, such as chamomile, dragon’s blood, incense, and plenty of egg; then mix in a dose of lead plaster, so that the wound cannot heal; and keep it long, and mix in some lint of flaxseed; then be cured of other cures until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when there comes swelling of cartilage, if you cover it as described above, this will prevent abscesses from forming.</start_of_turn>
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For the swelling of cartilage that is in the marrow, do not touch it with fire.</start_of_turn
des emorroides	From boils.
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Emorroydes are openings of veins which without support customarily, and when the hemorrhoids are old they become thick; and as we have said in the preceding parts, their signs and symptoms I will say here those which resolve the cure.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and the thick ones, when they are pressed down into the marrow, and are not felt, if not by the iron cure
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those which are at the mouth of the marrow, we can feel, are those which we can cure.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	It is therefore necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then hold the armpit steady, grasp it by the root, then sprinkle some restraining medicines around it, such as chamomile and dragons blood and incense, and similar things; then bind its parts for an hour, then put it in cold water; and when it softens, remove the dressing. If blood comes, let her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate peel and barley and similar things, and then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and mustard, and apply it to her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it sticks, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If not, make a ventouse on the back and apply butter; then take lint and moisten it in the juice of plantain or in the juice of elderberry with old wine, and apply it to the wound.</start_of_turn>
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the abscess has healed, if the wound has bled so much as to be healed; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and is similar to a black head, if you cover it so as I have said before; and then heal the wound when it is healed.</start_of_turn
des apostemes de la marris	Emoroids are openings of veins which without support are usually not cured; and when they are old they become thick; and we have already mentioned in the division the signs and symptoms, and I will say here those which bring about healing. I say that emorroids and thick blood, when they are mixed in the marrow and are not perceived, can only be cured by iron. Those which are at the mouth of the marrow can be perceived, and can be cured. It is therefore necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then strengthen the ankle and hold the shin bone in its roots, then sprinkle upon it medicinal astringents such as acacia and dragon’s blood and incense, and similar things; then close the wound an hour later, then bathe it in cold water; and if there is any remaining blood, if she sits in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate seeds and barley and similar things, and then drink barley flour, and mix it with honey and oatmeal, and make one application on her back. And if it stops bleeding, that is good. If not, if there is still bleeding, make her breathe with a cloth over her back and apply pressure; then take linen, and moisten it with the juice of plantain or the juice of elderberry with wine vinegar, and make her breathe. And when the wound has healed, if it is not completely cured, it will become white like a rough chief; if you cover it as I have said the thick blood. And then it will be cured when it is completely healed.
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	There are many kinds of abscesses that come in the belly, such as carbuncles and purulent abscesses and herpes and piles and tumors and fistula and hemorrhoids and chautier abscesses, and other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.</start_of_turn
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	It is commanded that when the cautery is applied to the boil which appears in the marrow, which is not a simple boil but which collects pus; if you know the work of iron, look whether the boil is already in the beginning of its coming, and full of heat and fever, and if it turns red when you see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Do not immediately pierce, but let me measure until the pain is calmed; then seat the patient on a chair and make two small stools or he will slump, and support him on his back and bring his limbs close to his body; let his thighs be spread wide, and place his knees against his groin, and bind them well with a linen bandage; then draw out the swelling towards the breastbone, and bring the instrument which we use to open the marrow, so that this is the shape; and know that when you bring this instrument, first feel the depth of the marrow, so that what enters through the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and does not damage the patient; and if the instrument is too large, cover the depth of the marrow with a drape, so that the instrument does not grieve; and command that he put on the horn of the instrument at the base, and that he hold the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when an abscess bursts, and we wash the hand with the palm facing inwards, if the thumb covers the chief, at the wrist; and when the wound is empty, if you put in the wound some soft materials in olive oil rose or dry green oil; put the dressing firmly over the wound and put over it a bandage of linen net soaked in vinegar or mallow, which must be cooked; then cure after two days of washing following this, until it is healed. And under no circumstances lift the dressing and the wound with a clamp of water and honey, and then water or licorice root and elderberry long must be cooked; then resume the washing.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	If the wound has healed in the wound cavity, if you must guard against burning, but cure it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	From infancy
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	The master first teaches that she who knows the figure of natural infancy shall recognize the signs when a woman presses down on the navel and desires to smell the navel-cord; then she must immediately deliver the child; for when the navel descends on the head, the second stage follows her, and the belly swells with her; and when these signs are seen, if she presses gently on her belly, the child will be delivered head first; for when he descends on the head, she follows him, and the mistress delivers the afterbirth by natural force.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it never happens by chance that the limbs or the head, or the hands, or any part descends; or that the belly swells or contracts, or that it hangs limp and is converted by accident from its collar, and by other harmful figures; if the mistress is skilled in the art, she will be wise and discreet in these matters, and will avoid error and deception, and I will show her all the figures which she must employ in order to aid her.</start_of_turn>
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	When the child comes out naturally from the head and the woman gives birth and the strength of the child is weak, if you make her sit on a stool, or the women hold her; and when she has relaxed with oil or rue or fennel, which is customary, then you should hold the child between your two arms and gently push the little heel that gives it its shape:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	And split the secondine, and bind its nail until the moisture which is in its core is consumed; and press the woman’s belly until the fetus descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to clench the woman with the muscle of fenugrec with oil of sisament; then make her take in and expel a concoction, and keep her mouth and nose closed for an hour: if it is now expelled.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if the two hands come out violently, then it is necessary that you hold them lightly back and forward; and if they do not enter, put the woman on a seat, and support her feet high up; then pull the seat away from the earth, and hold the woman, that she does not cough; and if the hands do not enter, and the fetus is dead, if you press the hands to the breastbone which is above mentioned, and pull out the fetus, and make it equal.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	From the issue of the child on his feet.
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes on his feet, if you can push upwards; then bend his leg forward and backward, until they are even; then grasp the toes and stretch them forward and backward.</start_of_turn>
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If he jumps up to his buttocks, if the master commands him to grasp, and makes him cough out of his chest; if he jumps too high, God help him.</start_of_turn
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it is not forced as we have said, if the joint hangs too low or too high, as long as it is according to the natural figure.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For in such a case it is easily displaced.</start_of_turn>
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if he does not jump up so eagerly as we have commanded, say that he should take muscle laxatives, oil of poppies, gum masticatory, and broth; and mix all in a mortar; and put over the woman's belly and drive away this vomiting, then make her sit in cold water until the ribs are numb; and when she is softened up from the cold, give her a collar of myrrh, and put on her clothes, and leave her for an hour; then make her sit on her seat, then make her vomit and strain her mouth and nose, and take hold of her belly gently, for the child now jumps.</start_of_turn
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	because of the child’s discharge from his genitals.
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this form, if he puts his hands on his shoulders and his head down; then either he is overcome with nausea on his collar, and hangs his head down; or he lets out a fart and looks away; he folds his hands on his chest and then grasps the hands on his belly, and pulls the cushions of his buttocks towards the navel, until it is visible in the mouth; and if the child does not jump, take his hands and move them forward, then move his hands up to his belly, and he will let out a fart; and he will be still and quiet; and command the woman to stay until the child is better.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	and the boy cries out loud; and instructs the woman to look after him until the boy is well.
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	I can teach you to restore the limb: if you are unable to restore it, if you make the woman rise up and call for help; if she is unable to call for help, if you make her lie down and put the legs forward; then bring in the muscle I mentioned before. And if she does not recover, if you make her sit on the chair, then study to restore the limb; and when the limb is restored, according to the natural shape, make her expectorate, and command her to stay until the child is better.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	From the issue of the child on his neck, and his hands spread out, and his face turned towards his mother's back.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	I command thee that thou graspest her hand firmly, then turn it back and forward, and move it lightly; and when it is even, apply the caustic substance of alum and oil, as we have said before; then command her to move it back and forth; and when thou hast done this, cause her to sit upon a chair and command her to lean forward; and she shall vomit.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	From this same manner at all the second time.
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When force comes in this manner throughout the second, if thou seest the second finger at thy nail, until the moisture is expelled; and if it hangs upon her face and neck, if thou seest the swelling burst, that it be not retained, and the child dies; then draw out the child as we have said, and command the woman not to move at all: thus it will be slight indeed
de l’issue des gemelz	Then if it is easily pulled out
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Then if it is easily pulled out, the nails which grow often do not grow at the same time; and this is not a strange thing, and often happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	It is an alien thing, and does not live alone, if its name be known; I know well, that it is multiplied, and is driven out by a substance which is linked to the body; and never escapes naturally as all the others, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	If it escapes roughly, if the treatment is as we have said, and if the thing be subtle, and makes pressure and light in what it does; make as much as it deserves for health.
de plusors enfans	Moreover.
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Never are they formed in the marrow one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, or more until fifteen; and they are all formed like children by the measure of their glorious age, and it is fitting that the chaste hand do all this, for by chance similar things happen; if you do as it is fitting
de l’enfant mort	Of dead children.
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you cure a woman of a dead child or an abortion, if she does not go into labor, and you are compelled by the work of your hands; if you are certain that the woman is of sound health and has no accident or fear of death; if you are certain that the woman is relaxed on her back, with her shoulders relaxed and her arms raised; and that the minister grasps her hand at the second joint, or binds her to the bed if she is not being treated for a descending fetus; then massage her mouth with olive oil mixed with alum and fenugreek seeds and linseed, then anoint her hands with these oils and these mashes; then put her legs in the pelvis lightly, and then give her the emetic that is suitable for this, and take care that the fetus does not reappear that it descends from her head; if you put the emetic in her eyes or nose or in her mouth or in the navel or near the beard or in the throat or at the breastbone or on the genitals, and the fetus descends onto her feet, she will grasp or scream and will have loose bowels; and you must keep the emetic in her hand that is on her right side, and put the elbow between the two of her left hand, and hold her firmly with both hands, and grasp the emetic in no place except those that we have mentioned, until it comes to the empty thing; and this is the form of the emetic:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then the pincer finds another bone, or the third hand is needed, if so be it that the extraction is even; and then extend it evenly by moving from side to side, for support, and keep the nails clasped for support, as is the custom.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if some remain, if one wets a part of them with oil, and press them into that part, and treat the other part; and if there is still some remaining, if put on that pincer or higher up again, and do so until it is all gone.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes in front of the other, and it cannot be returned by the stretching, then it is necessary to wrap around the cloth, so that it is whole; then bend in the groin or at the knee, and then it is necessary to do the same in the other hand, and hold the two feet together
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the head of the shoulder is large and swollen at the joint, or if there is a severe collection of blood there, if you can, place the spinous process between your thumbs and index fingers and press the blood outwards; or you can bind it to the instrument which is called the "almidach," which comes with the instruments or chapter which follows this one; and do the same with the limb itself, making it naturally swell outwards; and then force the bones apart, as tightly as you can, until the moisture which is either coming out or remaining comes out; and if it does not come out, cut through the muscle as much as you must; and if it is inflamed in the belly or along the ribs, if you can, let blood flow out as much as the moisture goes out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	if it is above its pieces, if the attraction is slight, and the receiving end of the tube is lighter.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	If it is swollen in the belly or arm, if you can, drain it with a drape wrapped around the hand; and press the belly or arm until the moisture that is coming out is gone; and if the other limb is stiff and the shoulder is dislocated, if you see the limb hang limp from the shoulder blade, treat it until the shoulder blade is brought back to its natural position; then apply an ointment or two, and force it outwards; and if the socket of the shoulder blade is narrowed by a tough scab that has come away, if you cannot pull it out, you must bring in moist and fatty things; and bring in thickeners, and soak in soft and moist water.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the fetus lies on its side, put it even, if necessary as we have said in the living child; and if it does not go, draw it out piecemeal, and leave nothing of the afterbirth.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, if necessary as we have said in the postpartum period, there may come from the belly matters that go into the urine; and if blood comes, put on a tight bandage, and bring other treatments.</start_of_turn>
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman who had a child in her womb that was dead, then consulted with another about it, and refuted death for the other.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, there came a swelling in the belly that opened, and caused great pain
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I went for help, and for a long time I thought, and could not stop the pain.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on a strong plaster, and out came a bone, and after a while another.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marvel at your mouth, for your belly has no bone.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I would like the wound, and in treating hands bone, as long as the woman is in better condition; and I saw the woman long tense her flesh, and it was because of that that I did this chapter, for when the master finds a strange thing, he must ask for help.</start_of_turn
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to reset the dislocation to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	And thus comes the form of the pressor, as we must do in the books; and two returns are made for two limbs.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	Whenever the head of the shoulder is more subtle or restricted, or if it is made of ebony or boxwood; and if the mouth is wide open and the jaw wide apart, and the length of the palm of the hand is long; and between these two limbs there are two joints of the same nature, which are closed in one and the other, half the length or more; and these two joints are supported in the mouth of the mare’s hoof to open when the two heads are turned.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, is made of ebony or boxwood, according to the resemblance of the teeth; and it has two joints of the same nature, as you see, each of a palm’s length, and two wide; and when you see the mare open her mouth with all her instruments, if you sit the woman down slightly, keep the toes and calves still, then join the two joints together in the mare’s mouth, and hold the chief of the instruments between her thighs; then grasp your hand with all the instruments, as you did the teeth evenly, according to the quantity you see open the mare’s mouth, until the limb makes what it wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These instruments are all very strong, and their resemblance is multiplied; and when you behold them appear, the work hastens and the houses are higher in quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not despair of the instrument when you do not see it, because its need is not excused
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the second toe is retained at birth, if you command the patient to retain its nail, and then make her cough out the condition, and hold her hands to the mouth and nose; and if she spits through that, well done.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If that does not happen, if I take a pot and make a perforation or incision, and put herbs inside that can open the mouth of the patient, like chamomile, rue, anise, camomile, cassia and centaury; all of these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked or boiled in water over a fire; then put a sponge or perforation in the pot, and the other hand in the patient's mouth, and hold it until vapor comes out of the patient; then make the patient cough, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second joint is affected with the illness.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	If it remains after this treatment and there is no more pain, as I command, let her rinse her left hand in oil of sesam or in alum, and then put it back in its place, and wish for the second one; and when she has found it, grasp it and stretch it out to the side and to the right, so that the marrow does not splinter; but let her move it slightly to the left and to the right, and then treat her. If it comes and disappears.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	If the marrow is bruised, as we have said, for the cure of bruising, and fumigation of herbs; and if it is not from all that we have said, do not give her anything for the treatment; but it is necessary that what is at the marrow's mouth be bound to the woman's hip, and then wash with oil of tetrafarmaçon; if she will drink and rest, it will come out of its own accord; but nevertheless, if when she has drunk it, if there comes a bad smell from the stomach and the head, and vomiting, let her know of the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	If it be necessary, then fumigations which are useful for these: none of the ancients have proved the efficacy of fumigation with rue and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument which allows us to fumigate the woman at the retention of urine and the secondine if it is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it is seen like a dog, and put on the head of the sufferer in the nature, and the arms large over the fire; and either the fumigations over the charcoal, and the smoke as long as it is consumed, and begin again.
de percier lou fondement	To pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born who do not have a perfect foundation, for it is often stamped out by a subtle spasm: if you therefore wish to dance that you prick that spasm at its root, and do not prick at any acute sprain, and keep the wound closed that it does not touch; then put on moist linen soaked in wine and oil, and cure the wound until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	If you doubt that it will stay in place, if you put in or pull out a sliver of lead, and you leave it hanging there, and remain still as long as the boy sees it lying there in bed.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	Never again comes this stamp of suspicion of wound or abscess; if you cover that suspicion: if it is cured, as we have said of the sliver of lead.</start_of_turn>
de la fistule dou fondement	of fistula from its foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come from the foundation are nodulations, and those that come from below the foundation are more serious, or in the space of two parts, if there is one fistula or more; and when the nodulation is old, if it is renewed, and is accompanied by moisture or white spots or bumps, these fistulas are never cured; and they are known by the fact that there is stool or vomiting or diarrhea when the patient defecates, or by chance when one leaps.</start_of_turn
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	If there are fistulas that reach the bladder, and halfway up the thigh; and reach as far as the hip joint, and even to the bone.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus one knows of the fistula persisting at the base, and not leaving: and it is only that you bite your thumb index or base, and insert a fine needle of spider or iron into the fistula when there is no torsion.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if there is torsion, if you insert a slight attempt of a sponge or horsehair, as long as you feel the attempt or the hair at your thumb; and if you do not feel it, and there is no risk of bleeding, vomiting, or discomfort, as we have said: such as that which does not pierce me; if you hurry to cure.</start_of_turn>
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	When the fistula persists up to the bladder or the urinary tract, if in a leap the urine escapes and cannot be stopped by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is pierced up to the hip joint, if there is a vein attempt up to the root; if there is no torsion and the invention of pain there, if it is that it is already bowed down, and there is no medicine or support by oil; and in these persistent fistulas there is no cure except toil, and the worthlessness of silly people who get in the way.</start_of_turn>
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In that one which is neither new nor old, hope of health lies by fire, as I have seen; and that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and that you support the legs until above his knees, and that you incline his knees towards his belly; then attempt to draw out the splinter or plunge if there is discomfort, until you have extracted it or the attempt comes.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels pain at the root, if you must bite down your thumb, if he then feels that the attempt has been perceived; or if the thumb or the index finger is broken, then extract the splinter which is present; if not, it will not be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	One can easily heal all sorts of things, but this is not so; and what helps in this is to burn the cautery cautiously according to the size of the fistula, as it is said; and pour toutes les autres choses, keep the wound covered with a dressing until the root is gone; and do this twice or thrice, until you are certain that these worms which are like the bristles of an oyster must be burned; and then cauterize the wound with smooth tentes and sew.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is truly healthy, it is well.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If he is truly healthy, it is well; for if he attempts between, and does not pierce to the root which is or should be the foundation, and between your thumb and the attempt a thick covering of hair or chaff, and you see the fistula at that which the covering departs from; if the head of the fistula is grasped from the commencement of the fistula, and is held fast before the attempt, and is cauterized afterwards, until it comes to the head of the attempt; and the attempt will be delivered, and cherished. Then praise those hairs that seem like a bundle of hair, and do not leave anything remaining.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	If he does not go away of his own accord, and stands between you and the work, let the fire cautery or the medical potion suffice.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For the fire cautery brings together two bones: namely, the burning of these hairs that are around it, and the coagulation of blood and the drying of moisture; then the cure of wounds that are moist and soft in bran or chaff, until the liquid blood flows; and isse force the hairs to burn in the flow; then cure the wound of the wounds that are surrounded by soft hair, and the dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, if it is healed and does not come back.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	When the fistula comes up to the root of the bone, and is loosened from the flesh, if the bone or root is grasped or grasped at the root, ask for that.</start_of_turn>
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If thou feel the urging, and between the second and the fourth rib, or the spleen or the liver, or if it be near to pierce, if there be no other remedy but flight and hope, by the administering of one of the three methods: either thou cauterize as we have said, or thou bind it until it is whole, or if thou wilt thou may take it with force and cure as first; and do not go too deep, that thou cover only that which holds the foundation, and let the discharge go in the natural order; then cure as we have said; by chance if it be well, or thou draw out that covering and the mud then when it is bound from the foundation, or by force or by other pointed instrument; then bind up that which is in the wound, as thou wilt; and study to restore the wound, and to stop the fistula in the lower part of the foundation: if it be a less arduous thing for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And never are fistulas like this: when you bite the attempt in the fistula, and it is either costs or is deeply rooted under the skin, if you take a bite pierced at the head like this.
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And thus .i. feel the thread twisted in two, and hold the attempt at all the thread in the fistula until it is at the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	And if it persists at the root of the foundation, then draw out the thread of that which is pierced, so that you bite your root or foundation; and draw out the head of the thread, and bring together the two ends, and strain one against the other, and leave it hanging there for one or two; and do not restrain it ever, until the thread overcomes these burdens that are between two bones, and yields. Then cure the wound until it is closed and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not break through, if you force it to break in every way you can, it will not be too deeply seated.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not right to force it from the surrounding tissue if it is deeply seated, and then it will cure, as we have said, when it is sound.</start_of_turn>
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The form of the spiny burdock from which we make the fistula is thick and hard at one end and soft and slippery at the other; and because of this we must not grasp this with our hands, as we see here:
des emorroydes	Des emorroydes.
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Emorries are of two kinds: when they are deep in the foundation, like a grain of resin, and there are a few or many of them, and they are firm in blood; or when there is one or more of them, and they are soft or pale yellow or bloodstained, and have the color of wax. As for those which are deep in the foundation, if you command the patient to stretch and rise from bed, as long as the foundation is forced out, the thread will appear. If you are hasty and grasp his finger or nail, then grasp them at their roots; if they cannot be held by their moisture, then take hold of them with a bandage or lint or a piece of chammel, and pull them out, then grasp them, and powder over them hot powders which are in lieu of cautery; or cauterize them as it is said in the treatise of cautery, for other cures are as effective when they are healthy. If the foundation cannot be forced out, if you bite the patient with a biting and abrasive clistere, it will force out what is in or under the foundation, so that it can be forced out openly. When the patient does not feel it and the thread is forced out of the foundation, if the cure is legitimate, grasp his finger or nail and grasp them, then cure them as we have said, until they are healthy, and that they fear the incision with the knife.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is certain that you have restored the shoulder according to this method: take one thread and pierce it through a needle, then pass the thread through under and out, and twist two threads of the thread together, and if it is thick; strain the thread together, then knot the thread and remove the needle, and do the same with all the others, and leave one to hold the surplus of blood; then put on the foundation a bandage soaked in rose oil or cerate, and put on the foundation, and command the patient to rest; and then leave it until it heals, and when it is healed, if the wound has healed and other treatments, until it is whole.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	When the wound is dry or healed at its base.</start_of_turn>
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	There is often a dry discharge of blood in the intestine, and by constriction of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine is of no avail.</start_of_turn>
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is certain that you have reduced a sprain or a dislocation of the nail at the base of the nail, which does not allow it to dry; then treat it until it is healed if it is possible; and if it cannot be healed, if you must renew the scraping more strongly than before, until the wound bursts, and is scraped away; then treat it until it is healed.
dou fremit	because he is groaning.
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Formice is a small appearance that grows before the body, and goes out like a mouse; and never does it leave the true without bruising, and one feels it as if dead from fear, and comes throughout the body, and more so than in other parts.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the cure for this is to take a needle of goose feather or a strong needle of bull, and put that needle on the wound, until the circle turns purple around the wound; then pull the hand away from the needle as much as you can until you reach the wound, and pull it out, and scrape the wound from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	If you see that it is done with a wasp or iron according to this form, and that the edges are blunt and the underside is rough:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	If you see that it is done with a wasp or iron according to this form, and that the edges are blunt and the underside is rough, do not be afraid, for it is necessary to hold tightly and press firmly. If you see that the fire is applied, if it is before or alongside the cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of this form.
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Never is copper or silver cautery made, or of wasp or molten iron; and never are these small and great instruments made as they are brought.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those who are feeble and painful in their upbringing and in their treatment are petty.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of a small and great blister is thus when it is surrounded by a wide area, or when the belly is bound in this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And if there is swelling or the belly is bound, if you see, and the shoulder is dislocated either forward or backward; and there are two punctures on one rib and one on the other; or if the belly or abdomen holds the medicines in a bladder of best or parchment, or if it is pierced throughout around the wounds, and there is one space between each puncture, then put in this puncture one strong thread of silk or cotton twisted like an X or around like a nail; and assemble the belly as though it were a hoop. And when the medicine is inside, if there is an instrument before a strong thread, then clip; and this is the shape of a circle.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the medicine neither be too hot nor too cold; rub the head of the blister with oil or the yolk of an egg, or something similar; then bind it loosely; then grasp the minister with both hands together, until it is quite swollen; then draw out the blister, and leave the patient’s legs exposed, and if the medicine wishes, if he can bear it; and if he sleeps all night, that is more helpful.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cauterize it in a state of sickness of swelling of the belly, and the physician hasten to leave, if it starts again as long as it is sane.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if there is bruising or swelling at the root or the base of the blister, if the blister is as subtle as for one child; that is the form of a subtle blister that is stretched over the skin:
des plaies	And thus it is with the form of a subtle blister on the skin that the leather is strained: from wounds.
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already said in the preceding section the treatment of wounds; or rather the treatment of hands and medicine, as it is completed.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are various according to the way they are made, and according to the place or the wound is made, and of what material it is made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things that cause wounds are biting of stone, and the size of spear and nail, or lance or fist or sickle, or similar things; or that are done according to the customs of the country, as for example a wound that bites on the neck, or on the head, or the elbow, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members; and I will tell you the cure for a superficial wound, and I will begin with simple wounds of the head, for the memory will come to mind in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes or a fracture occurs, and the bone is not broken, if you take care that it is not from a stone wound or similar things, and the skin is thoroughly torn and the wound is large, you doubt the cause of the wound: if you do so immediately without delay, the head of the fracture will be better even if blood comes from the wound; or let the blood flow in the opposite direction of the wound; and listen to the patient’s complaint of a full stomach and meat.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not heal, if either vomiting blood or eating does not cease, do not eat meat or drink wine; and remove the wound, if there is suspicion of an abscess; smear clotted ointment in oil rose only, or in astringent wine; and if there is no suspicion of an abscess, put a cover on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moved by air, dust, or anything else, I will tell you later; and if it has been moved, put on some dressings, until it is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is great as if made by a sword and similar things, and the edges do not come together by tension, if you join them with sutures, as I will say, for wounds of the belly, with sutures.</start_of_turn>
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed by the bone, and is raw, and can only be held together by a staple, then cure the wound with medicine, and restore flesh in place of skin, and command the patient to eat coarse food, such as meat and bread, as well as poultry, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find or leather putrefying, and it does not touch the bone, if you staple it all, and pour in urine, then cure it; and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped by medicines, if you can, and if you find it dislocated, if you bind it with a thread; and if this does not help, if you cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	If these wounds are small and simple, if it is a mild cure: and if you put on this powder that adheres as soon as it moves.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the method of the powder is: take incense one part; dragon’s blood two parts; live chalk three parts, and grind them finely, and apply to the wound, and bind firmly, until it is well healed and reunited with all its blood; and then bind it well and leave it to drain, if it does not swell; for we do not put medicine on a wound until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	Never do we make this burn only, when we do not have incense or dragon’s blood, but that the wound has not moved.</start_of_turn>
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the wound has moved from its original position, even while at rest, do not apply any ointment; but put upon some absorbent materials, or poultices of ground barley made with water and honey, until it has dried; then treat with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	If a fracture occurs with the wound, and it is small, if you grasp the wound with fine tweezers; and I will tell you about fractures later.</start_of_turn>
de la plaie dou col	of the neck wound.
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	Wound comes from the collar and it is simple, if there is no difference between the neck and the chest, but if the neck or the artery is severed.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If the nerve is affected, if there is no other remedy than leaving the wound open, and do not put any restrictive dressing, because it hinders the nerve and makes it shrink; do not put anything rough on the wound, for the substance of the nerve is cold, and the continuation of the disease is with the brain, which is the most sensitive limb; but if the disease is severe, like a boiled egg in sweet water, and mixed with rose oil, and chamomile boiled in sweet water, and other stones of the earth according to this method, and moist dressings.</start_of_turn>
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is great, if the pain and swelling persist, then the treatment must be continued until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	If the wounds are deep and the flesh is swollen and full of blood, if the artery is severed, or there is discharge of blood from the wound, or the caulking or cauterizing has not been done correctly; if the thorn of the throat is severed, or the cord is cut, and the tongue is held back by force, because the meat hangs down on the cord of the throat; then the head should be strained immediately, and left in that position for some days; then the wound should be treated with ointment until it is healed; if the wound has caused an indentation in the bone, if there are pieces of bone, if the fragments must be pulled out, these must be left out as long as the wound persists; and if the wound is fresh, if powder is applied as I have said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and there is fistula, do as I have said in this chapter.</start_of_turn
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	Of wound from spear or knife.
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it be a wound from a lance or a knife, and the wound is deep, if thou seest that the wound is of such force that the patient cannot support himself; then shalt thou take out the arrow immediately; for if it be not deep, and it be fresh throughout its extent, if thou dost not put in at the first hour the powder, thou shalt not bind it up with the dressing only when it is sore and deep; but thou shalt remove it from the wound and comfort the patient; but thou shalt put in a effectual astringent, and bind it twice round; and if thou dost not have an astringent, thou shalt put into the wound fine cotton to absorb the moisture, and shalt make the patient lie upon the wound for three days, or four, or more; for if it does not yield to this, do not move or strain the limb, nor give him any nourishment. When thou seest the bones displaced, know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Cure the tension of the tendons and other cures, as long as he is sane; and if it cannot heal, and if there is pus, drain the abscess that has formed; if the cure is like this.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from a cut or a knife, and it is simple or deep, front or back, if the treatment for what is before; if it is large, suture; if it is small, powder; and if it is stuck in the bone, and pieces have broken off, if you wish for the wound, and the surrounding tissue has been damaged; and if it has not been damaged, if you leave it alone, if it aligns with the extractions; and for other wounds, as for other members, the judge will decide as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	The belly has been dislocated.
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The swelling of the belly is great and medium and small; from a great wound no time the intestines do not go out, or do not touch the intestines, because of the introduction of pus; and the suture is more painful, and no time is better than the little wound than the great, because for this we can put the intestines back one by one; for as the intestines expand so that they feel the fruit, if they go back in one by one, and for this reason is better the lesser wound, because we can keep the intestines in their place like others. And abscesses that rupture from the belly are in three ways: the two common costures come in the costure of the belly, and the costure of the other wounds of bone and two other costures are common to other wounds; and all of them are more proper with the costure of the belly, and I will say one and declare.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small and nothing of the intestines is pressing, and only a little thing is pressing, this can be remedied in two ways: either by the small size of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are distended by the fruit.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, bathe it in part with oil: moisten a sponge or I will drape it in warm water only, or you will burn in warm vinegar and resin and prick, and rise the intestine as long as it is swollen; and do not do this movement too tightly, and be quiet that we may avoid bursting
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling depart, if moisten the intestine with water or if cooked meat and blood are cooked, for by this is the opening of the entrance to many things; and if it cannot enter, if make a hole in the wound at the instrument to grasp the blood clots; and the first treatment is quiet that the size is not made greater than necessary, and it is the instrument for cutting: if it is cut inwards in the curve and does not slip out, and once this is done, cut in this fashion:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is swollen, and the intestines protrude forward, if you stop bleeding according to the natural shape in its own place, you will have done well, for this is useful.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	And when the wound is large, and it is in the lower part of the belly, if you must manage the patient on his back, and raise his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the lower part of the belly, put his head and arm higher than the lower parts, and in the same way if the swelling is in the upper part of the belly, put the lower part and the hand higher than the upper part; and thus you must bring to an end what I have said concerning great and small wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	When the wound is small, put what has appeared between your hands, and put a bandage that embraces all the swelling; and this is the common way of stitching, and take a needle or several, according to the quantity of the wound, then leave some space at the head of the wound, and pierce the two holes in the skin with the two holes of the needle, which is through the skin inwards, until you have pierced through that part, and assemble the two heads of the needle together; then strain a double thread around the needle at two parts, and assemble the two edges of the wound together, and then leave some space, and pierce another needle; then tie the thread as you did for the first needle, and do not cease doing this until the whole wound is restrained; and let the needles be neither too fine nor too thick, for the fine needles catch all the flesh, and the thick ones do not penetrate well: for this reason they should be neither too fine nor too thick; and do not push the needles too far from the flesh and the skin, for they catch and open the wound before the suture; and then trim the ends of the needles, that they do not irritate the patient at sleep, and put patches or dressings over the holes of the needles in order to hold them in place, and leave them until the wound is healed; and this method of stitching with needles is more convenient in small wounds, for there is only need for one or two needles for the second stitching, and that you assemble the two holes in the skin and the two holes in the needle together with one needle or with a strong thread in the middle; and when you have pierced these holes all together, remember the needle at the part where you began, in the manner in which you cut the threads; and leave some space between each stitch the thickness of a small fist; this stitch is suitable for a home, and I stitched a wound once on a hip or belly, which was caused by a knife, and the wound was more than half an inch wide, and there were intestines well two palms wide, and the wound was in the middle of the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I shall return the intestine when it has been out for twenty-four hours, and the wound has been closed for fifteen days; the cure was applied, and it has healed.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And he saw that it was dead, and this was a miracle; and I did not cure him with any medicine, for I was in Italy where there was no medicine, no remedies; and I did nothing more on the wound than twice daily dressing it with wool, and applying honey until it healed.</start_of_turn>
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Or you will tell me two proper ways of stitching: take the needle and pass it through from the underside until it reaches the midpoint; when it has grasped the right corner to the right, if the skin slips or tears or if you have passed the needle, and you make it pierce from the other side of the underside until it reaches the edge; and you understand this stitching if you sew like a leatherworker and leave once the slip of one side, and take it back from the other, until the stitching is complete.</start_of_turn
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second method of stitching, which Galiens describes as proper, is as follows: if two parts are naturally joined together, and one of the ends is applied to the other at the midpoint: pierce a needle or the nearby end, and pierce only the lower part, leaving the two ends of the former intact; then withdraw the needle, and pierce from the lower part until it reaches the middle, leaving two ends; then pierce the one and the other from the lower part until they reach the middle, in two other holes made on the opposite side; and this is the most perfect and common method.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galiens says concerning this passage, and no one contradicts him, that the belly must be sewn with two needles, or there must be yarn in the bobbin; and one needle must be fastened at one end and the other at the other, in the manner of those who sew coarse cloth. And so it is that when the wound has receded somewhat from the belly, if the stitching is finer than usual, it will be better
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judge of the wound is like the judge of other wounds: when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, even if it has moved, if you stop the intestines and the cost, then put on the healing powder; if it has moved, do not put on any dressing except for what is present, until the wound has healed; and close the wound, and join the edges, and the edges of the wound; then cure the wound like the others, until it is healed. If you have no medicines, if put on, as soon as it begins to ooze blood, wool felt, and move it twice the time until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	You need no other medicine for most wounds except in principal limbs; and if you doubt that the wound does not make common cause with the principal parts, you must cover it with coarse linen soaked in warm olive oil or rose oil, and put it on the wound, and drain the abscesses; and if it feels pain or putrefaction in the bowels, and this often happens, if you give it clusters of black wine, and even if the putrefaction comes up to the intestines; and pierce through, and drain what is inside, as when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small intestine.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestines which are called 'jeuns' cannot heal when they are swollen, for it is by the swelling of the veins that they are, and by the subtlety of the whole body, and by the proximity of their nature to nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the wound spurts blood, if you put it back as before when the intestine is fresh; and if it is old and becomes black or dark, if you tie the black part, do not fear that blood will come, for there are veins and arteries there; then close what is between the bone, and hang the two thumbs down from the part below the wound until the blood has clotted, to align the extraction when the blood spurts out, and the wound will heal.
de la routure dou boueil	De la routure dou boueil.
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is round and the wound is small, if you can restore it in the abdomen, because I have seen that one bone was swollen or wounded by a spear; and the wound was at the stomach's side, and it became filled and turned into a fistula, and in that there was egestion and vomiting; I cured it according to that which I could, and I did not cease to subtilize until it was healed, and the wound closed
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	When I see it soldered, I doubt that the patient has anything wrong in his belly; but there is no point of harm, but a great many favorable dispositions, and food and drink; and they say that whenever there is a small wound in the intestines, it must be closed in parts. Take tweezers and grasp the edges of the wound, and when the tweezers have grasped the opening, if you place two fingers above the opening, so that it is strained, and then close the wound, and this is kept until it cannot be undone; then put in another tweezers like before, until the wound is entirely closed.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	If the chief [of the intestines] tears in the intestines, and there is no other nuisance to the patient, and it can be closed with a fine thread that is cut from the intestines of a beast, in parts. Take the head of this thread of intestine that is already detached, and then join to the head of this thread one thread of fine linen twisted, and pass the thread through the needle, and close the intestine, and keep it in its place; and this manner of stitching with tweezers is not fierce except according to the way of fashion and hope; and if the wound is large and wide, even if it is in one of the great intestines, if there is no other ailment, except for subtility.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	From fistula or whatever it may be.
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Wounds and abscesses, when they burst, are universally called "fistules," and indeed when they are chewed and come to a boil.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	A fistula is indeed a nodulation that must be durable and white, for there is neither pain nor swelling; and it is as much chewed as the quill of a bird; sometimes it bursts clearly and sometimes thickly; sometimes not at all, and sometimes enough; and I have already spoken of this in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and there is no pus, is only fierce by one of the seven causes: that is to say, by the smallness of the blood or the bone; or by its malice; or because there is a hard pus inside, and on the face, that does not allow pus to grow; or there is too much swelling; or the blood vessels are hardened, and the matter is of poor quality; or the medicine is not good in the cure; or because corruption is excessive due to pestilence; or because the property of the region is tardy in digestion and in health, and flees by nature; or there is a vein or bone: and I have already mentioned all these causes and their signs and cures in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Or I must tell you the cure for fistula, which is made by an egg of the hand.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Wounds that arise in all limbs due to infection; for there are wounds which arise from great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or at the joint, or in the intestines, or in the bladder, or on some of the bones, or on the backbone, or on any joint of the hands or feet; and if a part comes to the property of the main limb, and the rest.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	All the fistulas of this kind are of grievous healing, and there is nothing but toil and ignorance; and if there is no fistula which does not reach the marrow except as I have said, and you have undertaken to cure it, and you see it approaching, if it is straight, if the marrow is soft; and if it is crooked, if you can plunge a needle so as to break the curvature, for the marrow is softened by the heat of the fistula; and if the fistula is wide open and you do not wish to seal it by stitches, if you can clench one of the edges by the other, for the moisture is short from one edge to the other, and the surrounding tissue is softened; then you must know if there is bone or nerve, and if there is swelling around the joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or in any other part which I have mentioned, if the swelling is as I have said, and the bone is fractured, and the char is corrupted which is within; and then the cure until it is healed, and if the fistula is deeply rooted on the right side, if you can clench it firmly, as much as you wish; then put poultices soft and moist in medicine, and keep them until the medicine has eaten away the superfluous matter which remains at the bottom; and then put on oily unguents to the wound, until it is healed; and if it is not healed by this, if you must cauterize as we have said, and if the bone is fractured by the fistula, if it is grasped.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If the vein or nerve is not swollen or the principal limbs are not affected, as we have said; and if the bone is discovered to be fractured, and there is corruption and blackness, if the marrow is whole as long as the corruption is bone-like, then cure the thing cautiously as long as it is sane; and if it is not sane, and rent bowe as before, extract the bone fragments until you reach the marrow; if you discover it and desire to do so as long as you are at the bottom, extract the whole corruption, then restore the limb; and if it is once again sane, that is well.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If that is not the case, extract the fragments of corruption that are too deep; do not attempt to do anything further; if there is nothing else to be done except to leave it to nature; and if there is only a small bone fractured, and you wish to treat it, do so cautiously with pliers; if the extraction is done with a suitable instrument and there is no other bone, do not leave even a fragment; and if moisture opposes you, and there is neither doubt nor fear, grasp and moisten and draw out the bone fragments.</start_of_turn>
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	If thou dost not wish to remove them at an hour, put upon the wound some substance that hinders corruption, and leave them until the wound is completely healed over the bones; then it will be easier to remove them. If it is a large bone, as a limb or thigh, reduce the corruption as much as possible until the bone is whole again, and then restore the wound. If there be much corruption and the bone comes out to the surface, cover it with silk and cover all until the corruption has ceased; then cure the wound until it is healed. I tell thee of a fistula that occurred in a man's leg, so that thou may take example and help in thy work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	There was a young man of about thirty years of age who had pain in his leg due to a cause that came from within the bone, so that the matter went up to the leg, and he bled from a large abscess, but there was no apparent cause for the abscess; but they put it down to madness and they opened it so much that they corrupted a great deal of matter, and there became a fistula, and there came out a lot of pus that flowed and moistened the bone; and they continued to treat him for two years, but there was no skill in their hands, as far as I know, until I left there, and I saw his leg and the medicines they gave him, and what cured him of the fistula, which was the great swelling of the bone; and the bone became red, and had a citrine color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I made an attempt in one of these holes, and then circled all the holes, and found that one followed the other from all parts of the limb.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I was hasty then, and I cut into one of the holes until I discovered a part of the bone, which I found corrupted and rotten, and it extended to the marrow; I cured the corruption that I saw of the rotten bone, and I thought that there was no other corruption, except for that which I saw; and I began to restore the wound with soothing medicines for a long time, but I could not fix it; and then I began again, and I discovered the bone just as before, and I found the corruption continuing in the bone, and I cured it, and then I left it, and I thought I had fixed the limb; but I could only do that as long as I held a palm of the bone, and the marrow was thrown out whole, and then I restored it with medicines; and it healed and was firm, and did not swell any more, except for the weakness of the patient, who could not endure it, and for the fear of death that I had to avoid for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For often is blood evacuated thus, but he remained whole; and from his bone there sprung a hard scale, and was in good condition and did not suffer any hindrance or discomfort at any time, neither in eating nor in walking.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in no place but at the bonehead, if you must bind it in this manner: take one thread and stretch it to the top of the bone that breaks, and command no one to pull it out; and put another thread of linen thicker than the first, and bind it on the scale that is above the bone, and stretch the top, so that you tear out the corrupt scale, and uncover the scale above the bone where you see it bound; and put on a bandage or a sponge soaked in vinegar over the bone to cover the corrupt scale; and bind as much as you can see and feel the corruption, and bind once more.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if the bone is corrupted, and does not open wide, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, if it discovers the marrow fully; then put in a sponge of sponges, and then sew from one part to the other the corruption, and be sure to sew for the length of the corruption as we have said; and if the corruption is in the joint, if you join the corrupted joint and sew the bone or that which contains from the other side; and if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, if there is no other vein but that which covers; and if the corruption is at the wrist or at the ankle, if it is strong in that thing, but whatever it is, it must be enquired about that corrosion, how it opened; and it must be made manifest in all the ways that you can, but that the vein or nerve does not make you do wrong; and that the incision and the sutures which cover these bones are many, according to the size of the bones and the appearance of spots, and their thickness and thinness, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness. And for this reason it must appear similar to the work of this instrument; and that the work will show you the instrument of which you have need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the methods of diseases; if you think that the instrument is that which is necessary according to this, that it must be so.
dou feu	fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The head of the shoulder may be dislocated by force of the hand, or by pressure of the teeth, or by the violence of an enemy. And when you have treated this corrosion with medicine, and it avails you nothing, if you cover that limb until the corrosion is gone, that the patient may escape from this death, or from the malice which is greater, the defect of the limb; and the sign of that is that the limb becomes black, as though it were burnt by fire, and afterward there follows the blackness, because that corruption of the limb spreads through the limb and takes hold of the whole body; if you are slow to cover it, and if it is by the percussion of some venomous creatures, as the scorpion of the sea and the viper and others, if the corruption is at the head of the bone, if you do not give it space to come out until the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	If it comes up to the hand, if the hook is at the joint, so that the callous does not reach the arm; and if it comes to the arm, if the hook is at the shoulder; and if it passes the shoulder, it is death, and nothing but the quantity of its force is of use; and do all this while the callous comes or goes: if it comes at the first joint, the hook follows the other joint; and if it comes or goes, the hook takes hold of all of it; and if it comes up to the leg, if the hook is at the knee; and if it comes from below the knee, there is nothing else that can save the patient but to leave the limb exposed until death; and the mark of the hook or the thread that was left there, and extend one minister from the lower ligament and one from the upper ligament, and you remove the flesh that is between the two ligaments at one spatulate wide, until the bone is exposed; then take out the hook or thread, and put in place a bandage of lint, so that the thread does not touch the sound limb, and cause the patient further damage and incision.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	If blood flows from a wound while working, if you cauterize the flesh too hastily, or put on restraining powders; then return to your medicine until it is complete, and then bind the limb securely with a strong ligature; and I will tell you of a case in which a black spot appeared which seemed to burn like fire, and that corrosion began in the bone of the forearm, so that it consumed the whole limb; and when we saw the corrosion, if we did not cover the limb, it became healed; and long after the corrosion had vanished, it returned again, and we had to amputate the limb.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	Never does the postemer come loose in the marrow, and remains so long that it forms a great gathering of bones; then it breaks and tears, and in the leap of the bones, and breaks the marrow, just like vessels; and the skin which is under is just as thin as a tapestry of thread, and does not reach the bone, nor the nerve, like such diseases are called "sain," and not "fistula"; but if it is so elongated that it comes down to the bone under the skin, it is called "fistula"; and the skin which is over it, if you press it, is just like a tapestry.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	Never does the postemer come loose in the marrow, and remains so long that it forms a great gathering of bones; then it breaks and tears, and in the leap of the bones, and breaks the marrow, just like vessels; and the skin which is under is just as thin as a tapestry of thread, and does not reach the bone, nor the nerve, like such diseases are called "sain," and not "fistula"; but if it is so elongated that it comes down to the bone under the skin, it is called "fistula"; and the skin which is over it, if you press it, is just like a tapestry.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	When the arm is fractured, if you do not leave the limb to swell, and if you do not cover the wound as you see, it appears in such a way that the arm is set lower than it should be; for when the arm is fractured, if you do not leave the limb to swell and if you do not cover the wound as you see, it appears in this way: that the arm is set loosely forward, and leave nothing of the limb; and take consolidating medicines to bring out the bone, and stretch over a cloth that covers the whole limb; then bind up the force of the limb at the part where the break is most wide, because there is often swelling on the other covering according to the quantity of the break, and put the limb back on the bone to align the fracture, and do not leave the great covering until after once; and the one who comes out of the limb often causes the fracture to slip, and tears what is cracked from the fracture, whether it is poison or blood or enough, or digested or indigested; and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is swelling or not, and when your medicine has reached its full extent and you see the nature of the swelling on the limb, if the swelling has already subsided, and approach the health; and then take off the bandage in the morning, or the third day, and when you take off the bandage, if you see another bandage, renew the dressing.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	and if it persists swollen and painful after the third day, remove the dressing and observe the wound
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poison comes after a long tension, if you do not arouse with all your strength, because health is approaching.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	And if subtle poison comes after a long tension, if you do not arouse with all your strength, because health is approaching. For there are some who delay their wounds by eating charcuterie in their wounds, and those who do the opposite; and if the belly is too full of food after a long journey, its veins do not swell; and if the veins swell too late, they are drawn out, so that if there are moist and dry medicines in substance and in effect, as in diaphinit, because there is a great part of vitriol in it, this is the last medicine. Take diaphinit and make it with rose oil and the juice of a vine equal in substance; then confirm and use. And this itself makes honey swell up, when diaphinit is not present, or take mirre, aloes and incense, crush them and sprinkle them over honey when it is taken out of the fire; and then glue it on, and extend it out of the belly, and never administer an aristologist for a long time, or celestial roots, which is as much like flour sometimes and hundredweight; and use simple or compound: crush them, make powder of them, and sprinkle them over the honey that I have mentioned, and use it. And if the cure is prolonged, and is not cured by this cure, then its veins swell up, and the bones are fractured, or the limbs are deformed; if the cure of the fistula is as we have said above.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the incision of the abscess.</start_of_turn
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Panarice is an abscess that arises from the swelling of the pouch of the hand, or the armpit, or by chance arises in other two; and when it is neglected, if it comes to an abscess of the thumb, it contracts and swells so much that it reaches the root of the thumb, and by chance it contracts all the way; and there comes the erosion down to the bone, so that there is sharp pain, and the head of the thumb is large, and the colour is dark brown.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you have treated it as we have said in the previous chapter, and the cure does not help, if you must, cut away all the superfluous tissue that remains of the thumb, then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cautery is a great help when the bone is sound, and the thumb is healthy; but if the thumb presses on the marrow and begins to swell, and the black bile comes, if you must put off the root of the thumb that point the marrow, and bring the thumb up, and cut away this little marrow lightly and gently, and put on the remaining marrow medicines that are astringent and corrosive to burn away everything; then heal the wound until it is healed
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	If the bone is corroded and the swelling persists, for as much as the bone is corrupted, it cannot be healed; and if you see the thumb corrupted, if it swells up just as much as it has been said, then treat it until it is healed; and if it is inflamed, and swollen, and causes great pain, it is better to remove it first; then cut off the nail at the base of the thumb, and guard that the cut does not go deeper than the pulp of the nail, because the patient would feel too much pain; and if this happens, put something over it that will soothe.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain comes from the hand.
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The two thumbs that are born on the hands of some people by chance are all fleshy, and by chance there is part where there is bone, and never is there a nail, or anything that is born in the root of the joint, or the birth is on some of our thumbs from the nails.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	He who is born without a stain does not move; he who is born at the joint of the shoulder, by chance moves; the size of him who is fleshed is slight, in part as much: size like the root of a broad spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	He who is born at the root of the joint if he is grieved must cure: if you keep him covered.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In him who is born or must afterwards without stain, if you must, first grasp the rounded flesh around the bone until the bone is set, then grasp the bone to a convenient distance from this one, and then heal until it is sound
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The wounds that come as a result of these things come from birth, or from the swelling of a wound, or from the burn of fire, or from similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	If you must grasp that which is swollen, if it must be repaired in its natural form; then put between two bands or cloths soaked in rose oil, that it does not stick; or you put between two pieces of soft sponge, until it is healed, as it must be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	When a swelling comes to neither of its two ends with the palm of the hand, if you manage that dislocation as it seems necessary.
des vils	Des vils.
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	The veins are large blood vessels covered with dark, melancholic fat, which come in greater numbers in the limbs that move and work, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is proper therefore that you do not give him any purgatives of colocynth, and then the rest of the balsam.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The treatment with fire is in two ways: one is with the cautery, and it treats the black blood; the other method is that you ligate the vein, and you pull it out whole.</start_of_turn>
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The size is as follows: first, warm the affected limb until the fat is softened, without stripping it; then stretch the limb of the patient from under the hipbone to the knee; then cut the vein in one, or two, or three places, of a large size; then ligature and pull out the black blood from your hand, from the tip to the wrist, until as much as the patient can tolerate; and then ligate it, and command that he eat flesh that is fatty black; and repeat the evacuation and bleeding when the veins are full, and do not harm the patient.</start_of_turn
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The wounds of the patient are as follows: let him open the limb with the hand, if there is hair, then put or bathe it in hot water until it turns red, and swell the veins; and if you have no bath, if the patient is in fire, then make him lick the fire, and then hold his hand over the vein at its long end at the elbow, or in the lower part at the ankle; then draw the leather over the nail, and loosen the vein from the heel up to the ankle; when it appears as if a white thread; then release the nail, until it is freed from the leather, then tighten the nail slightly, and hold in another place for three twoths; then loosen the leather over the vein until it appears, then return to the original position as you did before; then make another burn, or several if necessary, and when it is finished, draw out the nail and hold it in the hand, until it is fully withdrawn; and keep it still, for if it moves, it will not be possible to draw or lift it, and will cause harm to the patient; and when it is fully treated, remove the scab from the wound with wine and rose oil.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the eye is contracted and tortuous and surrounded altogether, and it is not straight, as we have said, if you must open it, do so with force, but do not close it; and take it out as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	And if the eye is curved and tortious, and is not straight, as we have said, if you must open it, do so with force, but do not close it; and take it out as we have said before.
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein.
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is found in the limb, in hot parts or where there are no herbs or trees, and in the earth or where there is no moisture; and by chance it comes out elsewhere except in the limb, and this comes from the corruption that comes from the decaying leather, as when it comes from the serpent's body and towards, it is enclosed between the skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if there are signs of the beginning of this vein swelling, that is to say, if there comes into the limb a very great inflammation, then it contracts the blood, and the vein begins to swell, just as if it were the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	If the vein bursts open, if you believe that you can wrap around around a piece of sponge from one and a half fingers to two and a half, and the thumb, and leave the sponge in the limb, and every time that it is about to slip away, if you wrap around the sponge with the thumb, and the thumb itself; and if it is too long, if you cut off a part, and wrap around the remainder, and do not cover it in its root, until it is all gone; for if you cover it, if it returns to the flesh, it causes swelling and pus or death, and is a bad disease; therefore it is necessary that it be treated promptly and continuously until it is completely healed, and that nothing remains or remains stiff; and never is this vein well treated when it is treated with five palms of sponge, or ten, and one hundred has already come to me of this, from ten palms of length, and when you cover it, if there remains one hair or perforation, and pierce it through to the end, so that all is gone; and either evacuate the matter that is inside, and bring medicines to the limb without causing further pus, and then cure it like the apostemes.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And never in this vein have I seen hands remain, even when it bursts through the wrist joint or the wrist itself, and from there comes moisture of pus, and where it leaps rains; cure it as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	And never in this vein have I seen hands remain, even when it bursts through the wrist joint or the wrist itself, and from there comes moisture of pus, and where it leaps rains; cure it as we have said before.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called in our land "buffalo disease," because it often causes swelling of the calves, and is a small vein that arises between the skin and the flesh, and runs throughout the body, up and down, and is felt quite often from limb to limb, as long as it reaches the skin or moves, and leaps fiercely; and is accompanied by the discharge of various humors, such as bile, worms, blood, and carbuncles or tumors. And it is suspected to be malicious, for when it runs through the body and reaches the head, and comes out at the other end, it often returns and destroys the marrow.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see it cured and treated, if it will not yield until it goes away: if it is certain, then bind the limb above and below with a strong tie, then press upon it and pull out, and if it does not come out, if you burn it with fire above, until it dies; and the greater damage it makes, if it turns black, as we have said; and if you see it coming or near the black, strain out its hair, then press upon it, and pull out. And you must use the patient of ointment of corrosive medicines for the humors which are carried, and feed him nourishing food.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	When you see it cured and treated, if it will not yield until it goes away: if it is certain, then bind the limb above and below with a strong tie, then press upon it and pull out, and if it does not come out, if you burn it with fire above, until it dies; and the greater damage it makes, if it turns black, as we have said; and if you see it coming or near the black, strain out its hair, then press upon it, and pull out. And you must use the patient of ointment of corrosive medicines for the humors which are carried, and feed him nourishing food.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called in our land "vakirir," and is a pain that comes in the limbs following one another; and I have seen this happen.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to a sick woman, and found her arm swollen at the elbow; and I saw a small swelling in the armpit of the arm. I observed that it grew as quickly as a worm on the back, more quickly than anything else, like silver when it comes out of the furnace; the pain departed from that limb and settled in the armpit, and then spread throughout the whole limb, so that it reached the other arm; and she told me that it would recur whenever she moved the limb, as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I wondered what caused such a movement of the limb against the limb, for I had never seen such a disease in this way before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	However, I do not wish to say that the pain of one limb moving to another has ceased; but I do not wish to lie, as I saw in the woman; and I thought that this was because her bones were dry and her veins were exposed, and because of that appeared that constraint; and I do not see it for any other reason, for those who have moist bones and veins restored
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see the healing of this disease, and the patient feels the pain, if the lymph above and below is swollen, and then press above as long as this wind-gust is confined to the limb; and cauterize the limb. And if you do not see it in your eyes, if you cure this that discharges the wind-gust, as with foul pills and pills of serapin, and similar others.
des saiettes	And when you see the healing of this disease, and the patient feels the pain, if the lymph above and below is swollen, and then press above as long as this wind-gust is confined to the limb; and cauterize the limb. And if you do not see it in your eyes, if you cure this that discharges the wind-gust, as with foul pills and pills of serapin, and similar others.
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	If the antidote for those who suffer from wind-sickness, as with foul pills, and oily pills, and similar things.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The variety of their shapes is such that some have large points, small, hooked, and rounded; and some have two angles, and those that have tongues, and those that have pieces; and the one that bites in no limb bites in two ways: either in the principal limb that bites like the brain, the shoulder, the liver, the kidney, the spleen, the intestine, the bladder, and similar limbs.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When the head of the shoulder dislocates, do not delay in extracting the arrow, for death often follows in its wake; and when such a bad sign appears, do not hesitate, for the arrow is not easily withdrawn, and cure the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	When the arrow pierces the bone of the shoulder and the scapula above the brain, and there is scraping and swelling and redness of the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and confusion of the mind, vomiting of bile; and by chance there is no movement of the nose or ears; or by chance the speech and voice are lost; and there leaps out from the wound a white moist discharge resembling pus, and in the same way as brown blood; and if this sign appears, if you hesitate, withdraw the arrow for it is not in vain.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	When the tooth aches or bites, it is near the left breast and feels as though it is caught in something hard, without any void; and by chance the tooth moves like a poulp, black blood spurts out, and there is cold sweat and a cold shiver, and fainting: there is doubt that the patient will survive.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the seat that never lets go of its wound is that it leaps without prompting, the throat swells, the patient turns pale, and breathing is difficult.</start_of_turn
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the seat breaks in the armpit, if it is between the ribs; it causes great swelling and great pain and breathing; and all the limbs of the armpit move.</start_of_turn
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow or the stone comes out through the wound, by chance nothing of the indigestible meat is left.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow or the stone comes out through the wound, by chance nothing of the indigestible meat is left. If there is no hope of recovery, do not attempt to extract the arrow.</start_of_turn>
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow comes out into the bladder, and the urine comes out in spurts and comes out forcefully, and the patient feels great pain: the wound is mortal.</start_of_turn
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	As for the other limb, if it is made up of flesh and bone and the jaw and the shoulder and the elbow and the wrist and the hand, and the limb that is similar to these, they are all subject to many variations.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the splinter is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I have said before, for this reason you must do something else.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	In my house there was a tooth that was loose or inflamed at the root of the jaw: I grasped it, and it slipped from the other side of the ear, and was cured without any harm.</start_of_turn>
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And I treated a case where a tooth was loose in the oil of the ear, and it was pulled out leaving only the tip towards the face; the tooth was as large as a Turkish arch, and I did everything cautiously without causing any damage.</start_of_turn
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And take out an arrow from the throat of a peasant, and behold the Arab’s arrow ear: I plucked the bristles, and did so secretly as long as I could, and he was cured of the peasant.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And took out an arrow from the belly of a cripple, who thought he was dying; and after he had not moved for XXX days, if he did not recover his composure; I cut above the arrow, and put it in fettle, and took it out, without any mishap.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if I see a cripple with an arrow stuck or lying on the back, and had a deep wound above; and put the arrow back into its place, and did not restrain its natural inclinations, and found no discomfort in any of its natural works
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And I saw another man, who had an arrow in his face, and had a deep wound; and he suffered great pain; and many others died.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And take out an arrow from the king's arm, which was stuck in the flesh so that it was leaning to the right; and it had been there for three days. I went to cure her after that when it had been stuck for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	If I found the wound very sore.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I tried to treat it gently, and did not feel it; and there was no swelling or pain on the right ear
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was the tip of the arrow. I put on the plaster around the wound to digest the swelling, and the arrow came out by itself
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I kept it covered for a few days, and when I took the plaster away, the wound was healed, and the patient was able to move his limb without pain as long as the arrow was still inside his flesh; and he told me
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I put on the wound the corrosive medicine of vinegar by hand, while it was still overspread, and held it in place, and felt the head of the splinter that was coming out at the root; then I closed the wound with the said vinegar medicine, until the head of the splinter appeared visibly; and it went away completely in two and a half months, and then it became wider so that I could remove the sutures, and I held one part and the other, and was not able to do anything; so I continued to work subtly and cunningly in various ways, until I had made the sutures as well as they should be, according to what is said at the end of this chapter, as I did, and restored the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the doctors say that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored; I restored it nevertheless, and the wound was healed, and the patient was completely cured.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Or tell me of the quality of the extraction of certain arrows, so that you place your cure upon that which I do not speak, for the books do not teach me this; but you know masters better than anyone what is present and lacking, find nine works, and a new instrument, in descending order of the things that come to pass in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows do not exit from limbs or are ficxed by force, for there are two ways of handling them: either by force or by the wound; and that which leaps forth by force of the hand or enters, is an arrow that has penetrated flesh, and leaps forth never more.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it does not leap now, if you leave it as long as the flesh is borne round, and be joyful of the issue; and just as if it were pierced in bone, and it cannot issue, if you leave it in that way for some days, and it moves slightly; and then it leaps, and if it does not leap, if it has pierced deeply through everything, as long as the flesh is swollen, and then you pull it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	If the splinter is fixed in the bone of the head and goes up to one of the ventricles of the brain, and any of the accidents which I have mentioned appear to the patient: do not remove it immediately, but leave it as it is until it is even again after some days, for if the splinter comes up to the surface, that is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	If the splinter is fixed only in the bone alone, and does not come up to the surface, and remains in the patient for some days without any other mishap, if the pain is great, then it must be removed.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is firmly caught only in the flesh and does not reach the surface, if administered with poultices, as I have said; then cure the wound while it is still sound.</start_of_turn>
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	If the splinter is seen in the bone and we cannot see it, if it has all its might; if you see it, if you can remove it without any instrument; if you do not see it, because of the extent of the wound and the depth of the splinter, and there is neither bone nor nerve nor vein, if the pain is great; remove the splinter if you can. If there is an ear attached to the splinter that holds it, if the bone that is fixed by two parts of the muscle that you must remove, and then break or tear the ears of the splinter as much as you can, until you can remove it; and take care that you do not break the splinter, that you remove it more firmly.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	and if you do not do it once, if the limb remains stiff, then pull it out again, for extraction is better than suffering.</start_of_turn>
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	If blood flows out due to the wound, do not oppose it; if it is necessary, close the incision of the vein and the belly, and take care as you would to remove an arrow, or to break a bone; or, if you are in doubt, follow what the sign shows you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The arrow that comes from elsewhere, or if it finds no passage, or if the skin is swollen in that place if it is seen or felt: then leave it alone, as long as the teeth can hold it; and then extract it: if it breaks now.</start_of_turn>
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held to the bone, if you round your hand around it, until it enters the bone, and enlarge the bone, then withdraw it.</start_of_turn>
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot be extracted, if you leave it in, and then restart the extraction until it is extracted; and if there is much blood in the wound, if there is too much, if the wound is deep, and you see that it is necessary, if there is a tool with a hook, so that the tip of the arrow enters the hook of the instrument; and then pull out, and if the arrow is hooked, if the instrument has a pointed tip entering, to relieve the extraction.</start_of_turn>
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	If the bandage is surrounded, then it is necessary that you grasp all the fat around or the venom is, if you wish, then cure the wound as it should be.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If the bandage tears or breaks at the belly, the bladder, the ribs, or the chest, and it is close by, and you wish to cover it, if you grasp; and keep holding the abdomen and the nerves, and then extract it, and then suture the wound, if necessary; and cure as long as it is healthy.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the tweezers used to grasp the clots is like the beak of an osprey, and thus be the form:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	There are various sizes: large, medium, and small, according to the amount of the clot
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape at the end of the bone is like the wing of a bird, to press at the tip of the bandage, as it is like this:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the form of the clamp to ease and to hold if it is thus made:
des voinnes dou cors communes	the common veins bleed easily.
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	There are veins which one must know about in number XVI, that is to say: two veins which are behind the ears, which are called “herbech”; and two arteries which are in the two temples which appear; and two veins which are in the two corners of the two eyes, which are called “aspires”; and the vein which is under the brow; and the vein which is at the top of the nose; and two veins which are at the collar; and two veins which are under the armpits, which are called “augeherich”; and two veins which are under the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The common veins in both arms are five in number: one is the cephalic, which is on the left side of the chest; it is called the 'chief vein'. The second is called 'fast', and is composed of the cephalic and brachial veins; it is called the 'arm vein'. The third is either the right or left costal vein; it is called the 'belly vein' and lies above the rib cage. This is the one which is most frequently seen on the pouch.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	The ulnar vein is between the elbow and wrist; if there are two, there are also two in the leg and foot: one is below the bony prominence of the left costal arch, the second is the popliteal which is at the ankle of the right side; the third is called the 'radial', which is in the ankle of the left side. There are three veins in the other leg, below these.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The blood of veins that are behind the ears helps to expel old blood clots and foreign matter; and the quality of the blood, as I have said, is that you raise the head of the patient and wipe the blood or the veins are of a rough texture; then stretch the patient’s neck with a clamp, until two veins appear behind the ears in two loops depending on the head: if the patient has a dark spot there, then take the lancet and pierce the vein up to the bone, then hold the hand over the whole vein, and cut and the vein well two must go through, and make the blood spurt out until you see; then strain and bind, until it is healed; and I have already said the incision and the cautery or the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The blood of the two arteries which are in the two temples, if it is like an ancient pilgrimage, and soda, and obtalmia customarily used, and at the root of the tears there are pus; and the quality of the physician is such as I have said: and that the patient strains his neck, so that the two veins open widely; and he feels the pulse down to his thumb, and then he seizes the edge; then he lays his hand over the vein at the top of his thumb, and pulls out the lancet, and lays the vein at the top, and the skin, as he has done in two other veins, and makes the blood flow according to his necessity; then he frees the patient, and places his thumb on the vein for an hour, then puts on a bandage; and then the swelling forms, and he leaves it until it is healed; and we have spoken of this in the book concerning its treatment and extraction, or its beginning.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The blood of the vein in front is worth as much as that of the cephalic vein, for there are diseases of the face of ancient times, and migraine, and redness; and the quality is that the patient strains his neck twisting, as much as the vein bursts; then take the instrument which is called "burr," of which this is the form:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	The blood of the front vein is worth as much as that of the cephalic vein; for there are diseases of the face of ancient times, and migraine, and redness. The quality is that the patient strains his neck twisting, as much as the vein bursts. Then take the instrument which is called the "burr," and put its point on the vein, and hold it with your hand, or something else, and let blood flow as much as you see fit; then release the patient's neck and ligate the vein until it is whole and never more bleed with a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	However, it is not proper for me to tell you that the flames must be too great; and the same throughout, for the bone is close, and by chance breaks the flames when they are subtle.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The blood of the two veins that are two fingers wide is useful for the swelling, and the tension, and the redness, and the yellowing of the oil, and there are diseases of the face; and the quality of their blood is that the patient strains his neck twisting without any reason, as before; then do the same, and either let the blood clot, or leave it for a long time with a wide flame, for there is no char.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flame is fickle, by chance if it breaks; then make a drain of blood, as much as you are able, and then bind it up, and hold it firmly.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	When the blood of the vein does not flow as it should, and is clotted, and has diseases of the face, as with migraine and redness that comes in the face, and even when it is old; and when the quality of the blood is that the patient stretches his neck, then grasp his hand with your left hand, take the burning flame and hold it long in the space between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open very well indeed; do not push too much, but correct the blood as you need, and then leave it for the night, for it is much better restored; and this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	When the blood of the two veins helps to ease the swelling, and to begin the mixing of humours, and to remove diseases, and to stop itching, and to dissolve corrodens, and herpes, and worms; and the quality of the blood is that the patient stretches his neck both front and back, as we have said; then let the master sit above the patient's head, and the patient sit on one seat, then open the vein widely for a long time, and take out the blood gently, or as much as seems necessary; then do the same in the other vein, then close the vessel, and gently tighten the veins in the middle, so that the patient is not stifled; and leave it like that until morning, when the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	From the blood of the veins
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The blood of the veins of the upper limbs helps to clot in the mouth, and to corruption of gums, and splitting of the lips, and toothache and pain.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	From the blood of the veins, if you are to make the patient sit before you, and strain his neck as I have said; then open the vein, and behold two veins, one on the right side of the vein and the other on the left side, and know them by this that they are black, and that they have small black veins around them: consequently close one and the other, for if you do not know them and you are in doubt, if you close the greater part of the armpit, and the two veins that are below and above, this is a foolish method.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	From the blood below the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The blood of the veins below the tongue helps after the cephalic blood, and this is at the widening of the throat, and with eye diseases, and with mouth diseases; and the quality of the blood is that if the patient sits between your hands before the sun, and stretches out the tongue, and looks under each rib towards a black vein: close both of them, and do not poke too deep, for below are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	Veins that commonly bleed profusely are commonly healed in two ways: either by pinching with a great flame that is broad like a mirror, or by means of an olive oil so long as it runs in deep cuts, and this is called 'anesil'; and they are broad and subtle according to the size and distance of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the flame is often mentioned as a mirror, and is wide as you see it:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And there is a master who can open large veins filled with visible blood, which contain much blood and blood clots; and this is the form of the olive oil flame.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And it is more subtle to burn at the point, and it is for the health of the veins that are subtle, or there is subtle blood that has clotted.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The blood of the basilisk, which is one of these veins, helps to cure diseases such as sore throat, cough, pain in the chest, and pain in the belly; and it is useful for the well-being that it flows smoothly, and that it stops the artery that is below.</start_of_turn>
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if he grasps the toe, and blood flows, if the wound is closed as I have said; and let the flame not be lingering, but severed like an aspen.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the pulse does not clearly reappear, if you must extract it, and bind another; or you wish no further bleeding, or you prefer to leave the vein open instead of the arm: it will reappear clearly; and grasp the flame as an aspen, as we have said.</start_of_turn>
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you see the blood vessel burst, if you must now extract the arm, touch the vessel until you know the pulse; then sign the wound, and then bind the arm, and grasp the vein with the flame as an aspen; and beware not to cut the artery when you see the vessel swell, for that is the artery: stop it immediately.</start_of_turn
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you see blood spurt out like the urine of a child, and it is neither red nor frothy, suspect that it is without an artery: haste then, and put your thumb on its length, then bind your thumb if it does not bleed; many times it has happened to me. If the wound is bad, leave it alone and do not move the patient; be on guard and do not move until it is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if it is without stain, and thou feel pain, and the physician is not present, if the vein should burst, for the head of the shoulder retires itself; hold it still without stain.</start_of_turn
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	Take a bandage of physician’s rosin, and make a loop of it, and take hold of one end and bind it well up to the other; if it does not bleed, that is good; if not, if the physician has said, powders that stop bleeding; the bleeding will not be great in many positions by the small extent of the wound, and the position of the limb.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The blood of the vein is in the middle so that it treats the blood clot from the head downwards, and from the ribs outwards, because it is composed of the balsamic and cephalic humors, as we have said; and it is necessary for the patient to be aware of the nerve that is outwards, and if it is not too deep, and he finds the nerve, he swells it and the blood is either clotted, and by chance cannot be healed; and this nerve is often opened, and if it is not opened in some people because of its subtlety, it is necessary to take the blood from the instrument that numbs.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, if the wound is deep.</start_of_turn
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The blood of the cephalic vein is of great aid, that it pulls blood from the head downwards, and helps the eyes; and it is necessary to cauterize with the olive or myrtle flame, because this is the safest of all veins, because it has neither bone nor nerve nor artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	Whatever be the case, it is best to request the most gentle handling at the first time, and grieve nothing if it does not succeed; and by chance it may be successful in some cases where it did not succeed the first time, but grieve nothing.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of blood is as you think.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you must know about health is that blood should only be drawn for two reasons: to preserve health and to ward off future illnesses; and it should be drawn from one of the three veins that are either close to the surface or deep: namely, the cephalic, facial, or basilar; and it should be done immediately before prayer and fasting, and after meals when the signs of fullness appear; and it should be drawn at the beginning or after two or three hours.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	Blood drawn for diseases has no definite period, but whenever necessary for a pulse or nut, at all hours and in all conditions; and it is not permissible to draw blood from children until they are twelve years old, or from women for more than four months up until puberty
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	They should not remain alive who have passed .lx. years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	When anyone feels well, in whatever way, if he defends the intestines from a lesser fistula, if he has teeth clenched tightly, so that the veins do not draw out intestines with the superfluous humors that are nourished by these principal members; do not let him eat too much meat or drink, or vinegar; and if he vomits after eating, or has a swollen belly, and many pains, and sleeplessness, and loss of appetite, and vomiting, and a sore belly, and many women’s works, and trouble, and anxiety, and all the works of virtue, or by some weapon or poison; then secretly restore the humors, if they are not too great, by food, drink, and medicine, if you can; then enter or bathe, if nothing else hinders you, to secretly restore blood and keep it within the third part [of the body], as we have said; and keep him occupied with work, with drinking, and with luxury, and similar things; and keep him bound and joyous, and let the patient be higher than he was before, and wipe his hand twice or thrice, and then remove the ligature cautiously, for if it is too tight or loose, you will not be able to correct it without; then wipe the body with the hands, until the veins swell and are felt; then moisten the patient with a little oil, then put his hand of his left hand on that vein below the elbow, and keep it there until the vein returns to its normal state.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For some veins, when they are inflamed like strings, if they are filled with windiness, so that when one puts on the flame, it retreats from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus is this; and if it opens the vein, the wound is too wide, because of this one must advise the physician of these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	If he grasps the vein too tightly, if the wound is too wide, for this reason it is necessary that the attendants be informed of these matters. And if he grasps it too tightly for the first time, that is good; but if this does not suffice, he must begin again, slightly loosening the grasp or the patient will faint.</start_of_turn>
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	If the limb is swollen and the patient becomes restless, and he leaves one or two fingers open, and does not bind the arm: by chance there will be abscesses afterwards; do not enter or bathe, but restart the bleeding when it stops; and if it is a small wound, or if it lacks a visible cause and you doubt that there is as much blood as you see, if you have confidence in that wound itself with all the flame directly; and do the work skillfully, even if the limb is swollen; for this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the limb inflamed, if you do not immediately start to draw out the blood, put on a piece of lint soaked in oil, because it softens the flesh of the blood; and it makes the blood clot in this limb the oil that is on it. And give the oil-soaked lint in gulps so that you stop the flow of blood; and this itself brings about a tingling and swelling of the parts when it is put on the limb. If it is too subtle, it will escape when it is too large.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if there comes a large abscess which happens many times, even though it is not painful except at this time or the opening of the vein is small, if you are in a hurry, put on the limb a wet sponge and a little oil, and hold for an hour; and it is to be known that you must do this after the bloodletting of the vein, and if it remains in the limb after some days no blackening or greening shall occur if you do not make it so; and if you see it, do not put anything of aloes or myrrh mixed with mustard, honey, or the like.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often there is abscess and appearance to the blood of the basilisk: put your hand there, and if you find the limb soft under the compression of the hand, if that is the bad appearance.</start_of_turn
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Except that you do not put anything of what we have said, for by chance in court without an artery; but you must do indeed plaster dry to harden the limb, then treat it with another treatment, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each wound according to the quantity of its virtue and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if it is black, leave it be until it is red; and if you see it large, leave it until it is subtle; and if it is too thick, leave it cool down.</start_of_turn>
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is fitting for the one who is firm and strong, and who has the mastery of extraction of blood, to make the wound larger; and let the flames be large. And for the one who is weak, do the opposite, and keep it healthy often, and must keep it healthy by cutting across, not by pricking. This method of bleeding is safe from the damage of blood and nerves, and is worth more than bleeding for a long time without making it wider.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for the one who has a cold complexion, it is fitting to give soft bread soaked in the juice of green pomegranates; if he is exhausted, if he has lost blood three or four times. And if he is of cold complexion, let him mix in front of the bleeding soft bread soaked in mustard or in aromatic honey with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and a fragrant oil.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he has pricked himself with blood, after the evacuation of moisture, then it is certain that he will vomit bile, and a fragrant vapor, and use other things which we have said in the division or chapter of syncope, for the evacuation of the vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he sees it is going to vomit again, and is well another time, if it is caused by great bleeding, he must rest and lie still, as much as he can
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And who vomits after the first bleeding and has a strong pulse, if he rests for nine hours after the first bleeding or after the twelfth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And who is well otherwise, if he must be well in two days or three
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For there is blood in the body which is already swollen, and causes fever; if it is necessary to drain a great quantity, and expand the opening as much as it cries out; then that all the blood should be restored, and put your hand on the pulse when it is well, that the blood does not come again in place of the vomit, and this often happens; and it is not right that you should see it slip from the arm, and make the vomit blood for the second time, and the opening is closed, that you press firmly; if it is crooked, extend the arm fully, for that would be bad; but leave it as it is until it has vomited the second time; or you point at the tip of the flame, until the one which is frozen at the opening of the vein has vomited all the blood, and put some wool on it and press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein has escaped, if you leave it and do not restrain it, until the abscess is calmed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if necessary, it is good to drain blood a second time, if the same is in the same limb, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The blood in the arm is pale in comparison to the vein of the shoulder because it is composed of it.</start_of_turn>
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	If the patient’s hand is immersed in hot water until the pulse is red; then bind it moderately so that the wound opens well; then pass the needle through, neither too large nor too long; or make a large perforation and draw out the blood well close to the wrist joint; if this does not suffice, immerse the hand again in the hot water and leave the blood to clot in the wound until sufficient; and if this is the case, do not withdraw the hand from the hot water, for more blood will be shed in this way than in the case itself; and the blood of this vein is more valuable than all the veins, for there is neither artery nor nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The blood of the salivary vein of the right hand is worth for all the diseases of the liver; the method is: strain the hand and immerse it in hot water until the vein escapes if it is seen; and if the needle passes through, and if you press it in all, if it does not bleed; do not press too hard, for the nerves are already quite bare of flesh; then immerse the hand in the hot water once more, if it is not frozen in the wound, and do not attempt to extract it.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the wound as well as you can, if you put oil on the vein or abscess and keep it warm, and do for every wound.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The blood in the left hand is worth the disease of mice, and do the same as I have said before concerning the right side.</start_of_turn>
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The blood of the spleen is worth for all the diseases which are in the chest, such as diseases of the marrow, retention of flowers, diseases of the rains, and of the uterus and the ancient legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And its quality is such that when the patient has a hot fever, and sweats on the chest so that it becomes wet, and lies down at the joint of the bone; and the chest is at the ankle, and from there the bone goes out with rains; as much as a small or large rain, or at the ankle, that much is worth
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you wash the wound on the limb, if you take care of the nerves which are outside, and if you move the limb as if you were combing; and let the flame go out.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if it cannot be moved, if you reset the limb in the water, and let the vein drain well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the patient must be bled for the first time, if it starts again at the second time from under a little space, because the blood is salty; do not doubt, as we have said, and do the same with the spleen of the other side equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The limb of the sciatic vein is at the ankle of force, and its blood is worth the pain of the groin, when it is for blood that has clotted.</start_of_turn
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And if the patient enters or bathes in blood, it is strained from under the ankle twice by twisting, for otherwise it will not open the vein; and if it opens, let him do so in all the ways that you can, and through and through; and it is better that you cover it, for the wound is deep, and it is likely to close with hands alone.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	If you do not find that the blood has opened or drained out, and if there is little or no pain, and if there is swelling; do as much as you can to stop the bleeding, and then bind up the wound, and put on a bandage; it is now healed.</start_of_turn>
des sainies de ventouse	of bloodletting
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Ventouses are made of horn, or cobwebs, or glass; and are applied according to two methods: either by cutting and drawing out blood, or by cutting alone.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this bloodletting which is done by cutting has two methods: either it is done with great heat, or with cold; and bloodletting which is done by cutting and extracting blood is done in twelve pulses, of which one is at the top of the head; and the other is at the nape of the neck; and two on the two costal cartilages; and the sponge is placed under the chin; and two sponges under the scapulae; and a sponge on the buttocks; and two sponges under the arms; and two sponges under the legs; and two sponges under the ankles; and bloodletting does not treat any illness except for superficial veins that are scattered throughout the body, and for this reason it does not cause much pain, as when we do bloodletting of a vein; and it is not recommended except when it is administered, neither with great heat nor with cold, in any disease that comes from repletion, as long as all the swellings are emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if need be of illness compels it, or by custom, if the physician has seen a woman menstruating for a whole month at the beginning or at the end, and every month in between; for there are some who, when they must vomit, have a heavy head; and there are some who find swelling and redness in their face, in their head, and at the throat, and dark circles under their eyes; and there are some who have a drop of blood in their mouth, have lost their tongue, and spit blood; and there are some who think, and see nothing but blood and fear and death and other things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and indeed when moisture is in the air, we command them to wait for two hours before they can go outside.</start_of_turn>
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The blood of the womb helps to ease the pain of the head … which comes from these dark circles under the eyes; and it does not suffice for me that this vomiting should be after the evacuation of all the humours; for this vomiting is in place of the blood of the head, and it does not suffice for me save those who are of cold complexion in use, or who have a headache, for this makes them suffer much discomfort; and for this reason I do not advise vomiting in these uses except for those who have neither cold fevers nor other diseases.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And he who is sick in temperament, if he becomes unconscious, and for this reason it must be placed a little lower by the doubt of unconsciousness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The wind blowing in the neck is in lieu of the blood of the head and the bile, and for this reason it is worth at the least the stretching of the jaw, the fracture of the channel of the tonsils, and all, and even swelling; and it is to be feared, because if it stays too tightly, it can cause stiffness or swelling of the belly or the chest or the groin.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The wind that is in the collar is worth as much as the pains of the head, and pain of the brain, and swelling, and strangulation, and pain in the roots of the teeth, and it is in lieu of the blood of the bile; and it is to be commanded to the patient that he express his hand to put it in, that he does not compress the artery, and does not leave discharge of blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The winds of the south blow low over the mouth, and at the corruption of the gums, and similar diseases which are in the mouth; and it is in the power of the healing of the twelve leaves.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The winds of the south blow low over the mouth, and at the corruption of the gums, and similar diseases which are in the mouth; and it is in the power of the healing of the twelve leaves.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The wind of the shoulders is worth as much as three veins of the arm, because it draws blood from these large veins; and command the patient not to tighten too much, because the flesh is delicate, and knows nerves and arteries
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The swelling that is on the buttocks is worth as many bruises at the foundation, and as diseases of bones, and it is known that the swelling should be great, and of a coarse texture, that it must be thoroughly treated; and by chance, if it should happen to be superficial, if it breaks, it will cause great wounds.</start_of_turn>
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The swellings of the legs swell widely open, because they draw blood from all parts of the body, and cause old wounds of the rains, and of the marrow, and of the bladder, and reduce the flowers; and are in place of the upper jowls, and of the calves, and all of them cause the body to swell afterwards along its length, and cause vomiting in various conditions.</start_of_turn
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	When the vacuum is placed first thing empty, and then with moderate warmth, put it on the patient immediately, and move it equally, and do not cease doing so until you see a little redness of the flesh and blood; then stop, and remove the vacuum, and take care of the body, for there are many who have suffered with this, and clear pores: if you do but wound once only, you will make large wounds and deep incisions; do it gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	If it is not too large, if you must wound it, do so but once: the first time to staunch the flow of blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	If it is very thick, if you must wound it, do so but three times; and when our wings draw blood from the wound, if we are only slightly wounded once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	If our veins bleed profusely, we must repeat the incisions often; and if the bleeding does not cease, if it is fierce and abundant, we must know when to stop, for if the wound is too deep or the skin is tough and has many pores, we must apply an aperitif and dissolvent ointment to the wound: such as violet oil, sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil; or if it is in summer, cresson oil, or lily oil, or chamomile, or something similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	If excessive sweating is great and cold, take oil of marigold, or balsam, or oil of angelica, and the like.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	If the wound has a tendency to suppurate and has large pores, oil should not be used, but rather the wound should be washed with rose water, cold water, or vinegar, or cucumber juice, or porcelain water, or something similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And if anyone has a moist mouth, if he gets up easily, or from mistletoe, and sumac, and the like things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have excessive humours rise from wine strong, or from seawater, or from decoction of rue or chamomile, or from other things of the like; and they must not fear to use the ventouse beforehand the bath, but after the bath an hour or two; and do not sleep after the ventosation, and must know that he must rise when he should rise and when he is risen.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And beware those who are sickly are cold and fiery, and if they are too hot and inflamed; if you must take things cold, such as grapes and cucumbers and lettuce at ease, and other things of the like; and eat mucilage, and barley broth, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those who have a cold complexion, if you take honey syrup and fragrant wine moderate, which is between strong and new, and eat porridge, and eat mucilage, and small oils and barley; and when he should drink, he must drink more than he should eat; and must give to others no food of triacle or mustard before or after the ventosation, for to comfort the principal members; and be discreet about it, but do not let him drink anything else.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The wounds which are made to bleed are those which are made upon the liver, and upon the spleen, and the kidney, and upon the belly and the buttock and the groin and the heel, for in these members there is no suffering from wounds save for the extraction of blood from one member to another; for as we put on the thumbs when we do not want to bleed; to remove the viscosity which is in the limb; as we put on packs upon the belly and the buttock to soften the limb; and to stop the pain, when there is swelling or a fracture, for by its attractive virtue it attracts the swelling, or evacuates the fracture from its place; and thus it makes elevation when put upon the liver and the spleen when there is retained wind, and these packs are administered empty save for so little as to slightly suctor; and never are they administered together with fire, and never are they administered full of hot water, as in diseases of pleurisy, and in such a manner we fill the pack with hot water or with water in which there are herbs that are conducive to this.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the wound administered with fire is thus:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And there are two broad palms and half of a palm of mustard seeds, or cost the joint a thousand little holes, as when driving out an arrow; and it may be from barley or chaff before if it does not bleed the patient when putting it on the limb; and in the middle there is a thorn of barley or iron, to put a bandage in place, and these are great and small according to the illnesses and the age of those who take them; for the blisters of the patients are different from ordinary things, and lean rather towards fat than towards leanness.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And one must put this bandage on the limb: grasp the bandage with the thumb or index finger, and pass it through the thorn which is already in the bandage, so that it clasps either at the end of the bandage or does not burn the patient; and then put it on the limb, and there must be either above the hole we have mentioned or below it, so that when we see that it is going well, if there is any vapor, we will take off the bandage; and grasp the bandage as before, and repeat this often, if you are in doubt.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the case where the disease of pleuresin is acute, having neither swelling nor perforation, it is only administered when it is surrounded by water; and it is placed only on the limb concerned. This is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	No other venoms are administered except in limbs where it is not possible to place a bandage due to their small size, such as levres and gums, and the like; and in those devoid of hair, such as nails or teeth, and others like these. And if you find veins that are soft and smooth without any sign of perforation, take hold of them; and put on a little water until they are full, but without anything in the belly; then either drain the vein and the bandage, or wipe the limb until it is red, and put on the vein again. When they are full and swollen, if it is possible to put on a bandage, put it on for this is worth doing afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If this does not suffice, if you lift the limb easily, then immediately afterwards with some water, rinse well, and then dry; if the limb remains too long in the water, immerse it in cold water, and place upon it, until the swelling subsides; if the swelling is multiplied, place upon it broken glass or rags, and similar things, until it subsides; or you extract half of the hairs from the head, and leave them until they burn out naturally, if you have finished now; if you still have more to do, take other hairs.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the swelling does not subside, if you rub the limb with fresh blood, or you insert a needle into it until the swelling subsides, and then place upon it, and as long as it feels the blood, if it subsides; and when you see that they are itching, if you sprinkle upon them a little aloes and bruised saffron, or ash, they will soon cease to itch now
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Ci comence li livre des brisures.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is the restoration of fracture and displacement.</start_of_turn>
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Hear now, dear son, for in this chapter the learned physician reveals a thing that no ancient book or letter hath ever recorded; and for this reason it is strange in our land, for I have never learned of it. I know of it only through the learning of the ancient books or through the study of it and through experience, and by the custom of my life. And I have set it down in this chapter what is contained in it, and I have abridged it at the end, and have made clear the forms of the instruments which are attendant, just as I have done in the two chapters preceding.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore it is necessary that we say or write in the prologue of this book the sum of the word and the chapters or the sayings which put understanding into it, and remain on the truth, so that those who are proven to be learned may learn this noble art and learn it from others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when a break or dislocation or twist or fracture occurs, if you must hasten the healing of the patient from one side to the other, if nothing else hinders him, if he is weak in body, or is a child, or an old man; or if his tension is not very strong, or too cold; and mix cold baths, that is to say cold showers, and oil and vinegar, and do not drink wine, do not eat fatty foods, and do not eat too much meat which fills the veins of blood, until you are certain that the patient has recovered from the postoperative heat, or from the swelling of the limb.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the fractured bone begins to heal, if you must order the patient to eat meat which causes great swelling, or if it has viscosity, as with wheat flour in water, and rye, and testicles, and spleen, and pancreas, and fish, and large wine, and similar things.</start_of_turn>
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For in part of nourishment, muscle and bone grow more brittle.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that bones that break from marrow cavities do not mend well nor reunite according to their nature because of the drying up of the members; and thus also those that are too brittle, as in the bones of small intestines; but there is no cure, except to leave the broken bone alone and unite the limb together, as it is; and do not move it in any way, for this is what is recommended in such cases.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And it is observed that fractures are of various kinds in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot, or of the arm, and I shall tell you in this chapter all the ways of fracture.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are fractures that go to the marrow, and others by bending, as with the size of a nail to write with.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture with a small tear.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And sometimes there is its own remedy and its own instrument in the restoration, according to what is remembered to come to its aid; and it is known that the fracture of the bone is recognized by its twist, and opens well by force, and some by pressure of the hand; and when there is no twisting or pressure, and the patient does not feel great pain, there is no fracture; but there may well be twisting, or tear, or a small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If you do not know how to move the limb, but put on medicines that will come later, and then strain it gently now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And the nails that break off that go into the marrow, and are two parts of the joint, it now coves them to put them in place equally, even as after-stitches remain; and if after-stitches come loose, if you leave no trace, until the after-stitches are appeased; then put them in place equally with the muscle, as you must weigh them gently and cautiously, and nails that restore the limb are lighter than those that remove parts; then strain, as it coves afterwards.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if there are broken pieces in the bone, if it is two parts, if it is hands or feet, or at your hand if it is a small limb, or two strings, or an arm and a hand; put the limb in its natural position, so that when the broken parts of the limb are loosened, if you restore by any means the pieces to their place on the muscle that you must weigh, and keep that in your work does not cause any lesion or pain to the patient; and adjust the two ends of the bone according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel well with the hand if you think that it is not well: if the wound is healing well, and it is not strained too much, do not press as those who do who make it come by their work to swelling and contraction in the limb, as we have often seen
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the limb is fixed in place, if the patient is very sick and does not move it, neither while awake nor asleep, neither while turning nor in any other way; and keep the limb so securely that he feels no pain at all.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when he feels no pain, if he is not at a loss, it is necessary to put him in a position where he feels no pain; and keep him straight, so that there is no twisting when he is restored; and the quality of the limb that has been broken is in accordance with what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	The quality of a broken limb is diverse in small and large pieces and in shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For there are small limbs, such as the bones of the arms and legs, and similar; if you can cover them with soft and fine linen; and for those that are large, such as the bones of the thighs and calves: if you can cover them with a wide and strong linen, because the large linens embrace the whole great limb and strain it equally, so that there is no swelling; then you must make gentle rotations, three times or four, according to the limb, and strain your hand one pace to the whole limb, then go down to the break and strain less, than the break then lets go a pace of the break; and soften the linen around the break and around, as much as you take a large part of the limb remaining, then take another linen and turn the rotation back over the limb break; then put back to the lower part of the break, and strain moderately, neither too strong nor too weak, as we have said at the first hour above; then put between the rotations linen or cloth, so that they are all even, and then tie all around with a bandage, and then put your stitches in place, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	If there is swelling or abscess, put upon something calming the abscess burn, and which softens the swelling, and leave it in place for several days; then strain upon your toes, and let them be half of a broad cane resting firmly, or of staff from which we make nails, or of barley, and let them be as this figure.
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	But it is necessary that the cane which one puts upon the fracture be greater and broader than the others; and be as long as it is convenient for the limb in small or large; then strain upon the toes in the same way as before, and bind with a thread that is neither too thick nor too thin, and of linen wool; for if the thread is thick, like those fools who make their threads of linen string, it is a great mistake, for the thread will not be even if it is too subtle, and it will not hold well.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is bruised by the blows of the stones after the stretching of their bones, if you put sponges of linen or coarse cloth on them, they will not swell up.</start_of_turn>
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the fracture, and the bone is broken, I shall speak of the cure for that later.</start_of_turn>
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And the threads that he cannot bear to hold are those which break first of all.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the limb is great, it is not permitted to set it except after five days or seven, or more according to the severity of the wound; and when this is done, the manner of the ancient plasters is used to restore fracture, dislocation, and torsion. Take wheat flour that remains on the walls of a mill, and mix it with eggs, and make this confection, not too thick nor too thin, and use it. This is the common manner of plastering that restores fracture at various positions, and the same is used for women and small children, for it is neither too harsh nor too rough.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another method of plastering that restores the fracture and dislocation and torsion: take three barley grains and linseed, mugwort, asafoetida, gum arabic, and mastic, in all; myrrh and aloes, in two; aloe vera, in seven; and grind them together, and mix them with egg white; for if the patient's complexion is hot, use this plaster, for it is of good composition and restores the broken bones very quickly, and is worth more than many homes.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another method of plastering that is useful for torsion: take mugwort and vinegar, each ten; mirbane and aloes, each seven and a half; acaice, six and a half; and aromatic bile, ten. Grind them well and mix with water or eggs, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Other methods of restoring joints and bones that have dislocated, relieve pain that arises, and reduce swelling of the bone, and bruising: take new linen, moisten it in oil and place it over the limb.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	These methods do not restore them immediately, but they are good for calming the pain and swelling.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Other method of displacement that restores fractured bones: take dried fig tree leaves and terrestrial pellwort leaves, and grind together, and make plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Other methods of restoring joints and bones and for diminishing the remaining pain.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take the root of chamomile, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, barley flour, marigold one part; grind them and mix with wine, if the limb is swollen, mix with vinegar or water, and apply it.</start_of_turn>
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Other methods of restoration are more forceful than the first, when an abscess hardens at the restoration of the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take root of mastic, flaxseed, balsam, melilot, and chamomile, of all an equal part; and grind, and confect with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates in his book does not put anything on the broken limb to restore it except for some fat and oil, and nothing else, and he says that it should be between two and not too soft or too hard
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems Galen recommends putting something dry and warm on the broken limb, such as myrrh, aloes, incense and the like, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way of dressing that is worth for pain and swelling: take mugwort and chopped onions, or poppy seeds, and mustard, and mix them evenly, and grind them, and make a dressing of it and bind it.</start_of_turn>
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then loosen a little afterwards, and take care that the patient feels no pain, nor has his bone moved from its place; if not, loosen by hand for days. And if pain comes to the limb, or swelling, rest or inflammation, if you are hasty, loosen and oste the displacement immediately; and take a light bandage, and a wet sponge, and plunge into water, and lift up the limb, until the swelling ceases, and the pain is appeased; then leave the limb rest for an hour, then put on dry linen, moisten with water or rose oil, and bind on a nut, until you are certain that the abscess has vanished. Leave the inflammation of the limb rest, and let the pain be ossified, then repeat the treatment, and do not strain it so much as before; and do it cautiously until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	If you see swelling, redness, pain and swelling around a bone, and if there is a recurrence, you must repeat the procedure as you did the first time.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	If it does not come to the limb anything of what we have said, if you must loosen it only after three days or four, or five or seven; and never leave it for twenty days, according to what we see, until the swelling has gone down and the joint has settled; then you must tighten the restraint more than before, and swell the limb, as I have said before; and if you see the limb drying out more than usual, that the wounds will not be able to come; then you must apply warm water to the limb every time you loosen it, and this every quarter hour, and cut a little mark on the hour; by this means you will shorten the swelling in the limb and restore the limb to its proper position. That is bad, and if the case is urgent, I do not see anything better than to leave it alone and treat it directly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	various methods of fracture.</start_of_turn
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	Many kinds of fractures are seen, and various figures, and the causes are diverse; for there are fractures caused by the percussion of a spear, and the collarbone fractured throughout, from the head to the socket which is the seat of the bone, as in the case of a break or fracture; and for this reason this kind of fracture is called a «haichure».
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Or if the spear pierces the bone in a reverse direction, it is called this kind of fracture 'absolute'; and there are wounds of these two kinds, great or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is an embedded percussion, or fracture or collar of bone, or fracture of bone on bone, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a fracture that approaches the socket which is below the bone, or it is above the bone, and is this wound, or large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if a wound that has healed in the bone is as slight as a nail, and if the fracture is small, this kind of fracture is called a «capillaire»; and if the wound is made by a wound of stone, or by thorn, or by something similar, and if the piece of bone below enters the cavity, and if the marrow is split as when boiling over a cauldron; if between the teeth of the bone.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And this often happens under those who have soft bones, as in children; and it happens in all these ways that small pieces break off and loosen, like stars; and I will speak of it in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And thus in all these ways of fracture, small pieces are detached from them as with stars, and the tension on the tense parts, and the corrupt matter that is above.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The blood vessel is known by this that when we have discovered the bone, and we wipe grease over it, if the black fracture is opened
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of the fracture, take care of the patient’s ailments, and if you see no other mishap, as vomiting of bile, emission of urine, extension, and swelling, and fever, and the eyes turning yellow and red, and other similar things in various situations, if you cannot otherwise make sense of it.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	If you do not see an imminent accident, and you hope for health, if so, begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	When the limb comes first to you, and that is in the armpit, if so, it is best to remove the bone from the fourth space above the muscle as you do.</start_of_turn>
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in this state, if you hurry to remove the bone from the seventh space above the bone, so that the marrow of the bone is corrupted, comes the accident that we have mentioned.</start_of_turn>
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if a break of the bone comes up to the skin that covers the brain, if you must cut through the torn flesh: take hold of the patient’s head and uncover the bone in every way you can, and on the figure of the wound more severely than you can; and if blood spurts out when uncovering the bone, or if pus comes out, do this with what is useful, and fill the cavity with wet cloths soaked in rose oil; and rest the wound until the abscesses have subsided, and be sure of the evacuation of blood; then when the bone is rotated to its proper position, this is done in two ways: one way if the cut is narrow in front, and this is the shape:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then there is another incision which is greater than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And thus if you have many different sizes of boils, some are soft and some are hard, and are pointed, and of iron inde; and in a slight wound, do not lance the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is firm and hard, if you must pierce through, do not make holes except where the bone actually breaks through; and must have above the point a margin or circle, which does not leave the point pass beyond the bone; and you must have several of these, so that the flesh comes out in place of the thickness of the bone, if you have holes throughout the test; and this is the form of the two methods of holes.
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality for piercing through the bone is that you put in a tarer on the bone, and twist your two hands until you feel that the bone is pierced; then put the tarer back in another place a little later, and do everything around, and close the incisions of the space between the holes, and do this more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you have moved the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments that you have like pins or tweezers; and keep your hand away from the brain and the jaw.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	When you have grasped the bone and treated it, if it is possible, hold the socket that is detached from the bone with all other instruments resembling a chisel, but make sure it is more tense and slender than the other chisels; and if nothing of the small bones remains, do not remove any scales, even if they rest upon the bones lightly. Then close the wound with sutures and dressings as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other method of treatment is like that of the Galenicians, which is more reliable; and the lord is very strong, and that is his word.</start_of_turn
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is proper first that you uncover a portion of the bone, either the fracture or break open muscle, so that when you have uncovered that portion, you must place the index finger of your left hand over the pointed end of this incisor lens, as follows:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	Do not cut too deeply from one side, for the part that is hanging in two costs, if the cutting is towards the bone; then hold with a small mallet above, so that you can grasp the bone lightly, and be careful of the surrounding tissue; for if it is close to the bone, if the bone is slightly displaced, because we must hold it firmly in its place, and with fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	If the bone breaks without piercing the skin, cut the bone as little as possible; there are small pieces remaining. If it is possible to rejoin them, do so with the blunt end of a scraper, using various quantities as needed, to fill each cavity adequately according to the work and the nature of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If there is abundant scraping beforehand, and afterwards more subtly, and it does not cease to do so until it is well done
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In small cuts of other sizes and breaks that are subtle, it is prudent to provide the cause according to its location; and this is something that is not mentioned in this art by anyone who has put their study into this area.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	If the socket is discovered, take a drape of linen, according to the quantity of the wound, and soak it in oil rose; then place it on the wound. Take another drape doubled in two or three, soak it in wine and oil rose, and place it on the first drape. Do this more gently than you think, that you do not damage the socket. Then administer from above another linen, and do not bind more tightly than is necessary to hold the wound alone; and leave it in place for one or two days until the swelling subsides. Then remove it and administer medicines such as herbs, flour of times, incense powder, and an apothecary, and similar things; mix these things together and put them on the wound, and administer appropriate medicines in moderation. Keep the wound clean, do not leave it bloody, do not leave it gathered together, for when it is gathered together on the soft parts of the head, if it swells and becomes loose, it causes great harm to the patient. For when anything biting is put on the socket, if it is not held in place from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Beware then, if no other evil befalls the patient, as we have said, if there is doubt, it is better to be uncertain
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if black bile does not depart quickly, except by the medicine that has been placed, that some virtue has, if you take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and in glue one drapel, and put it on the surface; then it will be cured in the way it should be cured, as long as it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Then come the treatments in various ways that are appropriate, as long as it is healthy. The veins that are never broken in two parts do not bleed, or bleed only slightly; for these are bones; and when cartilage is involved, it does not break unless something forces it to bulge or twist, and then it is well healed.</start_of_turn>
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, if you can drink your little toe or pierce the nail that does not want to go back in, and put the broken part inside your index finger, and at the nail head outwards, as long as it returns to its natural position; do this gently, and beware that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the upper part of the arm, and cannot come from the bone itself, you must know that you must place a splint equal to the breadth of a thumb at the chief of a finger.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the break is of two parts, if you must do it again, and hurry to restore the first joint if you wish; if not, after the seventh or eighth day, when the swelling of the wound has subsided, then bathe the head of the nail that you are trying to drape with linen, if the break is in a part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you bathe the other side as well, if the break is there; and let the bandages be so thick that they fill the hole of the break.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And they say no restorer should mill the tents in the burrow, and die each for himself.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	I do not think it is enough. But it is proper that they be milled in preparation of egg-whites and powdered meal; then leave the tent until the bone is firm and the cartilages are hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And never should one put goose feathers in place of tents, and if there is too much soft drape, and it hangs there, and blows the patient among them; or do as you will
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	If swelling comes to the neck while you are working, if you put some cotton or gauze moistened in rose oil or some vinegar.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the afterbirth does not come, if you put in place by force, barley flour, incense powder, confirmed with egg-whites, then put on clean bandages, and do not tie tightly; and if the swelling is small and is broken into small pieces, if you have suitable instruments for this, then cut the wound and cure the things surrounding it with char, and soldering, if it is confirmed by plasters and ointments for this; and if there is no wound in the swelling, if you cure the tents, and put in lead weights, as much as it is sane.
de la routure de la mandibule	De la routure de la mandibule.
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the mandible is fractured without any wound, and the break is only slight, and is not seen to be broken thoroughly, except for the prominence within, if one grasps it lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is appropriate, if the break is on the outer part, to bite down on the index finger of the affected hand; and if the break is on the left mandible, if you take hold of the index finger of the right hand, and gently hold the fracture, and move the other hand away by force, and make it equal.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the mandible is displaced in .ij., if it is necessary to administer extension of .ij. parts, as long as they are equal.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	If movement of the jaw comes loose, or is dislocated, if it is strained by a thread of gold or silver or silk, then put upon the broken jaw a cerote, and put upon it a double drape; and upon the drape a great staple well made, or a piece of leather equal in length and width to the jaw, and bind it upon the muscle as you please, and command the patient to rest, and feed him soft food.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	If you see that the figure changes, if it dislocates from the third part of the jaw, and then returns to its place; put on a dressing of powdered alum with plenty of eggs or oatmeal, after this has been osteized with the cerote; and put on the dressing a soft linen cloth, and if the dressing comes loose, and the patient’s condition does not change, leave it as it is until it heals; for often it heals in two weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if the abscess comes out, if it is as we have said many times before.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, award that no piece of the bone is left osteose; if subtle of the bone has instruments covering this.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is wide, if the edge has been burned according to your need.</start_of_turn>
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have ossified all these pieces, and there remains no more, if the wound is wide, and put upon it such coverings as cover this, to prevent suppuration, as long as it is healthy.</start_of_turn>
de la forcele	forcefully
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The forceful fracture occurs many times before, behind the shoulder, and the fracture is according to two methods: when it is broken and desevree in three parts, and there are pieces, and it is the lightest to restore; or if there is a fracture with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And when the fracture is towards the wound, you must have two assistants, one of whom will hold the limb that feels the forceful fracture; and the other will extend the collar towards the part; then put the fracture back in place, so that it forms as it should, and there is no sign or swelling.</start_of_turn>
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you have to extend further, put under the patient’s shoulder a round ball of lead, or cloth, as thick as you need; and hold and keep the forceful fracture steady, and strain the ball with your hand, so that you can put the fracture back in place as it should.</start_of_turn>
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	If you do not manage to push the head of the arm away from the shoulder, because it is coming out of its socket, you must know that the patient lies still on his belly, and put on the arm .i. middle forearm, and keep the hand of the minister on the lower arm, until the bone of the arm is raised up.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	Then direct the fracture towards your side, and if you find debris, if you must, make an incision there; and force out the pieces gently, and if the bones cannot reunite by any support, if the pulp has reached one of your incisors, but put on the arm that is the instrument, in order to prevent infection.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And it seems like a scoop, but is not so wide, and be as wide as it seems convenient, according to the size of the bone and the power of the work; and has two holes, as you see, and one is large, and the other is small, as is the curve of the wound that you made when you treated the bone; and when you are assured of the post-extraction, if the wound is small, or you doubt the post-extraction, if you employ the wound with patches and sutures, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	If the wound has bled, if it is small, take oil of roses, assails, and wine, and put on top.</start_of_turn>
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The stripping of the bone, when it is feeling wounds and feeling the saw, is that you put on the bone the plaster of the fine meal and egg-white, and put on soft bands, and put a pin of lead on the ankle if you must; then take a large fold of cloth, and put on a double drape on the bands, and plaster; then take a slender pin of three fingers wide and long, and wrap around that bundle, so that the head of the bundle rests; and put the pin on the fracture, and turn the bundle on the collar, and remove the ankle from the wound, and remove the wound from the painful side; and leave the remainder of the limb, and when you see that the ligament holds the fracture in place, and you see clearly that the pin does not move from the fractured bone, if the reward comes again, and when the limb is relaxed; and make the patient lie on his back, and put under him a little pillow under the ankle, to raise the limb up; if you will align the fracture with the alignment of the shoulder, or you will bind the arm to the collar, and do not unbind it until it is badly necessary, until about twenty days; then repeat the plastering, if you see that it is necessary, and tighten and leave it on, until it is restored; and it is restored in about eight days, and in less time for most men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	Then resume the displacement, if you see that it is necessary, and hold and leave it in place until it is restored; and it is usually restored within .xxviij. days, and in fewer than most homes.
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	When the scapula breaks or is dislocated from its socket, it must not be forced out by force alone; if it appears according to the figure of the fracture, and is reset according to its natural form, in every way that you can; then put on the limb a fine powder of meal with abundance of eggshell, and stamp lightly, and put on two layers of bandage; then put on a broad and subtle splint, a little wider than the scapula, and keep the splint fixed firmly in no part of the scapula, if you use the hair of hemp, so that the splint rests evenly; and then strain it with a great firm bend, so that the splint does not move from its place, and look at the limb every hour; and every time it swells, if you strain, and put back the splint if it has come out of place, and keep the patient lying down; and the scapula is restored in twenty days or less. And when this number is completed, if the bone is loose, and be cured. For it is not the bone that easily breaks.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone sticks out beforehand, and does not yield like before, if it persists, hold the bone steady and do what we said in the breaking of the forceps to soothe the abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	And if a piece of the bone sticks out beforehand, and does not yield like before, if it persists, hold the bone steady and do what we said in the breaking of the forceps to soothe the abscess.
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The weight is never broken in the middle, but this happens often; but it breaks often at the outset.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	When it is broken in two, if it is tilted downwards, and causes the patient great pain, and there is no other cause, vomiting blood, and opening the wounds in the broken bone, and all this together.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient lies supine on his back, put one cushion between the shoulder blades, then press the shoulder blades together, and unite the edges of the two ribs with your hands, and subtilize that it be even in all ways that you can, until the shape of the bone is as it should be; then put on bandages and stamp under the staple of salt, or some other soft substance, and cover with a single bandage, and bind on the bone break, if it does not move; and turn the limb around the back, and strain gently, and reward somewhat the limb after an hour, and if it relaxes, strain it again; and if you fear that it will slip, due to corrosion or inflammation that comes to the limb, or pain or swelling, haste and slip it, and wipe off the bandage, and address what has come from the way of treatment; then rebandage the wound and strain it until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	And if the patient lies supine on his back, put one cushion between the shoulder blades, then press the shoulder blades together, and unite the edges of the two ribs with your hands, and subtilize that it be even in all ways that you can, until the shape of the bone is as it should be; then put on bandages and stamp under the staple of salt, or some other soft substance, and cover with a single bandage, and bind on the bone break, if it does not move; and turn the limb around the back, and strain gently, and reward somewhat the limb after an hour, and if it relaxes, strain it again; and if you fear that it will slip, due to corrosion or inflammation that comes to the limb, or pain or swelling, haste and slip it, and wipe off the bandage, and address what has come from the way of treatment; then rebandage the wound and strain it until it is healed. And in the case of a broken rib.
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	The fractures of the ribs only come from great blows to the back, and at the shoulder, and do not bend but for that reason that they are glassy; and the patient feels well at the inquiry as two.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	The restoration is that you set the fracture equally, as it should be done
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then put on the dressing, and bind with a bandage, if you have need of it.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the fracture of the ribs is declining inwards, if the patient feels great pain and swelling, as if there were pleurisy, for the bone is pressing on the lung; and there is vomiting and copious bleeding, and this is a great danger to life, and it has often caused great suffering.</start_of_turn>
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if these things are said, it is advisable to administer nourishing foods that will swell the belly, to push out the fracture.</start_of_turn>
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not make this treatment for burns that are fresh and new, if they have not begun to fester.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if they have begun to fester, so be it.</start_of_turn>
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	They say that no one should put a dressing on the wound, for it causes swelling; and this is similar to reason; however, there is doubt that the dressing will draw out the superfluous matter from the wound because of the disposition of weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	They say that no one should cover the wound with coarse cloth soaked in oil, and put on tents between the ribs to make them equal in length, then either bandage the pleurisis, meat and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear from the bone that points to the loin, and there is doubt in the patient, if it is convenient to open on the side of the broken rib, and if it is convenient to put in a poultice; then you must cut the bone slightly, and smooth it out, and then sew up the two layers of the wound, if it is large, and cure it with dressing, until it is healed
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the armpit becomes inflamed, put upon moist cloths soaked in rose oil, and put upon the limb; and treat until the limb stops bleeding at the incision, and do not touch the cost of the wound or it must, until it is healed.
de la brisure dou col	If the abscess bursts, if put on moist cloths soaked in rose oil, and put on the wound; cure while the bone is held in place, and be calm about the ribs or it must be so, until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Never comes a fracture of the collarbone at the same time as a falling blow; and in the same way at the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to no avail, and you know if it will heal or not, if you take care so that you see its hands softened and limp and dead, and do not move or extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, if you do not feel it
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	The wounds are mortal in many situations, and if you move them and feel well when you pull them out and touch them, the joint of the bone is saved, and the patient will be cured, if we put a cure on it.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	If anything suspicious appears on the back, you must learn to know whether it is blood or not, whether it is soft or hard; and if it is in the hands or on the back, take hold of the wind and let it go; and when you have soothed it on the belly, let it go again.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	When it has been soothed on the back and it lets go, if it is not sold.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	The herbs that are deadly: if you do not toil in their cure
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not happen, if the thing is lighter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is this: if there is a wound at the root of the hair, put upon the spine oil of roses or oil of egg yolk, until it is calmed; then put on one of the comfortable and drying patches, and bind it with a thread, and command the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where he feels pain, until it is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If bones are broken, cover with a bandage; and straighten the bones, then unite the joints of the wound, if it is large, with a splint, and support it until it is healed; and if the fracture is broken, which is called the "fracture of the marrow", if you feel a swelling in your left hand, and equalize it with the right hand in front, then put on the dressing and support, if necessary; then strain, and if there are broken bones underneath, if you do not stop, and straighten, and cure the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	from the fracture of the thigh bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	When the thigh bone is fractured, and if there is no sign of injury to the head; then keep it long and still, and do not move it; and the patient will suffer pain at the place of the fracture, swelling, and bruising.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	If the fracture is at the top of the thigh bone, extend your hand over the fracture as long as it is on the fracture; and keep the limb in the position of the fracture; and if the fracture is only at the head, make it even so that it is in its natural position.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	If the fracture is long or slopes downwards, make the patient lie on his belly, until the restoration of the fracture is apparent.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have set them even, if you place them on the support, then place a splint of wood or bone, and hold the brace, so that it does not move; and use the weight of the limb to compress the costae, until the limb is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on his side, or on his back
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	If swelling comes, if it does not go away, until the swelling has subsided, put on what we have previously said; and then rest, and strain if it seems convenient, without any mishap; and this is the remedy.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	De la brisure de l’ajutoire.
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder joint is the one between the shoulder blade and the ball of the shoulder, and if it is dislocated, it must be restored in one of two ways: which is to take a fistful of myrrh, as follows:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And as two fingers are bent, two thumbs are bent, and hold the patient above a seat; then grasp the limb with the fist, until it reaches the armpit, and put in the middle of the fist a corb of the fist, then put on no weight or the attendants extend downwards; then put the joint back in its place, as it should be.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is that you support the patient on his shoulder, and you bind the arm to his collar, and order the attendants that one of them holds what is on the joint at his hands, and the other holds downwards at all the bones, and stretch the scapulae outwards.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	If you see that the extraction is stronger, strain the juice from the briseure, and on the briseure, and extend your thumbs to their share.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	If the briseure is close to the head of the shoulder, you must put half on the shoulder and the other on the heel, from the shoulder; and if the briseure is on the heel, you must put it lightly, so that the briseure is even on both the shoulder and the heel; then put it even on the bone, as it should be, and strain it, for if the pieces do not come together, there is danger
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	If the after-effects come, do not strain for more than thirteen days; put on moist linen and rose oil until the after-effects have subsided; then strain, and the method of straining is as follows: if you place the support on the fracture, assemble the limb on the assistant, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; put on the bandage and strain on the assistant, and on the limb, so that the limb is steady, without any hindrance, or without the bone being fractured.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	If you doubt that the bone is not moving, use splints, and on the fracture put on a splint that is wider and stronger than the others, and have between the splints a space of about two finger-widths; and let one splint be as large as to pass over the fracture two finger-widths; then strain on the splints, as I have said above concerning the chapter on the fracture, stronger and less flexible.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if thou seest the swelling of the joints, and the stiffness, as we have said, in the course of restoring the limb, and thou doubtest the apposition of the bone, if thou leave it to its own devices until the seventh day, as we have said; then behold for three days how the limb grows, that it does not swell or become inflamed, or that the bone does not move on the limb by that which it is too strait.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the limb is out of place, as we have said, in the course of restoring the limb, and thou doubtest the setting of the bone, if thou leave it to its own devices until the seventh day, as we have said; then behold for three days how the limb grows, that it does not swell or become inflamed, or that the bone does not move on the limb by that which it is too strait.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such thing happens, if not more than three days have passed, and the patient sleeps on his back and has his hands on his stomach; put a bandage around the limb one inch wide of equal wool, and behold for an hour or two whether the limb is straightened, or whether the ligaments are softened; if the limb is set by the power of medicine, and do to the limb what we have before set, in part as much as the limb is soft; and when it begins to recover, if it is large.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary that the shoulder and limb must be taken back in forty days in all; and then one must loosen them and administer poultices and medicines of ointments to the limb to be remedied.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the fracture is severe and bloody, it should be loosened in twenty days or two months.
de la brisure du bras	In the event that the shoulder joint has been dislocated due to moisture, and has been reset but remains unstable, resulting in recurrent dislocations with even slight movement, as we have observed, you must first stabilize the dislocation.
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm consists of twelve bones, which are called the "femurs," of which one is small and is the one that supports the pouch; and the other is large, and is the one that is hollow, towards the little toe; by chance the large femur only breaks, or the small, and by chance they break together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the little bones are fractured, the restoration is slight, and the healing; but when the great bone is fractured, if the healing is bad, it is more painful than when they are fractured whole
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If only the little bone is fractured, it is enough to extend it slightly, and make it even.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if the great bone is fractured, if the limb must be extended more strongly; and extend over one cushion, and hold the hand higher than the other, and the little must be lower than the other, and let the patient cross his arms over himself, and one cushion in front of him higher than the patient, so that the patient does not suffer any pain; then extend the limb from the elbow to the wrist, or to the elbow, and another limb at the other end
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	Then he sets the eye level, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	If it breaks into pieces, if you put some together in its place, and if there is no displacement that has pierced or torn it, you shall not be able to restore it to its place, for it will remain fractured as before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	If with the fracture there is a wound, as I have already mentioned in this chapter; take the cure.</start_of_turn>
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	Then when he begins to restore the eye, drops of blood sometimes issue from the wound. If the blood clots are too thick or too thin, neither is good; and one must cover them up with a thin layer of oil of roses and white wax, so that neither is too hard nor too soft; and one must cover them up from above cautiously, until the bleeding has ceased.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	Then he puts on the cerate and places the filling of fine powder with a lot of eggshell, because he puts in the stars, and let the star of the iris be more firm and a little wider than the others; and there must be six stars or more in a variety: either that the iris is in one of the bones, or in two; and is strained more on the iris than elsewhere, and less every day as I have said at the beginning of this chapter; and let the edges that are on the iris be soft and moist, and not too hard or too rough; and let the thread that is used for straining be neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And rest the limb and the limb again after a while.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any other evil happens to the limb, as if there is itching that happens to the limb, then you must raise the limb high with hot water, until the itching is appeased; and leave the limb resting still.</start_of_turn>
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	Then resume the treatment, and if the flesh is softened and the bone is loosened, and anything similar, if it comes to this.</start_of_turn
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	If you take care that the swelling does not come back to the limb, because it is too tight, then you must soften it somewhat, and leave it a few days, until the swelling goes down, and then strain it again.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said happen to the patient, then keep it bandaged for twenty days.</start_of_turn
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	Or if the swelling persists, then hold the patient’s hands to his collar, and let his collar be even, and guard against movement and vomiting, and sleep on his back; and the swelling will be restored in thirty days or in fifty, or by chance in twenty days, according to the compositions and temperaments of the virtues.</start_of_turn
de la brisure de la main	Of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	The bones at the back of the hand have often fractured here, and it does not cease but rain many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	When the hand is fractured or rains, if it is necessary to prevent the patient from screaming, if he looks straight ahead without moving; then put his hand on the extended cloth, and extend the fractured bones equally; then put the plaster and bandage, if there is no opening, and put on a splint according to the degree of displacement; and cover with a linen drape
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	When the fracture is at the elbow joint, if you make a ball of gauze and command the patient to hold it on his fractured limb; and then strain with a long bandage, and make a splint as large as the fractured limb itself, and strain it as much as it is necessary.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	If the fracture is lateral, command that you place a splint above and below the joint, so that the hand is fully extended and straight, then bind the limb tightly around the hand, and seal the wound between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	If the fracture does not go through either bone, if it is in the flesh, if it is necessary; and strain with the bandage, and if you see that it does not move, put a splint in place to raise the fracture, and do not move it; or if the fracture is in another place, if for example in the index finger or any other, if you put it in the flesh, and bind it with the two fingers which follow; or you bind them all together, holding them firmly in place, as long as movement is painful, or put on a splint, as for a pouch; take care of the restoration and the arrangement of the cautery, and secure what comes from it, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken limb
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bone of the thigh is often fractured, and one can see it when it turns before and behind; and it is restored when it is bound with a loop above the fracture and below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	The patient lies on his face, then extends his limbs symmetrically; and it is when the fracture is fixed to the bone
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	If the fracture is close to the root of the bone, if one of the ligaments surrounding the ankle is ruptured, and the other is stretched by the fracture.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	If also it is close to the knee, and then either the ligament above the knee is ruptured, or the lower ligament; then put the hand on the bone, equal to its natural figure, and then apply the dressing, and bind it, since the swelling will not come.</start_of_turn>
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	If there is swelling above the wound, if you leave it quiet and return to your work and your cure, the ligation is made hastily.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary to wrap around the fracture with a strong bandage doubled in two or three places, and to drain the excess fluid, then bend the limb until the nails reach the root of the nail, and put a long thread between the bone and the limb below the knee, from the knee downwards; and draw the thread tight above the limb and above the bone, then put on the dressing, and put a pin on the bone of the limb; then put in the wound eight threads between the limb and the bone of silk cloth to make the pressure equal, and as you go up the fracture, and less the strain; and leave in place two threads that you had put between the limb and the bone, and put on three pins that are above, then cover again at the bottom with the thread, until you reach the end; and the strain, if it does not move from its place, then leave it be, then do not put on any dressing or swelling or anything similar.</start_of_turn>
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	If there is swelling above the wound, if it comes loose, and you address what has come, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that prick, it is necessary to remove them, if possible; and if that is not possible, it is necessary to cut the limb open, and drain the pus. Treat the wound as we have said, as long as it is healthy.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And never is the bone broken in this case where it is set with pins, as in the arm or leg; nevertheless, in the restoration done in this way, I do not feel any pain in the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And the swelling that remains in the bone after it has been restored, lasts for one or two days, or less or more, according to the variations of complexion.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the groin region.
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Hairs that in the groin are long, break suddenly, but they fall often.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	If they break, if it is not just a split, or an opening, and there is pain all around, and sensation of pain, and this feels very well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if restoration is to be made, set the round things that are round back to their place until they are properly assembled; then put on the dressing and put on a round splint, if you have need of it, and strain it as it should be strained; then reward all the arrangements that we have said above in other cases, as in the case of an abscess or other similar things; and if you put in each mishap what it should have, as long as it is sane.
de la brisure de la jambe	And if restoration is to be made, set the round things that are round back to their place until they are properly assembled; then put on the dressing and put on a round splint, if you have need of it, and strain it as it should be strained; then reward all the arrangements that we have said above in other cases, as in the case of an abscess or other similar things; and if you put in each mishap what it should have, as long as it is sane.
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Hairs that in the leg have two bones, of which one is called by right "muscle," and the other "foscile"; and they break all together as it comes to the arm, and because of this the restoration is just like that of the arm, and the work is whole like that. And if both bones are broken together, if they twist the limb throughout.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if a bone is fractured at its root, the limb is twisted forward
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the big bone is broken, if one feels great pain, and one sees it well; and it twists.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	When it is suspected that the fracture is serious, extend the limb and keep it straight; but if it breaks, it is better to leave it alone, as there are more pieces when it is extended, even if the extension is less severe.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, if you take four strips of cloth that cover the limb from one side to the other, and be as long as the limb from the hip to the foot; then wrap around with four layers of lint around and below, and bind firmly in the middle, and to this bandage will not allow the limb to bend to the right or to the left, and that is good; and no one will administer anything more long than the limb, and if there is swelling, and it has several pieces, it is better to extend slightly and more gently; and to adjust as you are able.
de la brisure des os dou piet	Of the fracture of bones in general.
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, there is no fracture; but in bones of marrow there is never a fracture, and two must suffice, and there is no other treatment except for numerous positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there is a fracture in bones of marrow, and you see these bones crushing one another, if you place the limb so that it would appear to be flying away, then put the limb on the ground, just as if it were falling, and then put the limb back in its place; then press until it returns to its original position; then put on the dressing and bandage, and put on a little stool under the belly of the limb, about an inch high, and strain the limb gradually, and when it has recovered, wrap it in bandages, and other things as you deem necessary
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when two or three days have passed, if the limb is still loose, because you will find the bones either broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	If there be any two breaks, if you restore them as we have said must be two-handed; then put at the break a splint according to the length of the break, and make it somewhat wider; then put on the thumb that I have mentioned, and strain immediately; and if there are three or more breaks, break them, and put on over each break a splint as per their quantity, wrapped in one layer of linen, and strain the thumb from the bone.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	Remember also the other things that I have said about other breaks; and secure each accident as it should be secured.</start_of_turn>
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the humerus bone.</start_of_turn>
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone is fractured, if it is made to sit out, then lean it towards the painful side and hold it there; then fill the limb with wool and put as much on as one can; then draw out the limb, leaving the back and front parts still; and then pull out the wool until the bone comes through, and put the limb back with the wool in place.  If the limb has bled, if the bone has been pulled out, and if it has bled, leave it alone for seven days or until the fracture has healed. If the fracture has healed, take a bladder of barley and bind it to the belly with a cord, and keep the bladder in the limb until the bladder is evacuated; the limb will then return to its normal position.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of a man or woman is fractured, if you restore it as we have said concerning the thighbone; these fractures are not hidden from him who has put his study and his art into it, and he will understand my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the fracture signifies in many ways the right way of restoration: therefore be attentive.</start_of_turn>
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the groin, when it is broken, take a goose beak and put it in the groin; then wrap it round with cloths, and leave it for two days or until it is healed.
de brisure avec plaie	Of sudden with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	In case of sudden fracture with wound, even if it is great, as with the bones of the thigh or shoulder or similar, that it be immediately set in order, if what we have said is true concerning these symptoms.</start_of_turn>
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is clean, if the vitriol has been delayed, if you have nothing else, then resume the reduction in this way at the same hour, or at the least as soon as possible, for if it is delayed, it will not be cured.</start_of_turn
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if there is swelling of the wound, if the fracture is not reduced until the swelling has gone down, do not touch either the third or the fourth part, for you will cause further harm.</start_of_turn
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	If the bone breaks suddenly, it is found outside the socket as if it had been discovered, then you must hold your hands lightly at the point of the break.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	If the limb extension does not appear to you in order to make them equal at your hands, if you have this instrument of iron which is about twelve or thirteen inches long, and the size is according to the quantity of the wound; and for this reason it is necessary at the mire that it grasps three or four inches, according to what is necessary in the wound of the fracture; and whether round or square, that it does not press too much on the limb at your work, and whether it is before or behind, and large in front, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called "palainche" because it is known that the curved bone must be placed above the head of the visible bone; and once it has returned, it must be equal on one side as the other.</start_of_turn
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle, and the instruments cannot well hold the bone, if you must hold the head of the bone, as long as the instruments have possession.</start_of_turn
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot restore the bone, as we have said, if you are forced to apply an instrument that can cover this, such as a hook or saw, to your need; then remove that which remains embedded in the bone by scraping and removing the surrounding marrow.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the limb is restored, and the patient experiences great pain afterward, it is because the bone is not properly aligned in its natural position.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If you do so that it is in its place, then immediately apply a black wine stain to the wound, and keep it covered; do not place any cerate or other thing upon the wound while there is oil, as this will cause putrefaction and corruption; then administer stars when the bone has been restored, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover the surrounding area as much as necessary, according to the extent of the wound, and take care that the wound is not strained with the breaking; for many times this has happened to fools, and they have caused the patient to die or become lame or to suffer from an infection many times; or that the pain is milder and more painless than the other breaks.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is small or large, and you doubt that the accident has passed, as we have said, and you feel pain in the limb, if it does not suffice to put on supports; but wrap tightly around the wound, instead of supports, a coarse cloth, and bind it.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days blood oozing from the wound, if you put on more support than necessary at the beginning, and you cause healing wounds, as with excessive medication and similar things.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it must be that you bind the limb three times a day, in the morning and in the evening, until it is healed and sound.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it must be that the limb is kept in its place as much as possible, so that it can heal easily
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	If it is displaced again, and cannot be rejoined in its place, with slight fractures that there are small pieces of bone, because it must be thought that you wish to close the wound, and reunite all these fragments of bone that cause this pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if fistula arises in the limb, or any other form of corruption, if you can cure it, according to what is said in this chapter before
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken, and appears on the limb, as the bones of the thigh or shoulder, and other bones of the large limbs, if you do not treat it, for many times death comes from this; but leave it until it has healed naturally; by chance it will be cured by itself after twenty days or thirty, and then heal the wound if you wish; or if you do not wish, leave it as it is
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	From the beard that comes out of the beard hair.
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	From the beard that comes out of the beard hair, we often see after the swelling of the wound, especially when it is near the joint, and it is helpful to see the figure of the limb; and by chance it cannot do its natural work
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Therefore take care that you are aware: if you administer astringent medicines, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocoll, acacia, and similar others, that you take none of these things, or all together, and mix them with a stifling wine or with plenty of egg or with buttermilk; and put them on the wound, and strain it well, and do not remove it from the hand for days; and then dislocate it, and repeat this until the nodes are bony; or you strain on a well-made piece of sponge; for the property of sponge is that it will harden all the swellings under the limb; and if the node has already hardened as much as a stone, and it is necessary to break it, if the swelling above is great, and to make the apparent superfluity disappear; or do not remove it from any wound, as long as it is bony, and cure it when it is healed
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	Weak limb after the bandage.
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the bone is restored and the limb is weakened and limp, if there is any discomfort: sometimes this is because it was too tightly bound and was not properly loosed; or because there are too many bands, and it cannot regain its natural position; or because of many wounds; or because of too great a movement, not even in its hour; or because there is much blood in the body, if it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is to make the patient relax, and to make the limb firm, until the swelling is multiplied in him; and give him baths, and make him cheerful and comfortable; then put a poultice on the limb, so that the poultice attracts the great nourishment, and the wound often bleeds profusely, until the nourishment returns to the limb; and restore it to its natural position.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	The limb is twisted after the blessing.
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the bone is broken open, and the limb is deformed, although it does not lose its natural work: if one does not believe the fools who say that the limb must be broken anew, and many have done this in our land; this work is blamed, and great evils result, and by chance the patient; although if the nodulations and the torture are fresh, if you command that they be washed away with warm water, or with soft herbs be cooked, like leaves of chamomile, and roots, and meadowsweet, and similar things; and you make an application of a softening plaster, like good beeswax done, and you take the nourishment of chamomile, and confit with fat of gelly or oil of poppy seed, and apply the plaster again; or you take greasy figs, and grind them with dung of the colon, and similar medicines that appease the swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And never is the bone fractured by continuous rubbing and length of time with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And do not move the limb suddenly at all times.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	If the dislocation is swollen and hardened, like a stone, and needs to be held by iron, if it is covered up to the bone, make an incision slightly deeper; and put padding and a bandage on the wound.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	If the dislocation is swollen and hardened, like a stone, and needs to be held by iron, if it is covered up to the bone, make an incision slightly deeper; and put padding and a bandage on the wound.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs without any apparent cause, if it is now necessary to restore its proper position.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if you move it too late, if by chance you succeed in putting it back, you will have pain in the limb at the root; for this reason one must not move it while it is swollen: many times it brings vomiting and other pains; however, when it has subsided, if you make the patient comfortable, then leave it, until the swelling has gone down; then raise the limb with warmth and oil, and support it lightly, and cure each limb as it comes to its place
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations from the shoulder to the foot.</start_of_turn>
des mandibules	Des mandibules.
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	The jaws. For the jaws are loosened and the dislocation of both is frequent: either because they are fixed to the bone of their roots, and softened a little; or because they are loosened entirely, and hang towards the chin, and tear the saliva from the mouth that it cannot hold it, cannot close its mouth, and engulfs its tongue with the word.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, if it returns by itself several times.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	If it is whole and complete, if you must support it, do not grasp it; and in such a way that the servant holds the head of the patient, and look at my pockets of both hands at the root of the dislocation of the mandible in the mouth, if the dislocation is two parts; and the other two must be loosened, to make them equal; and command the patient to soften his mandible and move it in all directions
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the eye must be kept level, until it returns to its place.</start_of_turn>
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if it returns grasped, even if both mandibles are together, if they are swollen with hot water and oil, so that they are kept lightly; do not attempt to force it back, as we have said.</start_of_turn>
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	When they are returned equally, and the mouth of the patient is well closed with a soft closure, put on moist cloths in layers made of rose oil and wax, then bind them loosely with linen threads; and let the patient rest on his back, and his arms be at rest between two cushions, so that he does not move to the right or left, nor attempt to open his mouth, but take moderate food, until the pain is gone and the jaw is well healed.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	If the two jaw bones do not manage to return to their place at once, and are not firmly secured at their roots, if in comes fever and customary sickness, and by chance vomiting of pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	When you see this, know that it is a loss; and many times death follows in eight days.</start_of_turn>
de la forcelle	of the forceps.</start_of_turn>
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The forceps cannot remove pain from the root of the tooth, and is valueless whenever it is applied with force, and it is well known.</start_of_turn
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	If the patient lies still on his back and extends his arms; then press the limb towards the breast, and it will return; then place the bandage and bind it, and strain it; the limb which is towards the breast cannot be dislocated; if this does not happen, and if it should slip even once, if you must, reset the limb, as we have said; then place the bandage and bind it, and strain it, and command the patient to rest until he is healed; and in the same way bring back the displaced bone, when it is dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	From the dislocation of the shoulder.
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	Hairs that have escaped the armpit are loosened for only three methods: first, that they escape at the part of the armpit downwards; and the second, at the part of the thumb; and by chance they escape at the part above, and this is enough; and do not loosen them further by the armpit, and do not loosen them further downwards by the nerves; and many times loosen them downwards towards the armpit, even among those who have little hair, for at these leaps they will become ill; among those who have enough hair, they leap with points and return with points.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes there happen to be blows or fractures, and it swells the shoulder with a hot abscess, and one must take care that it is not dislocated by this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is necessary indeed. As long as you are sure; then commence the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	Dislocation is known when it is forced towards the armpit, and it makes a difference between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between their divergence a bulge; and at the head of the shoulder there is a pit, and the armpit touches the head of the shoulder, as if it were a nipple; and the patient cannot move their hand to its place, neither make any movement; and if it is dislocated upwards, if it is not hidden, because you will find it immediately on touching; and this method of dislocation is not sufficient to bring back, when it is new, or if the limb is diseased.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is that the physician grasps the painful limb high up, then places the thumbs below the armpit, and grasps the joint forcefully high up; and the physician grasps the limb and stretches it high up, because it places it below; if it comes immediately.</start_of_turn>
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	If it does not come as we have said above, if you must know, the patient should be bathed in warm water; and give him mollifying and soothing medication, such as decoction of altee and fenugrec and melilote in water, or give it to him directly. Then put the patient on his back, and put under his seat a cushion of linen even, not too soft nor too hard, and put his elbow on the cushion, and keep his shoulder joint firmly in place, and treat the hand of the patient; and another attendant holds his shoulder, so that it does not move backward. The shoulder will come back immediately, and if you see that it remains in place as we have said: that is to say that you make present one who is greater than the patient; and two attendants stand beside the patient, and stretch the shoulder from under the patient’s arm, and keep his arm up, so that the patient hangs down from his shoulder; and another attendant treats the patient’s hand from behind his belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too weak, if he can hold nothing heavy, the dislocation will return immediately.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And we shall do the same in another way: if the head of the shoulder is loosened from the bone like a stone that is too great or too small; then let the patient lie down and have a cloth under his armpit, and let the patient’s limb hang down loosely; then extend the arm upwards from the other side and the joint will return to its place. If it does not return with all these things that we have said, do this treatment: take two thumbs and three fingers wide, which has the head of the bone that enters the socket like a nail, and press it into the socket according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then lie upon the head of the shoulder, draped with a cloth, that it does not irritate the patient, and put from behind the patient’s back; extend your arms over the shoulder of the long kind, and support the limb on the shoulder, and the arm at the wrist, then put the arm over an inch of the scapula, and extend the hands forward, or leave the forearm hanging down from the other side: the shoulder joint is now restored.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is restored, in whatever way, if you put from behind the patient’s back a thumb of wool even, then put the dressing loosely of powder of wheat, with incense and alum of egg, upon the whole shoulder and around, then strain from behind the base of the thumb immediately, and turn the limb upon the dressing, and embrace the hand at its collar, and let the hands hang down alongside.</start_of_turn>
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he move little, until the limb is comfortable, because it will heal better; and then move more after five or six days, and turn; and if it is firm and is not softened, if it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	If the joint is forced from its place by moisture or for another reason, if you must, administer cautery in three places as it is placed before or alongside cautery.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	If you do all this, and the dislocation does not heal after twenty-three days, and the limb still cannot lift the upper arm, then know that the nerves at the head of the shoulder are compressed or stretched or softened; and that the dislocation will never heal in its place.</start_of_turn>
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is from front to back, and the bones, or behind, if it is done by impulse, and extension of the arms, and if another bandage is administered; and it is cured as long as it is healthy.</start_of_turn
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	If after healing the limb grieves and becomes stiff, if the patient uses it repeatedly, many times, until the grief is gone and returns to its first state.
de la dislocation dou coute	If after healing the limb grieves and becomes stiff, if the patient uses it repeatedly, many times, until the grief is gone and returns to its first state.
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	If after healing the limb grieves and becomes stiff, if the patient uses it repeatedly, many times, until the grief is gone and returns to its first state.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the patient with a bandage, if he wishes to see it openly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is tight, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch his shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And you must ensure that you reset it immediately, even if it comes loose again after you have set it; for if it comes loose again while it is healing, it will cause further pain. And by chance it will not be possible to restore it at all, even if it is at the back; in such a case it is better to leave it as it is rather than to cause further dislocation, which is more painful and can also lead to death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And if it can be restored, when it is possible to restore it, extend your hand with both hands; spread your arms and hands as wide as the ruler allows, from armpit to wrist, front and back, and stabilize the joint with your thumbs together or at the root of the bone until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, if it returns when you double your hand over your hand, and grasp from the root of the bone that is loosened.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if he does not see it return to its place, if you administer great extension; and if two ministers extend the arm and hold it, so that it does not move during extension; then turn the arm from the shoulder downwards, and when you have enveloped a double-length and wide bandage; and when you look at the joint with the hand, if there is any oil on the joint for lubrication, then put on the joint and it will recover; and when it is in its place, put on dry plaster with egg white, and the swelling will subside, and bend the arm to the patient’s chest, and leave it for a while, then remove it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firmly in its place, if you see that it does not hold firmly, repeat the manipulation of the limb and the support, and leave it thus for a few days, until it is firmly set; then you can remove the support.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	If he feels pain after the joint is reset, and it moves, bathe and rub well, and press until it is eased; or put on the joint a sheepskin nail and leave it for a night, then take out the nail and the bone, and let him enter or bathe; when he sweats, wipe the joint gently, then put the nail back in place, and enter or bathe again; do this twice or thrice until it is healed. If you see that it does not return to its place, put on a poultice of moist lint soaked in urine and bind it up; if it returns to its place.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The dislocation of the hand is loosened, and its return is laborious, more than other joints in general; it must be immediately repositioned to its place, even if it is loosened, or if there is bleeding or swelling
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	If you put the affected hand on a table and extend the patient, look at the hand and make sure that it rests equally on the joint; that he places his palm on the surface of the joint and stretches it until it returns naturally, you must watch to see if it is well aligned; then put the patient’s hand back on the table during extension and retraction.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, let the patient place the back of his hand on the table, and I will look put his hand on the appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, that is good. If not, if the strain of the relaxed tendons calms down after the incisions, and you leave it in its original position, it will recover on its own.</start_of_turn>
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	If he cannot bear it, and you do not set it after some days, the joint will become stiff; and neither you nor the patient will be able to do anything except soften the hands, and you will not be able to extract anything, whether nerves or arteries. If there is no other remedy except to extract by cautery, do so in this case, and by chance there is nothing else.</start_of_turn>
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	When the hand is at rest, if you place the thumb as we have said, then strain and hold it for five days, then release and leave it be.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it does not move well and there is no pain, if there is warm liquid [fluid], and you rub it until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
de la dislocation des dois de la main	... until the dislocation of the shoulder of the hand.</start_of_turn>
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Never are the fingers desoiled at the wrist or at the elbow; whenever it is at the back of the hand or the belly, then it is certain, and the dislocation will remain until it returns; then support the head of the finger, and turn it towards the part where it is joined; and leave it there for two days, and then put it back in its place; and do not touch it, as we have said, and do not move it, and bind it; do this often, until it is tight, and do the same if it is desoiled at the belly of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed; and do the same whenever it is desoiled from another part.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	From the loosening of the shoulder bone from the back.
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the shoulder bone of the back or the neck is loosened, or there are several loosenings, if no remedy is found, for the patient dies quickly.</start_of_turn>
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the sign is that the urine spurts backwards, do not keep it, and many times is the limb softened, or the two thighs or two arms or one leg; and many times the spleen turns to three parts; that which turns at the back is called "gilbosite": it is cured if it is known that the gilbosite comes from childhood: if there is no cure or healing for the whole.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes from sitting or impacts or similar things, they say was formerly cured by great words, but I have abridged it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the swelling which comes before the heel, there is no remedy for the pain; and also that which comes directly on both sides, one cannot cure it except for that which comes from behind, as I have said; and that the patient should be stretched out on his face in one equal measure, and should have tension from his toes up to his head, that he should not bend; then put a cushion under the patient’s heel and another under the toes, and bind his ankles loosely with a bandage, and another over the heels, and over the calves, and over the thighs; and two assistants should know the bands, one at the head and the other at the toes, and be well bound, as we have said, and the patient should rest his palms on the spine until it recovers.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return by this cure, take a spoonful of three hands' length, and hold the thumb against the side; let the patient lie on his side, and put the thumb against the heel of the palm, then put the middle of the thumb on the spine; put the little finger on the other heel of the palm, and press firmly, until it returns to its place. If you see that it does not, do it at the wrist that turns at the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	If you see two tendons at the wrist of the patient of one arm, and you give them two others, and between each tendon you put a suture and a bandage, a palm's length; and in each tendon you make a hole, or the wrist is corrected, and the tendons are firmly secured. Between two tendons there is one tendon that is turning, so that the limb turns back; and there are two small tendons of a palm's length in two turns, so that the wrist returns. Then you must join the tendon which is between the bones to the wrist towards the chief, and the other tendon towards the pieces towards the other wrist, and you must bind the minister's wrist to the whole limb. The master puts the spine even as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when it is even, if you put on a drying plaster with a lot of eggs, and then press, and then support it with a tablet of three fingers’ length, that will cause the fluid of the swelling to retreat and the part of the vertebra that is painful, and then bind it with a bandage, as we have said; and use the patient of nourishment secretly until he is well; and if nothing comes to an end of his well-being, if you must administer soothing and calming medicines, with the support that we have said above; and never give him a piece of lead, and never does it appear at the back of the shoulder blade, take care that it is not a dislocation; and it is the bone that is open, for we must not presume anything: by chance comes death.
des dislocations de la hainche	dislocations of the hip joint.
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	The joints of the hip and the shoulder only dislocate; it does not happen with other joints; and the hip joint is damaged in three parts: front and back, and top and bottom; the more it is damaged from front to back, and the more it is damaged from top to bottom.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of his dislocation is that when you join the painful limb with the flesh, if it is longer, and opens more the patient’s joints than the sound, and cannot double his knee at the fire; and it is the thigh which is emptied of fat, for this is what brings about the pain in the armpit
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of such an accident is that it is contrary to the preceding ones.</start_of_turn>
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the sign of this is that the limb is well placed in accordance with its completeness; however, do not double the knee excessively, for if you see that it is painful, do not attempt it at once, and retain your urine, and swell the limb, and when he walks, let it pass over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the sign of that one who has behind him, if he cannot expand his knee, cannot double, and is the leg more short than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the thigh is displaced from its socket.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	If this semblance of dislocation persists, if it is an old dislocation and does not spontaneously regress, and there is no remedy; I do not know that there is any other remedy except for presumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in this case where the dislocation is fresh, and there are three ways of dislocation, if you are hasty in returning the joint, and stretching it inwards and outwards, and moving it to the right and left; by chance it will return, and there will be no need for any other remedy.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	If it does not return in this manner, if you must, appear I minister strong, and hold the limb firmly with two hands, or with one that you wish to bind upon the knee; and another minister extends his hand downwards as far as he can, as he holds his hands beside his buttocks; and he grasps it with a loop of thread upon the hip; and another holds the head of the limb; and extend upwards and downwards together until the patient is lifted from the earth at once, and remains suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common in three instances, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is well.</start_of_turn>
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If this does not happen, if you must, provide a cure for its semblance. When the dislocation is complete, if you can, support the patient above his costal cartilage, then place the limb over the root of the hip, and the limb which is beside the groin, then stretch the limb upwards towards the groin and towards the forcele; then take another minister and embrace the great limb of the painful hip, and stretch it forward: if it returns to its place now; and this method of dislocation is less laborious than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	If you do not hold it firmly in this manner as we have said, if you must, bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong thread above the two toes and above the two knees; let the limb be extended two fingers more than the others; then suspend the limb from the top of a pole, or upon the ground two arms long; then command one minister to grasp the heel of the hip bone and let another minister accompany the patient, who graspes the hip bone, for the joint is now restored.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	When the dislocation has been overcome, if the patient lies down, as we have said in the case of gout, grasp the limb firmly above the knee and the foot; then put two cushions, one at the hip and one at the foot, and fix one cushion between the hips of the patient in the form of a triangle; and place moist cloths around, so that it does not bruise the patient, then extend your hands ministers towards him, and I shall put it equal to his hand the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, that is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, put on the table, and press on it as we have said in the previous lesson, and keep the patient lying on the straight side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is before, if you must, stretch out the affected limb as much as possible, as I have said; and put the eyes on the painful part; then press with the other hand, and extend downwards towards the groin.</start_of_turn
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	If the dislocation is loosened, if it does not extend the limb backwards, do not lift it up, but know that it must be as it was before the loosening, as we have said concerning the two finger joints; and either on its face or at the side, and the limb is extended as we have said before, and must be pressed down on the joint at the table; and will be at rest when the patient extends his legs, and they will be even; then join the thighs and put on the bandage, and bind with a band, so that the limb does not move; and rest for three days or four, then take off the bandage and put on the dressing again; and if you see that they are even, if the bandage is as before, leave for three days; then take off the bandage, and leave it alone, until the limb is comfortable
de la dislocation dou genoil	And if it rests for two or three days, then loosen it and place the support there; and if you see that they are even, if strained as before, leave it. For two days; then loosen it and make it move gently until the limb is comfortable.
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The shoulder joint is dislocated in two ways: forward and backward; and do not strain it forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the sign is that you command the patient to bend his limb at the knee, and if he does not feel it at the knee, he will know that it is loosened; and when you make the patient sit upright, and extend his limb if he can, and put your hand on his face, and put your thumb on his toes; then take his knee up to your palms, and draw in between your thumbs, then bend the two costae of the knee; and another attendant extends his thumb, as long as the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he has regained his limb at the knee lightly; and put the dressing on, and make the limb firm at the knee, and bind them together firmly for three days or four, and then take it off. Do not let the patient move until the limb is comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not at its proper place, if an extension is administered strongly, as we said in the treatment of the hernia, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	Until it is healed.
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	Never is the dislocation fully suspected or fully relieved, always exists and often breaks free.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the sign is if the ankle is loosened, and it is suspected at the part where it is loosened: it is brought back if it is slight, and it must be extended slightly by the hands when it is simply limping.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is completely loosened, if you make the patient sit upright, and hold him firmly by the thigh, below the ankle; then take the thumb to your right hand, and then to the left hand twice, and extend it upwards, and hold the limb firmly; do this twice, as we have said, with both hands grasping and pulling the limb; if it returns, that is well; if not, repeat the work, for it will return; and if it cannot return, make the patient lie on his back on the earth, and fix his heel firmly on the earth between his thighs, and spread his blanket around him, so that it does not bleed the patient; then hold the patient’s thigh, and another attendant extends the limb with both hands or with one hand, that it lies on the collar of the limb; then extend the thumbs equally, and hold the limb either inwards between the patient’s thighs to hold the patient when it is extended; then put the eyes equally on the dislocation with both hands, and another attendant holds the limb steady at the shoulder, and the dislocation will return immediately.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	When it comes to the point, if you put on the plaster and bandage above, and the strain is formed, and you tie the limb to the leg, and guard the nerves that are above the ankle behind, so that the bands do not become too tight; then leave it for two or three days, and if the bands slacken with the strain; then remove it at a third or fourth, and tell the patient to wait for three days; and if he goes before this term, it is not certain that he will not damage himself further.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it comes after incision, if you must know, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
des dois	If it comes after incision, if you must know, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the dislocation is not in any great pain of the limb, then you must make the patient sit upright on one leg or on a chair, and place your limb on what is open of these joints, then press your limb firmly until it returns; and when it is even and there is no opening, if you put on the dressing of the limb on a chair for two fingers, then the strain is formed, and leave it for three days, then remove it; and make it rest until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	And when they are even, and nothing is open, if you put on the plant of rue over a table at a quarter past nine, then the swelling forms, and you leave it for two days, and then you take it off; and you rest it until it is healed.
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound comes with a dislocation, and it is seen to be restored, many times it has happened that the patient has died: if you are not bold in your cure, if you do not know the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not merciful and compassionate and timely, do not be ashamed; and begin with calming measures at the outset, and leave the patient in the hands of God, if you do not see hope of health; and when you see hope, if you rejoin the limb in its place, even as the abscesses remain; and when the limb is in its place, if you administer calming measures at the outset, cure the wound, if it is possible, with desiccated sponges; and if with the dislocation there is a fracture, and bones are broken, if the bones are displaced, do as is said in simple illnesses; and keep yourself away from fear, as I have said, for this is harmful to you according to your Creator, and for the preservation of your arm and body.
Amen	Amen.
