The author of this book, when he completed it for you, my children, said: 'This book which is a part of knowledge in the field of medicine, complete in its entirety and having reached its goal in clarity and explanation, I have decided to complete it for you with this section which is a part of practical work.'
Because practical work is perfected in our land and in our time, to the extent that one might study this science and lose its trace. And only a few simple illustrations remained in the early books, which were drawn by hand and written with ink, until their meanings became obscured and their benefits were lost.
So I decided to revive it and elaborate on this section by way of explanation, clarification, and condensation, and to bring illustrations of the tools and all instruments of work, as this is a means of further explanation and a guide to what is needed.
The reason why there is no one in our time who can perfect this work by hand is because the science of medicine is long and it is necessary for its practitioner to first study anatomy, which was described by Galen. Until he becomes familiar with the benefits of the organs, their locations, and their states, and their connections and disconnections, and knows the bones, the nerves, and the muscles, their number, their outlets, the tendons, the sinews, and the positions of their outlets.
As Albucasis said, there are many physicians in name but few in deed, especially in the craft of hand surgery, and we have mentioned this in part from this book.
Because those who are not knowledgeable about what we have mentioned about anatomy are likely to make mistakes that could kill people, as you have often seen among those who claim this science without knowledge or understanding.
And that is why I have seen a ignorant physician who had cut into a boil on a woman's neck, and he damaged some of the blood vessels in her neck until she bled to death between his hands.
And I have also seen another physician who had advanced in the extraction of a boil from a man's leg, and the boil was large and had grown deep, so he extracted it with a piece of catgut. And the man died after three days, and I had been called to extract it, but I saw from the bone of the boil and the state of the patient that I could not do that.
And I have also seen another physician who was a quack and claimed to know the science of medicine.
So he told a young black man who had a fracture near his hip and a cut on his leg to quickly apply the fracture to the cut with bandages and splints, tightly and without leaving any room for breathing.
Then, release him to his desires for a few days and order him not to tattoo until the soles of his feet and his calves are swollen and he is on the verge of death.
Then, call him and quickly remove the tattoo as he gained relief from his pain except that the damage had already settled in the flesh and I could not remove it completely.
The damage continued to spread throughout the body until he died.
I saw another physician who pierced and tattooed a cancerous growth, causing the bone of its owner to rot until it was completely destroyed. This is because if the cancer is made from black ink, it should not be exposed to iron.
Unless it is in a body that may be completely removed.
Therefore, my sons, it is necessary for you to know that work done by hand is divided into two categories: safe work and work that causes damage in most cases.
I have warned in every place of this book about the work that contains deceit and fear, so it is necessary for you to be cautious and refuse it.
So that the ignorant person does not find a way to speak and accuse, take precautions for yourselves with firmness and vigilance, and treat your patients with mercy and certainty.
Use the best and safest path leading to beneficial outcomes and treat dangerous and difficult diseases with care.
Avoid what you fear might cause doubt in your religion and life, as it remains a source of guidance for you and elevates you in this world and the hereafter according to your deeds.
Jalinoos said, "Do not treat bad diseases and call them doctors of evil.
This article has been divided into three sections.
The first section.
In the section on fire and sharp medicines, arranged from the tip to the base of the horn, images of tools and their uses for all that is needed in handwork.
The second section.
In the section on wounds, abscesses, fistulas, hernias, surgeries, and extracting arrows, all arranged and with images of tools.
The third section.
In the section on setting fractures and dislocations, treating sprains, and similar topics, all arranged from the tip to the base of the horn, with images of tools.
The first section.
In the fire.
Before mentioning its use, it is important to mention its benefits and harms, and in what situations it is used.
I say that the discourse on the efficacy and harm of the kyphos (a type of surgical instrument) is a lengthy and precise subject, and it involves a secret known only to a group of wise men.
They differed in it, and a summary of their brief discourse was feared due to its length.
I say that the kyphos is beneficial for all kinds of disorders when used with a substance and without a substance, and it has two types of heat: hot without a substance and cold without a substance.
As for the cold heat with a substance, they differed in it; some said that the kyphos is beneficial in such a disorder, while others said the opposite, that the kyphos does not cure a disease that is of heat and cold nature because the nature of fire is heat and cold.
It is unreasonable to treat a hot and cold disease with a hot and cold drug, and he who says otherwise said that the kyphos with fire can cure a hot and cold disease that occurs in human bodies. Because when you add human body and its moisture to the heat of fire, the human body becomes cold.
And I say that his statement is correct because experience has revealed this to me many times, but one should not imagine such a matter unless he has mastered the art of the kyphos. The excerpt is a section title in the Arabic textbook on surgery by Albucasis. The translation of the section title is: "Considering the variations in people's temperaments and the nature, symptoms, causes, and duration of diseases.
The excerpt is a sentence in the Arabic textbook on surgery by Albucasis. The translation of the sentence is: "However, as for other temperaments, you should not be concerned about them, especially cold and humid diseases, as all physicians agree on their harmfulness and do not differ in their beneficial treatment.
The excerpt is a sentence in the Arabic textbook on surgery by Albucasis. The translation of the sentence is: "And know, my son, that the heat treatment is better than the burning medicine because fire is a pure element that does not exceed its purpose in harming the affected organ and only causes minor damage to other connected organs.
The excerpt is a sentence in the Arabic textbook on surgery by Albucasis. The translation of the sentence is: "However, the burning medicine may exceed its purpose and harm organs beyond the affected one, possibly causing new diseases or even death. Fire, due to its nobility and pure nature, does not do this unless it is used excessively.
The excerpt is a sentence in the Arabic textbook on surgery by Albucasis. The translation of the sentence is: "This has been proven to us through experience and long service, attention to craftsmanship, and standing on the truth of the matter.
I have omitted lengthy explanations, as they do not suit this book of mine. Instead, I will reveal to you in secret a mysterious method and its application to the bodies, and how to expel diseases with philosophical proofs that pierce your understanding.
And know, my son, that they have differed in the time when it is proper for the knife to be used, and they have considered the best time to be in spring.
And I say that the knife may be proper at any time, because the harm that has occurred beforehand is overcome by the benefit that the knife brings. Especially if the knife is for urgent and severe pain that cannot be delayed without fear of worse consequences than the harm that has already occurred.
And do not let it deceive you, my son, that the common people and unqualified physicians believe that the knife that cures a disease that cannot be cured permanently and makes it permanent is harmful.
The matter is not as they believe because the knife is like medicine that changes the temperament and dries up the moistures that are the cause of the pains.
Except that the knife is preferable to medicine, as it quickly achieves its purpose and is more effective and has greater power.
The disease may return at some time, depending on the body's condition and its strength and weakness, as well as any factors in the body that allow the disease to spread, such as neglecting proper nutrition, and so on.
God forbid that the disease in which the knife is used should be a gentle one and affect only a small, dry area. Such as a knife for pain, and so on, it may be that such pain will not return in the least.
As for the common saying that the knife is the last resort of medicine, this is correct, because they believe that no remedy can be effective after the knife has been used, and the matter is otherwise.
The meaning of 'the knife is the last resort of medicine' is that when we have used all the remedies for a disease and they have not been effective, then we use the knife, and from here it becomes clear that the knife is the last resort. Translation: "It is not the common meaning that most people and many ignorant physicians understand.
Translation: "The early ones mentioned that the gold nail is better than the iron nail, and they said that because of the malleability of gold and its preciousness. They said that it does not corrode the nail hole, but this is not necessarily true.
Translation: "For I have tried this and found that it only works in some cases, not all. The gold nail is better and more suitable than iron as they said, unless you heat the nail head in gold fire, then you will not know when to quench it on the tongs to the desired gold color.
Translation: "For it cools quickly and if you add more to it in the heat, it melts in the fire and you may be harmed from that. Therefore, the iron nail became ours, faster and more suitable for work, God willing.
Translation: "I have arranged this chapter on the nail according to its sections from head to toe so that the student can easily find what he wants, God willing.
Translation: "Chapter 1.
Translation: "One nail for the head.
Translation: "This nail will be useful against the humidity and cold on the brain, which are the causes of headaches and frequent colds from the eyes to the ears, and frequent sleep and toothache and neck pain. For every disease that presents due to cold, such as fainting, epilepsy, and lethargy, among others.
This image, if the patient commands it first, should be treated with an easy-to-apply head-clearing medication for three nights or four, depending on the strength, age, and habit of the patient.
Then, command him to shave his head with a razor, then place him between your hands, propped up, with his hands placed on his chest.
Then, place the tip of your finger on the tip of his nose between his eyes where the middle finger ends, and teach him that position with the mudra.
Then, warm the olive oil, as shown in this image.
If the bone is exposed, as much as the size of the head of a pin or a grain of sand, raise your hand and, if not, prepare your hand with an iron needle or another one, if it has cooled. Until you see what was mentioned to you from the bone, then take something from salt and dissolve it in water, drink a cotton ball from it and place it on the position and leave him for three days.
Then, apply a moistened cotton ball with oil on him and leave it on him until the maggots from the fire disappear, then treat him with the four-pronged forceps until he is clean, God willing.
It has been said that the wound, as long as it remains open, benefits from being covered with a poultice.
Some of them mentioned that the skin should be pulled towards the bone and the bandage held until a part of the bone's surface is burned, then it should be removed after that, and what was burned from the bone should be treated.
Others said that one should use a strong pressure on the bone until it affects the bone significantly, causing it to fall out like a small flint or arrowhead, and they claimed that this would expel pus from that place and leave the wound open for a long time.
Then it should be treated until it dissolves, and I do not see this type of bandage except in some people and on the way of deception, and if it is left, it is better and safer, as the head will rot naturally when its natural connection is broken, as we have seen in other body parts.
Especially when the head of the patient is weak by nature and the first type of bandage is suitable and better for him, then use it as you wish, God willing.
Chapter 2.
Treatment of the head also.
If there is a persistent headache in the forehead and it has lasted for a long time, use the iron needles, the cauteries, the cataplasms, the bandages, and the plasters, especially if he has already used the single remedy that we have described. If nothing of this helped him, then examine. If the forehead of the patient is strong in structure and not weak, and he found severe coldness, then use another needle slightly above those. Then use a needle on each corner of the head until the skin softens and the bone fracture that we described is exposed. Then use a needle in the front of his head at the place known as the hammer and lighten your hand in this, do not expose the bone because the forehead has severe pain unlike the pain of all other needles of the head. I will mention this needle in its place.
The needle that is used for the corners of the head and the front should be softer than the needle used in the middle of the head, this is its shape.
Chapter Three.
For the side that is not persistent.
If there is a pain in the side of the head and a headache accompanied by pain that extended to the eye, then the patient should use remedies that clear the head and use all the treatments that we mentioned in the divisions of diseases. If this does not help, then the needle should be used on both sides. Either treat the acute burn with drugs or with iron.
As for treating the burn with drugs, take one clove of garlic and grind it, then cut off its ends from both sides, and make a wide incision in the place of pain between the ribs until it becomes a cavity under the skin where the garlic can be placed.
Then push it under the skin until it disappears, then apply strong pressure for fifteen minutes, and leave it for five or six hours, then remove the garlic and leave the wound for two or three days before bandaging.
Then apply a moistened cotton cloth on the place until it becomes clean, and then treat it with the march as long as possible, may God will. If you prefer, do the same with some of the burning drugs mentioned in the eighteenth article on burning drugs.
As for treating the burn with iron, do as follows:
This type of needle is called 'msammar' because its head resembles a small nail with some teeth in the middle.
Then place it on the place of pain, hold your hand and gently move the iron back and forth, so that the amount burned from the skin is half of it. Raise your hand so as not to burn the artery that comes from below, which would cause bleeding, then dip a cotton swab in salted water and place it on the affected area and leave it for three days. Then, apply the cotton swab with olive oil and treat it with the lancet until it is healed, God willing.
And if you wish, you can tie this wound with a thin silk thread from the suture material and protect it from cutting the artery in this non-permanent wound, especially.
The fourth chapter.
On permanent wounds.
If you have treated the wound with what we mentioned about advanced treatment and what we mentioned in dividing the diseases, but the treatment did not work and you saw that there is no cause for it other than what we mentioned from the first cautery or the second with fire. You should protect the thin silk suture until it whitens after being placed on the painful spot with a line of length half a finger or near it, and you leave your hand once and tighten it until it cuts the artery and reaches the bone.
Unless you should protect yourself from the connection of the jaw that moves when chewing, which would burn the muscle or nerve that moves it and cause spasm.
Be cautious and careful when dealing with the bleeding of the severed artery, as there is danger in its cut end. Especially for those who are unaware of what should be done and have not practiced, it is best to leave the first attempt.
It will be mentioned in the book, if Allah wills, how to deal with the bleeding from the severed artery at its place, as this is not something that should be done.
If you suspect that the person is in a critical condition, perform an incision in the middle of the head as described and treat the wound until it heals, if Allah wills.
If you wish, use the incision mentioned in the chapter on stopping the bleeding from the artery with a sharp instrument, as it is better and more effective than this.
The fifth chapter.
On the treatment of earaches.
If there is pain in the ear due to a cold and it has been treated with the mentioned remedies and other treatments in the chapter on division, but the pain has not gone away, then heat the sharp instrument called the needle point, as its image is shown.
Then insert it around the ear, all of it as it turns, or around both of them if the pain is in both. From the base of the ear, separate a little after learning the position with the probe and the hook is about ten points in each ear or near that, then treat the positions until it is cleaned, God willing.
Chapter Six.
Hook of the forceps.
The hook of the forceps that is used with the curette is only of the type that causes bleeding from the mucus as mentioned in the divisions of diseases.
Avoid the type that causes from wounds and contraction of nerves.
When this type of hook was treated with irrigation, tampons, and traction, and it did not improve your treatment, then the doctor should use three curettes. One at the base of the ear and the second below a little from the forehead and the third at the meeting of the lips.
Make the curette from the opposite side of the sick because relaxation only occurs in the side that appears normal.
The shape of the curette is that it should be curved like a hook under the tip of the ear and another in the forehead and its length should be equal to the length of the eyebrow.
Descend with the curette until you burn half of the skin's thickness, and this is a picture of the scraper and it is a type of scalpel that has its shape except that it is slightly softer than it. It is necessary that the knife has a slight sharpness, then treat the affected area with what was previously mentioned until it is cleansed, God willing.
The Seventh Chapter.
The Treatment of the Persistent Cough.
If the cough persists and has been treated as mentioned earlier, but the treatment did not work and it is not due to a cold, then give him four doses. One dose at the back of his head, one dose in the middle of his head as mentioned earlier, and one dose on the top of his head.
The recipe for the mawk is as mentioned earlier, and it may also be given one dose on the mouth of the stomach, which will be more effective, then treat with what was previously mentioned.
The Eighth Chapter.
The Treatment of Forgetfulness.
The one who is forgetful should first drink the cold, then the large vinegar and the brain-cleansing grains.
Then he should shave his whole head and apply a collodion bandage on the top of his head, as mentioned in the article of the antidote, applying it several times, for it is effective against forgetfulness.
And do the same on the other side of his head, as mentioned earlier, if it is cleansed by that, otherwise give him three doses on the top of his head, which should be made from the highest part of his head to the lowest part of his neck.
Place a finger between each two fingers and then treat the intermediate finger with what has been mentioned before. If you want to increase, and the middle finger is likely for that, then take the middle finger.
If you want to increase, then treat the ends of the fingers and make them clean, and the bandage should be ointment-like as mentioned before.
Chapter Nine.
In the case of a broken arm and relaxation of all the body.
It is recommended to proceed with the cleaning of the head with combs and what has been mentioned before, then shave the head of the patient, then treat the finger in the middle of the head and a finger on each ear and a finger on the forehead.
And four fingers on the neck, if there is a need for relaxation of the body and the patient is likely for that and the disease is severe and persistent, then treat four fingers on the back of his neck. And treat with the finger until the skin burns more and lift your hand then treat it as mentioned before until it is clean, God willing, and the bandage should be ointment-like.
Chapter Ten.
In the case of a fit.
The only way to cure a patient who has been bitten by a snake before the poison reaches the brain is to cleanse his brain first with large enemas and other treatments mentioned in the section on fractures, if the patient is large and there is a possibility of taking medicine.
But if the patient is a child who cannot take medicine, then do not use the gargling and brain-cleansing enemas before that for many days, along with improving his diet.
Then shave his head and apply the poultice in the middle of his head as mentioned before, and another one at the back. And on each corner of his head, a poultice, if the patient is strong and it was possible to apply the poultices mentioned in the section on fractures, and to relax the body on pillows under his neck and back, and the bandage should be made of olive oil on the poultice that was mentioned before.
If the patient is a child, then make the bandage gentle on this shape.
Chapter 10.
In the case of malnourishment.
If the cause of malnourishment is bad food and thick poison, then apply the poultices mentioned in the section on fractures.
If the cause of malnutrition is a leaning towards black bile and the body of the patient is moist, then do not cleanse his brain as previously mentioned in the section on division.
Then cut the head of the patient, then make a firm cake from dough like a circle, then place it in the middle of his head, and the patient is lying down, moving and holding from every direction, then take one pound of old sheep fat.
Then heat it on the fire at a moderate temperature that can bear the finger if inserted, then pour it in the middle of his head in the circle and leave it until it cools, do this for the patient every week once with all other good arrangements until he is cured by God's will.
And if you want to cleanse him a little, many small ones without holding your hand with the catheter but rather being gentle, then this type of clyster moistens the brain gently.
Then carry a moistened cotton cloth on him either in the fat or in the chicken skin.
The twelfth chapter.
On clyster in the eye.
If you notice the beginning of clyster in the eye with the signs mentioned in the section on division, then immediately cleanse the head of the patient and protect him from all moisture and perspire him in the bathroom on the steam for several days.
Then, pass the knife around the back of his head and make a groove in the middle of his head, then make two grooves on his temples if the beginning of the water flowing from his eyes is from both sides or from one side only if it is from one eye.
Then, cut all the veins and arteries under the skin with the knife, and let the grooves in them be long in the width of the temples to prevent bleeding from the blood.
If you see anything from it, cut it at the place with any treatment that is possible to you, and we will proceed with wisdom in stopping the veins and cutting them and preventing bleeding.
And sometimes, there may be grooves under the bones that are clear.
The thirteenth chapter.
On chronic tears.
If the tears of the eye are chronic and constant, and they come from the veins and arteries that are on the outside of the head from outside the head, and it has been confirmed that this is due to coldness, thickening, and phlegm, then make the groove that you described in the beginning of the water flowing from the eyes. A groove in the middle of the head, two grooves on the temples, and two grooves under the bones, and if it is necessary to increase, make a groove with a small knife on each side of the eyelid.
Chapter Fourteen: The Treatment of Wounds and Fractures.
Treatment of the Nose.
If treatment with what we mentioned in the division did not succeed, then apply a poultice of fenugreek for three nights, then shave his head and apply a poultice of mustard to the middle of the nose. Then apply a poultice of mustard to the temples above the eyes, under the hair, and avoid cutting the vein, this is the image of the mustard poultice.
Chapter Fifteen: The Treatment of Fractures in the Lower Limbs.
Treatment of a Fractured Eye Socket.
If the eye socket fracture heals from a disease or moisture, apply a poultice of halal to the fractured area.
And if you wish, apply a poultice to the temples above the eyes, two on each side, and avoid the occipital bones, and the length of each poultice should be equal to the length of the temple.
And do not apply too much pressure with the poultice, but only as much as to burn one third of the skin, and the image of the poultice should be in this manner.
Chapter Sixteen: The Treatment of Fractures in the Upper Limbs.
Treatment of a Fractured Eye Socket.
If the incision turns inward, it enters the eye at two points. Either the incision is with fire or with a burning drug, but if it is with fire, the surgeon should order the patient to leave the incision before that if he is one of those who expel it until it lengthens and becomes even.
If it enters at its root, tie the eyelids with a thread so that they do not move until it grows and becomes even, then place the surgeon's head on your stone, then learn on the edge of the eye with a probe as a sign of the shape of an asp.
The beginning of the sign is near the incision, then place a wet cotton under the eyelid in the whiteness of egg yolk or in the juice of the blue coral, then cover this shape with it.
Then you should repeat the shape a little at many times until the surface of the skin, which is like the shape of an asp's leaf, all of it becomes visible, especially the sign of the health of your work is that you see the eyelid has become red and the hair has risen from the flesh of the eye.
Then raise your hand at that time and leave it for three days, then apply a cotton with oil until the pus is expelled, then treat it with a probe until it is clean, God willing, if any hair remains after some time and the eyelid relaxes.
Prepare the area as before, if the hair is in the lower eyelid, remove it until it returns to its natural position and does not damage the eyelashes. As for the medication, it is to command the patient to leave off rubbing until it lengthens and becomes even.
Then make a paper-like paste from kaolin, take soap and unbleached linen cloth from each one and weigh about a dirham or more, grind them all together well and do this with the millstone lest it dry out. Then spread it on the kaolin paste that you made as a paper-like paste and place it on the eyelid or both, and place under the eye a cotton pad soaked in diluted milk and the patient's head on your stone.
And place your index finger on the medication and press it slightly while you move it as the patient feels the burning of the medication, for he finds relief like fire. As long as he finds relief, leave the medication and move it with your finger. When the relief is over, remove the medication and wash the eye with water.
And look, if you see that the eyelid has risen as it does when rubbed with fire or cut, otherwise, prepare more medication on the place where the medication did not affect and did not work until your work is complete and the eye is soothed, then place cotton with oil on it until the blister of the burn bursts.
Then treat him with the leech of palm or other, until he is purged. It is necessary for you at work that you hold the goal of holding that nothing from the drug falls into the eye, because if the eyelid relaxes after days and you fear hair in the eye, something.
Then prepare the drug at that place where the eyelid relaxed, especially as you did first, then treat him until he is purged, and this is a picture of the asafetida leaf.
And know that the eyes of people differ in size and large, so according to that, let your touch be, and it is not a secret way of the correct one on those who had a path in this craft.
The seventeenth chapter.
In the case of the eyelid that exposes in the corner of the eye.
If you treated the eyelid with what we mentioned in the divisions of diseases, but it did not heal your treatment, then it is necessary that he be squeezed on this property.
Order the servant to put his head on your stone and hold his head a servant between your hands, a grip that does not move and does not break his head.
Then you put a moistened cotton ball in the whiteness of the egg or in the sap of the brazilwood on his eyes, then you cover the eyelid that this is its picture.
It is preferable to make the shape of a cannula from a bird's quill, especially if it is open at one end and closed at the other, like a reed, but this is better for your surgery, God willing.
Then, if the needle is open, extract the matter through it and wipe it off, or if it is not open, make a small incision and remove its pus. Then, at that time, place a strong ligature on it, which is very firm, and hold it with your hand until you reach the bone.
Then move your hand slightly away from the quill towards the eye, to avoid your hand or the instrument damaging the eyelid, so that the ligature does not fall into the eyelid and spoil it. If it reaches the first joint of the bone, do not repeat the ligature, unless necessary.
Leave it for three days, then apply a poultice of oil and linen and treat it with a dry moistened reed until it heals. If it has not healed after forty days, apply a strong caustic medicine until the bone rots and cut it off according to what is mentioned in its chapter, God willing.
Another way of making the needle, as mentioned by some of the early scholars, is to split it at the tip and then place a thin layer of wax in the same groove.
He should pour in it a certain weight of dissolved lead, grasp the eyelid firmly with the forceps, and hold it steadily without moving the upper lid lest the dissolved lead leak out of the eye and spill into it. It is advisable to place a piece of cotton soaked in milk or water on the upper lid.
If the lead burns the position of the nasal probe and cleans it miraculously, then if the nasal probe is cleaned as mentioned with the ky and treatment, otherwise there is no choice but to use a nose piercing and return the nasal probe to the nostril as it was in its specific position.
Chapter Eighteen.
In splitting the lip.
Frequently, a split in the lip is called a "shura" and especially in the lips of young men, it frequently occurs. If this split is treated as mentioned in the division, but the treatment does not work, then apply a small, thin piece of linen cloth on this shape.
Its edge should be on the smoothness of the knife, then it is placed bandage-like with the forceps in the same split until the cloth reaches the depth of the split, then treat it with the curette until it is cleaned, God willing.
Chapter Eleven:
In the case of a broken jaw in the mouth.
If it appears at the root of the tooth or in the gum or at the roots of the teeth and becomes inflamed, then suppurated and erupted as a broken jaw, then treated but did not heal, one should cover the wound with a bandage as much as possible.
Then, insert a probe into the broken jaw and hold your hand until the iron is safely inserted into its front and back, then do this repeatedly, then treat it afterwards with the treatment mentioned earlier until it heals, God willing.
If the material has disappeared and healed, otherwise, it is necessary to examine the place and remove the rotten bone according to what will come in its chapter, God willing.
Chapter Twenty:
In the case of loose teeth and relaxed gums.
If the tooth has relaxed before becoming wet and the gums have moved and treated with medicine but did not heal, place the head of the needle in your stone then apply the bandage in its shape after this, after placing the tube on the root.
Then, insert the bandage with a spoon and hold your hand slightly until the needle feels the heat of the fire has reached the root of the root, then raise your hand and repeat the bandage according to what you want, then fill his mouth with salty water.
He grasps the hourglass and squeezes it; if the movable impact is firm, and the relaxed lip hardens and dries out the rotten moisture.
Chapter Twenty-Two.
In the case of toothache.
If the toothache occurred before a cold or had pus and did not respond to medication, then there are two options for treatment: either with smen (clarified butter) or with fire.
The treatment with smen is to take pure cow butter and melt it in an iron vessel or a copper vessel, then take cotton and wrap it around the toothache, dip it in the melted butter, and apply it to the affected tooth. Hold it until it cools.
Then repeat it several times until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the toothache. If you wish, dip cloth or cotton in cold butter and apply it to the affected tooth, then cover it with an iron plate until the heat of the fire reaches the bottom of the tooth.
The treatment with fire is to approach a brass or iron pipe and place some of its contents in it so that the heat of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient, then hold the cloth in the shape of a bag and apply it to the same tooth and hold your hand until the cloth cools. Do this repeatedly.
The pain may disappear either on the same day or on another day, and it is advisable after that to fill the wound with good quality fat and let it rest for an hour before applying it, and this is the method of treatment.
Apply it in any way you like and according to what is possible, and this is the method of treatment for the catheter.
Chapter 20.
In pigs.
If the pigs are not coughing and have no cold humors and do not respond to medication for ripening, and you want to ripen them quickly, then apply the dry bandage that is this method of treatment.
Place it on the other side of the wound to allow smoke to escape, and apply it again on the same tumor after an hour if necessary until it reaches the depth of the tumor. If the tumor is small, place the bandage on the level of the tumor.
Then leave it for three days and apply a moistened cotton on it until the burnt part by fire is gone, then treat it with the mercurous chloride and the fetid lotion until it is clean, God willing.
Chapter 30.
In the case of hoarseness and shortness of breath.
If moisture overpowers the lung crepitus, especially if it occurs with cold temperatures, it is appropriate for the patient to first be sweated with mild medications, then a vinegar-soaked cloth should be placed on the neck at the point of the throat near the collarbone in a low position.
Be careful that the vinegar-soaked cloth does not reach the throat and does not burn the skin, only half of it, then place another cloth at the neck joint in the last fold of the neck, and the application should be oily on the side that was mentioned first.
Then treat him with what was mentioned earlier until he is cured, God willing.
Chapter Twenty-Four.
In the disease of the lungs and coughing.
If the cough and lung disease are due to cold moisture and the patient is not feverish or weak, and the disease is chronic, then place two vinegar-soaked cloths above the sternum in low, flat positions between the breasts.
And the application should be oily on the side that was mentioned earlier, and if you wish, it can be a vinegar-soaked cloth called "point" and its image was mentioned in treating ear pain, and the point is from thirty to forty points.
Then treat him with what was mentioned earlier until he is purified. A three-pronged probe can be made from this image, and it is used to expel the cataract in one go, as you can make three probes in one go with it. This is the image of the probe.
The twentieth chapter.
In the needle of the cataract.
If the head of the muscle is broken due to moisture or has not been properly secured before it breaks, it usually reattaches when exposed to movement as we have seen. It is recommended to first reattach the jaw. Then the patient lies on his back or on the correct side, then the skin inside the needle is lifted up with your left hand's fingers if the joint has broken inside.
Then cover the probe with two pieces of cloth, this is its image.
Then use it to push the skin until it comes out on the other side, forming a shape of four probes, and it can be made with a three-pronged probe, forming a shape of six probes, and the prongs are on the surface of the eyeball.
This is the image of the three-pronged probe.
One can add one more to this number, making it eight, then carry the knife with the sharpened round blade mixed with salt, then apply the ointment of the Dua'a and do not move the organ for a time until it heals, although rarely does that happen.
If one places a needle or multiple needles of good quality above the meniscus, it will strengthen the joint and remove moisture and cleanse the ointment.
The sixteenth chapter.
In the stomach.
If there is a lot of cold and moisture in the stomach, to the extent that it exits its normal state and there are many vomiting spells and treatment has not helped, it is recommended that the patient lie on his back and extend his legs and arms, then wrap three needles around him. A needle under the breastbone with the length of a finger, with a sharp pointed needle, and two needles below each side of the single needle until they form a triangle shape and space them apart so that if they are sharpened, they do not touch each other. The depth of the knife should be one-third of the thickness of the skin and the shape of the needles should be like this.
On this picture and on this vessel without further.
And if you wish, one large kidney in the middle of the abdomen on this picture.
And the ureter that arises from this single kidney is in the shape of a circle on this picture.
And the abdomen may be lacerated from this single kidney and that is to learn on the vessel where you want to drain it, then ligate it with a point-ligature, then treat it with the treatment until it heals.
Chapter 27.
In the cold kidney.
If there is pain from the kidney due to cold and moisture or from a slimy wind until it exited its natural condition with excessive exit and the physician treated it as mentioned in the section, it did not help. Then the physician should lie down on his back and learn to drain three kidneys at this shape and this amount is exactly on the kidney below the ribs where the man's tail ends.
And after each kidney and kidney, it is at the thickness of a finger and the kidney is straight along the body and do not tie your hand with the ligature too much.
Let the extent of the burn on the skin be equal to half of it, no more. And if he is standing on his feet, if he is not standing, then he will be lying down with his legs spread and his arms raised, this is the position of the patient.
It is possible to use the sharp needles of the lancet if you have skill and experience in the craft, but do not pierce deeply into the wound so as not to burn the entire skin, the abdomen, and reach the intestines, for the skin there is thin, so be aware of it.
Chapter Eighteen.
In the treatment of liver tumors with needles.
If a protrusion appears in the liver and you want to know if it is that tumor in flesh or in its substance, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, then the patient will feel heavy and pain without inflammation.
And if it is in the substance of the liver, then there will be severe inflammation and pain, and you see that doctors have treated him, then it is necessary for the patient to lie on his back then learn the position of the tumor with the lancet.
Then heat the needle in the fire, this is the needle that resembles a quill, and this is its image. The dressing is applied with one bandage until the skin is burned entirely and the bandage reaches the sound part until all the pus comes out, then it is treated with the treatment of wounds until it becomes clean.
This type of bandage should not be used except by one who has studied medicine and has practiced this procedure many times, when he is able to perform such work and leave it to me.
Chapter 20.
In the bandage of the shaving.
Mentioned the first bandage of the shaving cold on this condition, that it should take from the dry long Zarand origin one as long as you find from it and it should be like the thickness of the finger then it is immersed in oil and heated in fire. Then one bandage is applied between the connection of the neck and two small bandages without the pad slightly inclined towards the side under the armpit and two large bandages above the chest in the space between the third and fourth rib.
And two bandages also between the fifth and sixth inclined slightly backwards and one bandage in the middle of the chest and one above the stomach and three bandages from behind one between the shoulders and two on each side of the hard below the bandage that is between the hands.
It is not appropriate to delve deep into the skin with a knife, but rather it should be on the surface of the skin as a probe. Some of the pioneers mentioned that some people used an iron file-like instrument almost like a needle, and they would insert it between the tendons until it reaches the same tumor.
The probe is removed as we mentioned in the liver tumor, and in this case, using a knife is one of the greatest harms, either it kills the patient immediately or exposes him to a disability that has no cure.
The third chapter.
In the abdominal cavity.
If you treated the abdominal disease as we mentioned in the treatment of the division, but it did not heal, then the knife has three correct uses, one of which is to cut three probes or four thin ones along the length of the abdomen.
In the shape of liver probes that have a form and there is between each probe and probe a thickness of a finger or more, but less than that, and the property of the knife is the same as we mentioned in the probe of the liver, neither should you delve deep with the knife, and the image of the patient is lying on his back.
The other face is in the incision and raise the skin that faces the abdomen where the incision of the patient ends, and raise the skin that faces the abdomen where the incision of the patient ends, and raise the skin on the surface of the body so that the probes are along the length of the body.
Then, the incisions are made on the breasts, protected heavily from the other side until the skin is pierced from the other side. Then, the probe is removed and four fistulas remain, and if you wish, you can make four more fistulas with the other probe having three sharp points.
Then, the position of the fistula is left to drain for a long time until it heals completely, as it is the best among all the treatments given.
Chapter 23.
In the fistula of suppuration.
The fistula is only beneficial in the suppuration of the abscess, especially if the patient with the abscess was treated with the treatments mentioned in the division, and if your treatment did not work, it is recommended to make four fistulas around the wound and one fistula on the stomach.
And another fistula on the liver, a fistula on the spleen, two fistulas behind his back between the ribs, one facing the chest and another facing the stomach, and the depth of the fistula should be close to the thickness of the skin, then leave the fistula open for a long time until it drains.
And do not neglect the patient after the fistula with what is appropriate to gather for him the necessary tools, so that he can quickly get rid of it, and the shape of the probe that is used for the back is a spiral as shown in its image, and the probe that is used for the back is a bristle.
The Second and Thirty-Second Chapter
On the Treatment of the Feet and Legs
If there is a swelling and it is filled with yellow water, it is appropriate to apply heat on the back of the foot in the area between the ankle and the bone.
And place your hand on the area with the palm and do not press too hard, then lift your hand and do not repeat the action immediately, as it will squeeze out the yellow water and the palm should be in this shape.
Then apply heat to both legs, two applications on each leg and the pad should be at the outer side of the palm and one pad under the ankle and another pad below it towards the middle of the leg and two pads on each thigh.
Leave the pad open for a long time without treatment to let the water drain out then treat it with all the methods mentioned earlier.
The Third and Thirty-Third Chapter
On the Treatment of Diarrhea
If the diarrhea is due to cold and moisture until the muscles in the stomach and intestines weaken, and it has been treated with doses of treatment but did not improve and you see that the patient is likely to have a stroke and the strength is strong, then apply a large pad on his stomach. Upon what was previously mentioned about the stomach and its application with a circular bandage and four fingers around the wound, he should rub it with a fine silk needle and apply a bandage on the cotton above the large incision or two bandages.
If you see that the discharges are abundant and the fever is likely, then apply a bandage on the painful area and a bandage on each incision, and maybe add two small bandages on the stomach near the large one, for this treatment is successful and does not fail if God wills.
The fourth chapter and thirty-fourth.
In the bandaging of the fractured limbs.
If there are many persistent fractures or one fracture that is mixed with thick, cold blood or bad discharges and was treated as mentioned in the division, but the treatment did not succeed, then apply three bandages on the lower back under the blanket slightly like a triangle.
And apply a bandage under the wound with two fingers, and if it was found that his stomach has cooled and his food does not digest well and his face is pale, then apply a large bandage on the stomach as mentioned before and a bandage on his liver. And another on the kidney with a spindle-shaped bone, leaving the hole open for some time and then treat it until it heals, God willing.
Chapter 53.
In the kidneys of the thallium.
After cutting it, if the thallium is cut, burn the spindle-shaped bone and introduce it into the same cut thallium and push your finger until the bone reaches the opening of the blood vessel from which the blood flows, do this once or twice.
If the thallium is many, cut each one into a kidney as described and then treat them with what matches it from the mallets until they heal, and if the kidney is also large on the cotton, it was more beneficial.
Chapter 63.
In the kidney of the Nasor, which is in the hollow and its surroundings.
If the urine does not flow to the bladder and the work we described in its place, it is likely that he was cured of the kidney, but if a Nasor happened to him and it was delayed, then the foul humors were drawn from it, first you should measure it with a fine spindle.
Then, recognize the size of the wound by the probe. Then, apply a bandage that resembles a belt to it. Then, insert it into a heated frying pan on the stability of the wound and the size of the probe that entered it. Prepare it on it until all those corrupt bodies are burned once or twice or three times according to your need.
Then, preserve the nerve if there is one or a large amount of blood and if the wound is leading to the organ of the penis or the organ of the bladder.
Then, preserve all these positions, but only do this if the wound is in a position of flesh and you have determined that it is not accessible, then treat the position until it is clean, if the position is covered and the materials are removed and remained like that for a time, then know that it has been cleaned completely.
And if the materials are not removed from it, then know that it is accessible or in a position of damaged bone or similar to what is mentioned in its position.
The seventh chapter and thirty-second section.
In the kidney case.
If there is a pain in the kidney due to cold or heavy wind and lack of it, then it is recommended to apply two bandages on both kidneys with a belt-like bandage that was mentioned and possibly a third one in the same dish, so three prepared bandages will be more beneficial.
Chapter Eight and Thirty-One.
In the treatment of epistaxis (nosebleed).
If there is a nosebleed, reduce and relax the body due to cold and humidity until the patient does not hold back urine. Then, apply three fingers on the lower part of the nasal septum where the nostril hair begins, one on the right side of the septum and another on the left side.
After applying the fingers on both sides, they should be at the level of the eyebrows and press the fingers firmly on the lower back or two fingers if necessary, with a finger-like pressure.
Chapter Eight and Thirty-Two.
In the treatment of vaginal bleeding.
If there is vaginal bleeding due to cold and humidity, avoid the uterus and do not massage it, as it may cause difficulty in delivery or pain upon its arrival. It is recommended to apply three fingers around the vagina as mentioned in the treatment of epistaxis. And apply a finger on the cotton below the back or two fingers, with a finger-like pressure.
Chapter Forty.
In the treatment of circumcision.
If there is moisture on the foreskin, it may cause the foreskin to come out of its position and a sign of this is that one leg is longer than the other if some of it is stuck to the other. If there is a gap in that place, it is recommended to apply a finger-like pressure on the foreskin itself in a nearly circular shape.
After learning the method of drawing the circle, so that the center coincides with the middle of the circle and the compass presents its image in the middle of the board, if you do not have this compass, use three large brass compasses.
Make the compass deep enough to match the thickness of the skin, then treat it until it is clean, God willing.
The twenty-ninth chapter.
In the compass of women's blood.
If pain occurs in the waist due to cold and moisture, and the treatment mentioned in the section on incision did not work, then it is recommended to apply a thick grease made from honey or vinegar and similar substances.
Then, apply and face the compass with two strikes, either by burning medicine or by fire, and if the compass is by fire, it should be on many faces, one of which is to apply three triangular compasses on this image.
It should have a suitable depth and after each compass, the distance between them should be equal to the thickness of a finger, and the compass should be brass, and one compass in the middle on the waist itself should be four compasses, and if you wish, use the circle mentioned in the section on removing the umbilicus.
If the circle encircles all the perineum and burns the entire groove, this is the sign of the kiyy in women's disease if the pain is specific to the perineum itself and does not extend to the buttocks and thighs.
If it extends to the buttocks and thighs, then it is two kiyys on the buttock at the place where the pain radiates from you, and a kiyy above the pubic bone by four fingers towards the abdominal side slightly, and the skin is smooth, and the depth of the kiyy is only as deep as the groove of the skin.
If it indicates that the pain extends to the fingers of the foot, then there is a point where the pain radiates from you, and it is indicated by three or four or more points as needed, and if it indicates the pain under the ankle towards the thigh, then there is a smooth kiyy there.
And it is recommended to avoid touching the kiyy with the kiyy until it burns a nerve or large vessel, as this will cause great harm to the patient.
I have seen one and two people who had kiyys above the pubic bone and in the kiyy, which caused the thigh to rot until it reached the ankle, and the whole leg rotted, then died of diarrhea and death after that. If the pain is in both sides simultaneously, their kiyys are on this feature.
Certain wise men have mentioned the properties of the wark (a type of surgical instrument) as follows: it is made from iron, its thickness is half a finger width, and its opening is slightly thicker than the hard core of dates or slightly less. Inside this wark, there are two more warks.
After every two warks, there is a space equal to the width of the little finger, and the warks are open from both ends, with their height being approximately one or two little fingers. A handle made of iron, which has been well-shaped for the warks, is attached to them, and this is its shape.
Then, it is heated in the fire until it turns red and the dirt is removed from it. Then, it is placed on the wark and the injured part is placed correctly on the side that is facing up. Three knots are tied in one motion, and then it is left for three days, soaked in fat, and the wound is left open for several days.
Then, it is treated with the marc (a type of dressing) until it becomes free, as said by the one who wrote this book: this type of wark is rarely used due to its harshness and appearance, and because it is not commonly found among those who can bear it at the place where it is needed.
The preparation of the burning medicine involves making two bell-shaped cups from brass or iron, into which a small amount of powdered alabaster is placed.
The height of the cups should be about two fingers or slightly more, and the space between them should be the thickness of a thumb. Both cups should have an open bottom and an open top, with one cup placed inside the other as shown in this image.
Then, place the cups on the affected area, with the patient lying on their correct side and your hand holding the cup correctly. Pour hot water between the two circles until it is almost boiling, and hold it for a short while. The patient will feel intense heat, similar to fire.
Then, remove your hand using the tool and wipe the hot water from the entire affected area with cool water. Leave it for three days, applying oil to help the burn heal, and then leave it for additional days until the discharge stops, as this indicates that the wound is healing well.
Then, treat the affected area with the marshamallow until it is fully healed. If the pain extends to the buttocks or leg, make a cup similar to the one used for the back, depending on how much water is held as before. This is the property of hot water, which has been proven in an article on the restoration of medicines.
Take from the salt of the eye and from the sweat that has not been wiped off from each one a part, mix them together and place them in a new pot with a small hole at the bottom to allow the liquid to drain out. Place another pot underneath to collect the mixture.
Then pour the sweet water over the salt and sweat until it covers them by one finger's breadth after mixing them well with your hands, leaving the pot to allow the sharp water to drain out at the bottom of the straining pot. Then collect all the water and pour it over another jar of sweat and another jar of salt, repeating the process again.
Then, when it is done, the strength of the solution will be very sharp and will be used in many medical procedures and for all body parts because it acts like fire on its own, and among the remedies are those that soften the gums such as thyme, honey from balm, and sweat with soap, all boiled.
It is said that Gallinus told a story about an old man who treated gum pain and female discharge, and he highly praised his method, claiming that it did not need any other treatment and that it could cure in one application.
Until sometimes the bathman might bring a person carried and he comes out from him purified, and it is that he takes from the green leeches if there is no green then he takes the dry recent one, and he makes its sharpness with something of pitch and he puts on the back where the pain is or in the leg or in the buttock.
And he is tied and left for three hours or as much as the patient feels the pain of the burn has subsided, then he is brought into the bath, if his body calls out, then he is brought into the bath, and the pain goes away and he is purified by the will of Allah, if he is not purified then he prepares the plaster again after ten days another time.
And he is purified if Allah wills, and know that it is not appropriate to use any of these drugs except after the body has rested, and Deascuridus mentioned that if a donkey is castrated with the testicles of a woman it benefits.
And the plaster is of this nature, it takes fur and he drinks it in old oil and he puts on the deep place that is between the thumb from the hand and the little finger and it is to the little finger closest then take a dry donkey fur.
Then heat it with fire until it becomes a boil then put it on the fur and leave it until it disappears then take another one and do not stop doing this until the feeling reaches the middle of the back and the pain goes away by the will of Allah and this beating of the plaster is called the plaster of donkey.
**Chapter 2 and 40.**
**Back pain.**
**Back pain may occur due to various reasons, such as a fall or blow, excessive strain, and so on. It is often caused by the accumulation of cold, wet matter, which is unique to this type alone.**
**If it is caused by the accumulation of cold, wet matter, after strain, the patient should lie on his back, where the pain is, on a table of the same size as the bed, with three rows of five or more cloths, depending on the likelihood and strength of the patient.**
**The cloth should be made of cotton, and if you wish, three or four cloths of muslin should be used.**
**Chapter 3 and 49.**
**Starting the incision.**
**This disease often affects small children, and the sign of its onset in a child is shortness of breath when standing or moving, and finding red spots at the end of their back, which are raised and tend to spread over the rest of the spots.**
**If you see this and wish to prevent it, apply a circular cloth of this size.** Take the catgut on all sides of the wound with equality and if you wish, make it around the wound by a needle point or points two or three, and let the points be close to each other then treat the position until it becomes clean as mentioned.
And be careful not to use the catgut in the wound that is from the compression of the nerve,
Chapter 40.
In catgut and dislocations of the joints.
If the dislocations of the joints are due to cold moisture that is attached to any part of the body, and if the dislocations occur in both legs, then it is the custom of the doctors to call this gout especially.
If the cold gout is treated by the treatment methods we mentioned in the division and if the dislocations do not go away, then the catgut is used to remove them, and it is done by wrapping around both knees many catguts and the needle is olive oil medium on this pattern.
And if it is necessary to remove from the face of the leg, then do with the needle point, and if the dislocations rise to the ankles or to other joints and often shows that, then use three or four catguts on each foot from every side with this olive oil needle.
If you need more than this, take it, but do not extend your hand too far with the knife, rather let it be near the edge of the skin, for if the afflictions have reached the back or the chest, use what we mentioned in the chapter regarding the knife.
If the afflictions are only in the hands, then puncture around the wrists as they naturally curve, but if the afflictions remain in the fingers, then puncture each finger at every joint and on the palm of the hand. If the afflictions have reached the elbows or knees after several days.
Puncture them from all sides and do not neglect the good management and taking of medications, for if he improves his diet and clears his phlegm, then this knife may be removed by God's will.
The fifth chapter.
In the knife of Futoq.
If a Futoq knife appears in the arm and some of the fascia and thighbone descend to the perineum, and this is recent, then it is appropriate to order the patient to refrain from eating his meal for that day and to use enemas to remove feces from his anus.
Then he should lie on his back between your hands and order him to hold himself until the thighbone or fascia emerges, then remove it with your finger. Then teach him how to press under the knife on the bone of the thigh, a sign resembling half a circle at its top towards the upper body.
Then, protect this wound with its shape.
Until white vinegar is thrown to remove the pus, then the wool or cotton is inserted into its wound, then a servant places his hand on the spot to prevent the wool or cotton from protruding, and it has been placed between the legs of the patient and a mattress underneath, and another servant ties it to his legs.
And another servant holds his hands, then the bandage is lowered to the same spot and he wipes it with the bandage, standing upright and holding it until it reaches the bone or is applied again if it does not reach the bone in the first attempt.
And you should guard against the wool or cotton protruding at that moment, for if it does, it may cause death or great harm to the patient, and know that if you do not reach the bone with the wiping, your work will not succeed, and the bandage for children should be delicate according to their sizes, and for adults according to their sizes.
Then, treat the wound with honey for three days until the blackishness of the fire disappears, then treat it with all the ointments until it is clean, and let the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound heals.
It is necessary to make his food during the treatment period easy on his stomach so as not to cause the intestines to become inflamed during defecation and urination. Then, if he wishes to stand after forty days, use a tight bandage for forty more days and hold it for that long to reduce the fatigue and fullness from food and drink and loud crying.
If this treatment is used in this way, he will be completely free from the disease, God willing, and I will mention the treatment of a fistula in its place, God willing. However, if it is a fistula that occurs in other parts of the abdomen and is new, if you wish to prevent it from increasing, apply a lubricated catheter on its size. If one-third of the skin is burned, then treat him with what we mentioned earlier, it will not increase, God willing. Some pioneers mentioned that the fistula should be plugged with a third of a tallow cake in this shape.
After learning how to plug the fistula with the catheter, draw the line that is in the upper side of the fistula and the other line downwards, and let your hand go into the middle with a single, sharp needle. The first catheter is easier and better, God willing.
Chapter 64: Treatment of Wounds and Ulcers
In the treatment of wounds and ulcers
If a fracture or injury occurs in certain body parts, causing severe pain that lasts for a long time and does not respond to medication, it is recommended to apply a poultice at the affected point, according to the size, smallness, weakness, or strength of each body part.
If the pain and swelling subside, if he is free from the first symptom, otherwise repeat the treatment, as it is common for these injuries to spread from one part to another nearby, so it is recommended to follow with the treatment until the affected area is completely healed.
Chapter 74:
In the treatment of burns
Those with burns greatly benefit from poultices, especially the type of burn that is caused by hot liquids and black smoke.
If you wish to apply a poultice, if the burn is mild and treated as mentioned in the division, and it did not become infected and did not worsen, it is recommended to apply five poultices on the head. The first poultice is applied in the middle of the forehead, the second one is applied below it, near the hairline at the end of the hair, two poultices are applied on the ears, and one poultice is applied behind on the back of the neck, gently rub your hand with the poultice until it has a slight effect on the bone.
Translation: "It is also necessary to remove the ribs from it to facilitate the passage of thick steam through it and to close the cavity on the same principle as previously mentioned. However, if the jaundice has persisted for a long time and shown a clear sign, then it is advisable to close these skull cavities that we have mentioned earlier. Translation: "And a cavity on the tip of the nose, two cavities on the cheeks, two cavities on the hollows of the neck, six cavities on the back, one large cavity at the base of the penis and another above it in the same plate, and two cavities on each shoulder. Translation: "And two cavities on each knee, one on each knee, two on the elbows, two on the ribs, and a cavity on every joint of his fingers and toes.
Translation: "And guard from the nerve that is on the tip of the knees, lest they burn them. And a cavity may be closed on the thigh bone and another on the mouth of the stomach and another on the liver. Know that every time you add a cavity, it becomes more beneficial and effective.
Know that the invalid does not feel pain in the same way as the healthy person because his body is paralyzed, and the massage should be according to the size of the limbs and joints, as previously mentioned regarding the properties of the instruments.
Then, he treated the invalid with great care using the cataplasm and other treatments until he was cured, God willing.
Chapter 84.
If a limb has been paralyzed and treated with medicines, bandages, and poultices but did not recover, then the same limb should be massaged according to its size or smallness, and it should be slightly heated on the skin.
Then, he should be treated with the electricity until he recovers, and for some paralyses that are exposed to the hand and leg in the hollow of the back at the exit of the nerve that moves that limb, the paralysis goes away.
And he should not do that unless he is knowledgeable about the anatomy of the limbs and the exits of the nerves that move the body.
Chapter 94.
If a limb is stiff, then
If the cataplasm has become hard and no remedy from the medicine has worked on it, then massage it with a little depth on the level of the skin until the whiteness goes away and its color changes.
Then, he treats it with precise incision using the edge of a roseleaf, the tongue of a pig, and the blood of a hamster or a rat, from each part separately. He mixes all of them together and applies it to the wound. He secures the position until it heals.
Chapter Fifty.
On Cancer.
If the cancer is in its early stages and you want to stop its growth, apply a compress made of a circle around it, as it grows. Some scholars suggest applying a strong medicine in its center, but I do not agree with this method because I have seen that it often causes irritation.
The correct method is to apply a compress around it as we mentioned, or with many layers of bandages.
Chapter Fifty-Two.
On Tumors.
If a tumor has developed and its maturation has slowed down, it could be due to the lack of the cause that produced it, or due to old age if the person is elderly with little blood, or due to time if you want to accelerate the maturation of the tumor, then apply many thin layers of bandages around it.
Then, leave it alone as it will mature faster. If you want to soften it, apply a poultice made of the following ingredients:
Then lower it into the middle of the abscess until it pierces the skin, and let the probe be made of what follows below to facilitate the flow of pus, then treat it with what is appropriate until it is clean.
Chapter 2 and 50.
In the eating ulcer.
The eating ulcer is nothing but a rot in the body that consumes it like fire consumes dry wood. If you see an eating ulcer in a place where it could be treated with fire, then apply many small and large charred borer needles according to what is appropriate for that place where the eating ulcer is.
Then remove it from all sides until the rot is completely removed and nothing remains of it, then leave it for three days and apply the finely powdered sulfur mixed with oil to all the affected areas until all the pus is removed and all the rot.
Then treat it with the healthy balsams for the flesh, as if after three days you see that the flesh is growing a healthy plant with no rot in it, then apply the probe to what remains of the affected areas. The eating ulcer has been treated with strong medication.
For it is quicker to use fire, and you have mentioned treating it with strong medication in the section on treatment, so take it from there when necessary.
Chapter 35: Treatment of Hernia
In the treatment of hernias, both protruded and non-protruded.
Often, this malady occurs below the feet, a hard lump that causes the leg to swell, and the hernia in it has two forms: either the hernia with fire or the hernia with harsh water.
As for the hernia with fire, it is to apply a soft, feather-like iron plate around the opening of the hernia from all sides, and then place a heat source on the hernia, followed by using your hand to massage the iron plate around the hernia until the iron plate reaches the depth of the hernia.
Then, leave it for three days, apply a poultice of barley flour mixed with salt, and place a cloth on it at night. If the hernia is not protruded, treat the wound site with a plaster made from frankincense until it heals.
Often, this malady occurs on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, it is recommended to take a brass or iron or feather tube and place it on the hernia or ulcer, then pour harsh water into the tube in moderate amounts.
Hold your hand firmly and gently stroke it with the tip of your finger to feel the groove of the cannula at the base of the tooth, then find the sharp water path to the base of the tooth and endure the pain for a short while.
Then leave it, as the tooth will come out by its roots. Do this one at a time until you reach all that remains of it in the body, then treat its places after it has come out with what grows flesh from the wounds.
Chapter 45.
In the nasal cavity.
If it happens to one of the nostrils due to cold or burning or other reasons, it is appropriate to apply four or five cloths on the bridge of the nose between each bridge, and one in the chest. And on his stomach, a cloth with olive oil, as the nostril calms and speeds up the healing of the cold disease.
Chapter 55.
In the broken bone in the body.
It may push into the body with a foul, thick, spoiled, cold material. First, its appearance should be covered with a soft cloth on each broken bone.
The Damascenes perfected this property in the early stages of its development, so that increasing and dissipating the beneficial effect of it does not release the recipient from obligation unless it is done after the recipient has fasted.
Chapter 65.
In the case of severe hemorrhage that occurs when a vessel is cut.
Frequently, bleeding occurs from a cut vessel when it is exposed from the outside or when a tumor or other body part is cut open and so on, which makes it difficult to cut.
If any of the above happens, quickly place your finger on the wound of the vessel and press it firmly until the blood is contained under your finger and nothing comes out from it. Then place a small and large number of cotton pads soaked in olive oil on it and blow gently on them until they become very hot.
Then take one, either small or large, depending on the wound and the position where the vessel was cut, and lower it onto the same area after removing your finger quickly and holding the cotton until the bleeding stops.
If the blood gushes out when you remove your finger from the wound of the vessel and blows away the cotton, quickly take another cotton pad from the hot cotton pads prepared in the fire and continue doing so one after the other until the bleeding stops.
The nerve should not be burned, as it will cause another complication, and know that if the vessel bleeds from it, it cannot be cut off, especially if the vessel is large, except by one of four ways: either by the knife as we mentioned, or by breaking it if it has not already broken. If it breaks, its ends will shrink and the blood will stop, or it may be stitched together tightly with sutures, or medicines that stop bleeding and constrict the vessel may be applied firmly.
If someone tries to cut it with a needle or sutures, or applies burnt substances and the like, it will not stop bleeding, except in extreme cases. If one of these things is present and there is no doctor or medicine, he should apply pressure to the wound with his own finger as we described.
He should press it firmly until the blood is stopped and flows out from above the wound and on the vessel and nerve, do not remove it with cold water always until the blood freezes and thickens and stops flowing, and during this time look for what medicine or knife he needs.
2nd Section: On the Treatment of Wounds
In fractures, dislocations, amputations, and other surgical procedures.
He mentioned in the first section all diseases that can be treated by cauterization with fire and the drug, its indications, causes, instruments, and images of the cauterizing iron, making it a chapter from the beginning to the end.
And I follow this path in this section to make it easier for the student to find what he needs.
Before I begin, you should know that this section contains many things not mentioned in the first section of the first book on fractures.
Therefore, the warning should be stronger because many things are done in this section that can lead to excessive bleeding, which is life-threatening when opening a wound, cutting into a tumor, dislocating a joint, treating a surgical wound, removing a sword or arrow, and other similar procedures that accompany all of them with danger and death.
And I advise you to avoid what is doubtful, as there are certain types of people in this profession who have different names and characteristics. Some have been so overwhelmed by their illness that they have died.
For the severity of his pain and the length of his illness, and from the disease itself, what indicates death, among them are those who spend their wealth on you and enrich you with it in hope of health, but their disease is chronic, so it is not appropriate for you to help those who come to you from among them whose nature is such.
And let your caution be greater than your desire and haste, and do not rush into anything of that until you have certain knowledge that it is appropriate for your patient according to the ultimate outcome, and use all the treatments for your patients with the advancement of knowledge and warning of what leads to safety.
For in that, you have help in acquiring praise, honor, mention, and thanks, may Allah guide you, O my son, and protect you from wrongdoing and misguidance, for that is in His hand, there is no god but Him.
This chapter has been arranged in sections according to what was mentioned in the previous book regarding the foot from the toe to the heel, so that you may be relieved of the matter you desire from it, if Allah wills.
The first section.
In the treatment of water that collects in the heads of children.
This disease is often seen in children at birth if the midwife presses the head of the child harshly without mercy, and it may also occur due to a hidden cause that is not known.
I have not seen this phenomenon in other boys and all of whom I have observed have died faster than others. Therefore, I have stopped performing this procedure on them as I have seen a boy whose head was filled with water and the head is the most important part of the body every day. Until the boy was unable to sit up due to the weight of his head and the moisture increased until he died.
And this moisture either collects between the skin and the bone or collects under the bone on the skull, and if the moisture is between the skin and the bone and the tumor is small, it is appropriate to cut a single groove in the middle of the head and the length of the groove should be about two fingers until the moisture drains and this is the appearance of the abscess.
If the moisture increases and the tumor is larger, make two intersecting grooves in this manner.
And if the moisture is under the bone and the sign of this is that you see the hairs of the head open from all sides and the water decreases when squeezed with your hand into the inside and it is not hidden from you, then it is appropriate to cut three grooves in the middle of the head in this manner.
After the incision, all moisture is drained out, then the wound edges are closed with sutures and compresses, and then it is moistened from above with water and oil until the fifth day, then the bandage is changed and the wound is treated with dressings and splints, and do not leave the head bandaged tightly and feed the patient with all dry food with little moisture.
Until the affected part becomes strong and healed, another method of incision is to look for where the tumor bone appears and gather water, as it may be more at the back or front, or on the right or left, or in the north.
So, you should incise where the tumor appears and fill with water, then cut as much as possible without cutting a blood vessel that causes bleeding and death of the patient from that bleeding due to loss of moisture.
The second section.
Cut the two blood vessels behind the ears known as the jugulars.
If a patient has severe fever to the eyes or chest and has not been cured by medication, then inform treatment in that case is to cut these two blood vessels.
If you want to cut them, it is recommended to shave the patient's head with a sharp knife to make the blood vessel appear, then bandage the patient's neck with a cloth, then look for where the pulse is and the two hidden places behind the ears that are not visible in some people.
Then, you should teach them the incision, then cut it with a hooked knife to the bone and it should be done at the width of the head and if you wish, you can insert the hooked knife from under the artery and twist it upwards with the cut and the length of the cut should be about two finger widths.
If the blood vessels are cut, the blood will flow out in a pulsating manner and it will gather at the front and back, and if the artery does not appear for examination, it is recommended to estimate from the ear by three finger widths, then teach them the incision and cut through to the bone.
You should send away six or more cloths to soak up the blood and perhaps you may send away more or less, all of this depending on how much appears to you from the strength of the bleeding and filling of its arteries, then look at the wound if it remains on the bone, cut it off.
Lest a hot ulcer appears, then close the wound with a thread of silk and then treat it with ointment until it heals.
The third chapter.
In the arteries that are in the temples.
If a person has chronic headaches or severe headaches before, or heat in the temple muscles, or persistent and severe headache, and other similar symptoms, and was treated with various treatments of medicine but did not improve, then we have tried in these diseases to cut the arteries from the temples or their branches as described.
The work in this case is to shave the hair that is on the forehead and target the prominent artery in the forehead, as it reveals to you its pulse, and if you find it weak in a person, then it indicates that he is sick, except for those who are skilled in medicine.
In severe cold, if it is hidden from you, then let the physician shave his neck with a cloth, then you should feel for the location with a probe or moisten the location with hot water until the artery becomes visible and clear. Then take the stethoscope, which has this shape. Then shave the skin gently until you reach the artery, then insert a hook into it and pull it up until it exits from the skin and remove any impurities that are underneath it from all sides, if the artery is thin, then tie it with the tip of the hook. Then cut a piece from it equal to the distance between its ends and compress it, but do not cause bleeding, as if it has not grown back and has not been cut, then the blood has not clotted at all, then let the blood flow from six to three.
If the artery is large, then it should be tied in two places with a strong double-headed string, and the string should be either from silk or from the strings of the flute, so that the impurity does not reach it before the wound heals, causing bleeding.
Then, cut the ligaments between the bones as you wish to do at that time or after a while, and if you want to attach it to the bone with silk thread until its ends rot and it becomes firm like this work with your own eyes or better as we said.
However, if the bone is hot or swollen due to the humor, then it should be cooled or drained because the ligament is what helps in removing the moisture, and it becomes stronger in utility. After cutting the veins, the place should be filled with a bandage and the appropriate dressings should be placed on it, and after healing, it should be treated with the dry medicines that nourish the flesh and with the filling until it is clean, God willing.
If bleeding occurs during your work from the vein, then immediately cut it either with a ligament or by filling the place with cotton and pressing your finger until the blood stops flowing. If none of these works, then put your finger on it until the blood congeals.
Then, soak the place with very cold water until the inflammation subsides and it becomes firm as it should be, and among what is easier and less painful than cutting the vein is to tie this ligament with silk thread after learning the positions of the veins.
The wound is closed with a hard adhesive until it reaches the bone, and the blood flows in two places so that it can be separated between its ends, for this adhesive does not stick to it at all, and this is the appearance of the bandage.
The blades should be sharp like small knives, but they should not be as sharp as a knife, for if they are as sharp as a knife, the cold will quickly reach them and the flesh will not separate quickly. Therefore, if there is some resistance in them, hold them in hot fire.
The flesh is cut quickly, and this work is better than all works and easier and lighter, and there should be a distance between the blades equal to the thickness of a finger.
Chapter Four.
In the treatment of constant hot and burning tears to the eyes.
If the tears are constant and their flow is from the sinus that is on the skull from outside, and nothing in it has benefited from any treatment of medicine, and you have seen the face of the patient become red. He feels a bump on his face like the ant's hump and his eyes are watery and sticky, and their eyelashes have been eaten by the tears and their eyebrows have been soaked from the intensity of the tears, so the early ones in treating them resorted to this treatment and called it the treatment with a sword, which is that you order the patient to shave the hair on his face.
Then, make three parallel incisions along the length of the forehead, each about the length of two fingers, the first one in the middle of the forehead, the second one slightly away from the muscle movement of the eyebrow, and the third one from the other side.
And preserve the two arteries on the sides and keep your hand away from connecting the jaws, and after each incision, have three fingers of gauze or a large number of cotton swabs ready to absorb the blood.
Then, insert the sharp knife at both ends of the incision, this is its shape. From the incision following the eyebrow to the middle incision, scrape off all the skin between the two incisions along with the periosteum on the bone, then do the same from the middle incision to the third incision, then remove this knife. Also, insert a different tool called a chisel from one side and a blunt one from the other side, this is its shape:
Its sharp side goes up to the meat attached to the skin and its blunt side goes towards the bone, push it until it reaches the middle incision and cut all the vessels that come down from the head to the eyes without the cut reaching the surface of the skin.
Then, perform this in the middle section to the other section. After blood flows moderately, scrape off the positions of the solidified blood, then soak each section with a thread of cotton and apply a poultice made of wine, oil, or vinegar and oil.
To prevent a heat boil from occurring, on the third day, apply a poultice with vinegar and water, then treat it with mastic resin, basil, and other remedies used for wounds until it heals, God willing.
Chapter Five.
In the treatment of tears and runny noses from under the head.
When a person experiences frequent, severe, and persistent runny nose with small, weak eyes and inflamed eyelids and the scales fall off from them. And there is severe pain in the head and constant stuffiness, know that these symptoms indicate that the mucus and runny noses come from many deep nerves. The best treatment for this is to order the patient to shave his beard, then make a cut in the middle of his forehead.
And there is severe pain in the head and constant stuffiness, know that these symptoms indicate that the mucus and runny noses come from many deep nerves. The best treatment for this is to order the patient to shave his beard, then make a cut in the middle of his forehead. Or lift slightly from the front and start the cut from the right ribs to the left, the cut goes to the bone, and keep your hand away from the moving muscles of the ribs until the bone is exposed and all the blood has been wiped off with cotton.
He separated the two sides of the jaw with cotton or a piece of linen, then closed it from above with sutures and applied ointment and oil to prevent heat and inflammation, and when they dissolved, if he saw that the hot tumor had broken, he should scrape the bone until new growth of flesh begins in it.
Then he treats it with the desiccated food that promotes flesh growth, such as taking a piece of wheat flour and four pieces of cotton, arranges them in layers, and uses them in the growth of flesh in such surgeries.
Chapter Six.
In treating what falls into the ear.
All that falls into the ear is one of four types: either a metallic stone or a similar stone like iron and glass, or a vegetable substance like rice and bean, and so on, or something slippery like water and oil, and so on.
Or an animal, so when a hedgehog or the like falls into the ear that does not grow in the ear, accept it with the ear facing the sun, if you see the hedgehog, scrape it with something from turmeric or serj and then try to remove it by moving the head or by irrigation with kandis. Plug the nostrils with a cloth or cotton wool when the nostril is about to close after applying a bandage around the ear and extending the ear upwards. If it does not come out, try to remove it gently using a soft instrument.
If it does not come out with the soft instrument, try using a blind, fine, and thin forceps. If it still does not come out, make a small silver tube and insert its tip into the ear hole.
Plug the area around the tube with a smooth, greased cloth to prevent the wind from entering through any other way. Then, pull it out strongly and repeatedly. If it still does not come out, use a pair of tweezers or a hooked instrument that birds use to take small things, place it at the tip of the tube.
After wrapping it firmly with cotton, insert it into the ear hole gently after the ear has dried from moisture. If it still does not come out, proceed to cutting before any heat or inflammation occurs.
The method of cutting is to first squeeze the earlobe in your fingers and draw out as much blood as possible. Then, place the earlobe between your hands and turn the ear upwards. Make a small cut at the base of the ear where it meets the skin, in the lowest part.
The incision should be made in the shape of a crescent until it reaches the peritoneum, then remove it as much as possible with the tools at your disposal, then quickly suture the incision from the beginning and treat it until it is clean.
If the object is a foreign body lodged in the ear from one of the grains that grow and swell, try to extract it as mentioned earlier, but if you cannot do so, then take a thin, delicate probe of this shape.
Try to cut that type of foreign body lodged in the ear with it, but only do so if you are certain that that grain has softened due to the warmth of the ear until it becomes small pieces many times, then extract it with a blind needle or a fine tweezer or a hook.
As mentioned earlier, it is easier to extract it, and as for the water inside the ear, it is recommended to use the syringe with a nozzle first, and if he has filled his ear with cotton previously and is lying on that ear where the water is, then it will come out with that.
Otherwise, take many thin, smooth needles of the length of your fingers and heat them slightly with fire, then one of them is inserted into a hole in his ear and he squeezes it from that side while striking another stone on the stone in the ear.
The patient is then made to drink water until all the water comes out, and this may be done by taking a reed or a single feather and inserting one end into the ear and holding the other end over a flame until it burns, then replacing it with another reed or feather.
This is done repeatedly until all the water comes out or is drawn out using the tube as mentioned in the reed, and as for extracting the animal inside it, if it is small like a frog or similar, treat it as mentioned in the section on dissection.
If the body is large and visible to the touch, try to extract it using forceps and needles, as this is easier than all other methods in the ear, and if you treated the snake as mentioned in the section on dissection in the article on snakes and it did not respond to treatment.
You should examine the ear in sunlight, and if something from the snake appears to you, extract it using forceps or needles that are sharp, but if nothing appears to you from it, take a tube of this shape.
Narrow at the bottom and wide at the top, and insert the thin end into the ear to the extent that it can bear, then suck strongly using a strong suction tool, and do this repeatedly until all the snake comes out, but if it does not come out, seal around the tube with fire as mentioned in the reed.
If the previous method does not work, use the cautery instruments mentioned earlier and tried by the first ones in killing the maggot. You can find this in the article on cautery instruments. Apply the adhesive and medicines to the ear with this tool. Here is its image:
It is made of silver or brass, narrow at the bottom with a small hole and wide at the top. If you wish, the piston inside the tube can be made of strong brass. Alternatively, you can take a piece of cloth and tie it firmly around its tip with cotton yarn.
Then, pour the ointment or medicine you want into the tube and place it in the ear. Insert the piston with the cotton yarn from above and press gently until the ointment reaches the inner ear and is felt.
If it is inserted deeply, make sure the substance inside the ear has been slightly heated in the fire and be careful not to use anything that is extremely cold or very hot as the ear does not tolerate such extremes.
Chapter 7.
In the treatment of deafness in the ear.
Some children may be born from their mother's wombs and with unbroken ears.
In some individuals, a plug may be shown in the ear canal due to a wound or a growing tissue within it, and this plug may be located at the depth of the ear hole, not visible to the eye.
Some may be visible slightly outside the hole and visible to the eye, while those visible inside the ear and not visible to the eye are usually more difficult to remove, and those visible to the eye should have their eyelid exposed to the sun. Look at it, if you see the plug visible, then open it gently with a fine probe, and this is its appearance:
Its tip is visible slightly, limited on one side and the rest of the probe is smooth to avoid damaging the ear, if the plug is from tissue that has grown in the ear canal, then grasp it with a fine needle and cut it off forcefully until all the tissue is removed.
If the plug is inside the ear, take a fine, smooth wire and heat it slightly in the fire, then insert it into the ear canal, if you feel the plug with what the eyelid feels from the weight of hearing, gently remove it.
Be careful not to pierce the auditory nerve, then insert a thread of appropriate size into the ear hole that has been enlarged, if you use the Egyptian method, do this for several days until it is certain that the wound does not stick to it, or take a thread and soak it in water and apply a thin, smooth ointment on it.
Use it if you see the ear swollen and hot, it is necessary to remove the sponge and replace it with a fresh one that has been soaked in rose oil until the inflammation subsides, then treat it until it heals.
If bleeding occurs, soak a piece of cotton or gauze in cold water and place it on the ear, then use the rest of the treatment mentioned in the article about hemorrhoids to stop the bleeding.
Chapter Eight.
In the treatment of moles that appear in the ears.
This mole that appears in the eyelid may be wet and dry, it is necessary to hold it with a spoon or tweezers and cut it from its root, then apply a moistened powder on the spot.
If bleeding occurs, apply a fine caustic paste and dress it well after cutting, often if any of the roots remain, it will recur. If it is burned with fire, the roots are burned and it does not return.
Chapter Nine.
In the treatment of the cold sore that appears in the eyelid.
Often, something similar to a cold sore appears in the eyelid, with its severity and hardness.
Therefore, it is called 'bard' which is the assembly of thick moisture in the upper and lower eyelids, and the work in it is to look at it, if the bard is prominent on the surface of the eyelid, it moves towards all sides, so he makes it easy by moving it, and makes it difficult by straightening it.
Then, wipe it from all sides gently until it is expelled, then attach it with the needle and cut it, if you do not have the opportunity to cut it except after the eyelid passes through the cut, it will not harm the patient at all, if the gap is large, gather it with stitching and treat it until it is clean.
And if it is small, there is no harm in it, but the mire must be forced and squeezed, if the bard is inclined towards the inside of the eyelid towards the inner surface, turn the eyelid and attach the bard with a needle without needing to straighten and expel it from all sides.
If the eyelid passes through the cut, it will not harm, then wash the eye with salty water after cutting the bard and treat the position with what squeezes until the patient is clean.
Chapter 10.
In the treatment of the stye that appears in the edge of the eyelid.
The stye is a pimple that appears in the upper layers of the eyelid, more common among children, it weighs down their eyes and causes them to have headaches during the night, they are unable to see light during the day. Because tears quickly flow towards them.
And therefore they are always leaning on their faces and sleeping on them, and their eyelids are wet under the eyebrows, with a swelling and inflammation of the stye, visible to the eyes, and when you pressed between them with your fingers, she felt the stye.
Then take a needle and heat it, then make a circle from it according to the size of the stye, then place it on it and press from all sides with your fingers to gather the stye in the middle of the circle.
Then cut in the middle of that moisture with a lancet, a cut of equal width and not larger than the cut in the eyelid, but if it is deep, you should cut the whole skin until you reach the stye.
In most cases, the abscess appears as a white piece of flesh on the surface. It is necessary to grasp it with a hook and twist it outwards between your fingers, while you are managing your right hand and left hand to extract it until it is completely removed. Be cautious not to increase the pressure in the abscess, lest the pus enters the eye and causes harm.
If the abscess does not appear at first, it is necessary to increase the pressure slightly with gentle force until the abscess appears. Then, grasp it as previously mentioned, and soak the hook in water and salt, place it on the affected area, and bandage it firmly. Some people use salt instead of water.
He places it in the abscess to dissolve any remaining moisture, then treat it until it is completely removed. If there is heat and swelling at the affected area, treat it with a cold compress until it is completely removed.
Chapter 10.
In the treatment of eye inflammation.
If there are excessive eyelashes growing in the wrong direction under the natural eyelashes, they can cause harm to the eye and lead to various diseases such as persistent tears, drooping eyelids, ptosis, and edema, which can be a cause of visual impairment.
1. The application of collyrium to the eye can be done in four ways: either with heat or with a strong medicine as mentioned in the previous chapter on collyrium, or it could involve stitching or sutures, or with a cotton swab as I have previously mentioned.
1. It is recommended to place the head of a needle on a stone and then use your left hand to rotate the eyelid. If it turns, insert a thin thread from below the eyelid and pull it out from above with the thread, keeping it close to the hair itself and pulling it upwards with the eyelid.
1. Then, use a probe to separate the lower eyelid from the excess hair and then pull out the thread, placing a small piece of cotton or silk under the eyelid, and then apply adhesive tape on the eyelid.
1. The shape of the adhesive tape should be according to how much you want to lift the eyelid, as it may vary among people, with some requiring a certain amount of cutting from the eyelid depending on how relaxed it is.
1. Some may require less cutting, depending on the degree of relaxation of the eyelid. Then, use a probe to separate along the two lines you have marked, starting from the upper eyelid and moving towards the lower eyelid, with each separation being close to the natural hair with a thickness similar to that of the probe.
Then the surgeon enters one of the skin's angles and scrapes it entirely, then gathers the lips with a needle and silk thread, wiping the blood and attaching the remaining threads to the eyebrows with some remaining things.
If you wish to do so, or not, it does not matter. Then the stitching and threads remain for about three or four days, then treat it. If you wish, leave the wound without stitching and treat it with what dries and absorbs, as the swelling rises at the end of the wound closure and stitching is better.
This face of the tattooing, which was mentioned by the first ones, except that there is a mark on the eyelid, and it is good work and there is no danger in it, and another face in tattooing is also to learn the shape of the eyebrow like the shape of a leaf as we described. Then raise the eyebrow with three needles, which are separated or gathered on this picture:
Then cut the remaining eyebrow with a small scissors on this picture, evenly:
If you cannot hold the needles and have not leveled them, then take a needle with a thread in it and insert it in the middle of the shape and insert another thread near the larger lobe and a third thread near the smaller lobe, gather the threads between your fingers evenly, then raise your hand with a moderate lift.
Raise the skin that is to be sutured, as we have described, then bring together both sides of the wound with sutures and treat it until it heals. If a hot abscess appears at the site where you have cut or incised, soak it with cauteries and other caustic substances.
It may also be necessary to turn the wounds at the bottom, in which case use what we have mentioned regarding cutting, suturing, and applying heat or strong medicine. If possible, leave it open from cutting and suturing, but if not, do both in them.
The cauterization with bark is done in this manner: turn the wound and incise the part inside, as we have described, then make two or three thin bark or wooden probes of equal length to the wound and narrower than a hair.
The ends of the sutures are tied on both sides where the sutures hold, then gather them gently over the wound and tighten the bark or wooden probes from both sides firmly, but leave them for a few days, as the sutured skin will die, rot, and putrefy.
Until it falls off by itself, then treat it with the cauteries until it heals. If it suppurates, raise the wound and do not touch the sutures of the eye, this is the shape of the bark or wooden probes made in this way and this is the size in length and width:
Chapter Twelve: Treatment of Fractures and Dislocations
In raising the eyelid with a needle.
If it is a single eyelid or two, the work in that case is to take a fine needle and insert a thin silk thread into it, then tie its two ends together with a delicate knot, and let the length of the thread be about an inch.
Then, another fine thread is tied in the suture, outside of the stitch, and its two ends are tied together if desired, then the patient places his head on your stone and let it be near the sun so that he can see the work, for it is a delicate operation. Then, the needle is inserted into the excess eyelid.
Then, it is pushed into the corner of the eye with a spatula until it comes out above the natural eyelash, then the thread is pulled up over the suture and the needle is inserted into that eyelash if it is one or two or three but not more.
Then, pull your hand with it until the eyelash comes out with the suture in the corner of the eye along with the natural eyelash. If the suture does not come out with it, pull it down with the thread that you tied in it until the suture comes out from the top hole.
Then, return the hair in its place and pull it to raise it in the highest hole and let the eye see it. When that happens, squeeze the eyelashes and the thread and remove them, tighten the eye and leave it tightened for two or three days until the hair grows back in its place and flesh grows on it.
If the eyelash is short, either add a long artificial eyelash to it so that it raises with it, or leave it until it grows longer after some time, then raise it.
Chapter Thirteen
In the treatment of the eyelash that occurs in the upper eyelid.
The one who is exposed to this eyelash is called Arnabeh and this eyelash is either natural or artificial. The artificial one is from the melting of a wound, scar, or kii and so on.
And the method of treatment in this melting is to scrape it and separate the lips and place a thread between them and tie it until it heals, and one should not use drying or contracting things in its treatment.
If you do that, you have returned the eyelash stronger than it was before, and use things that swell like henna and tannin with water that has been boiled with kitchen salt and a thread and a diachylon plaster that has dissolved with something from the adhesives and smeared with it and treated with it.
And the most important thing for her treatment is to strive with all possible means not to adhere to the original form, and this work which we mentioned is only a part of correcting the deformity, not that the original form of the place should be returned as it was.
The Fourteenth Chapter.
In the treatment of the deformity that occurs in the lower jaw.
This deformity that occurs in the lower jaw, which is called a true deformity and is congenital, is a cosmetic deformity, which is caused by a wound or a crack or a scar and so on.
The method of treatment in this case is to take a needle with a double-threaded string and insert it into the flesh, then pull it out from the left side to the right side until the string becomes straight at both ends of the flesh, then extend the flesh upwards with the needle and cut it off with a wide scissors.
If the shape of the jaw returns to its proper form, then a splint is placed on the wound and the jaw is turned over it and two incisions are made in the inner side of the jaw, and the ends of the incisions are at angles of the cut that was made until they meet, forming an angle. Until it becomes its original shape like this.
This is the Greek letter 'lambda'. Then, pull out that piece of flesh by the amount that the sharp side of it is below what follows the joint, then join the separated parts with two stitches using a thread of silk, and then treat it with the remedies we mentioned for expanding and stretching until it heals.
If the laceration was from a cut, seam, or puncture, it is necessary to make a simple incision without hair of the wounds as mentioned earlier, then separate the lips by stretching as mentioned.
The saying in treating lacerations is that if it is from above or below, the work should be done according to what is available to you from the appearance of the laceration, as there may be many differences in its shape, and the practitioner should handle the situation in any way possible.
Until its shape returns to its natural appearance or approaches it, and the same disease should be treated with what is suitable for him from work and tools in most cases.
Chapter Fifteen.
On touching the corner of the eye with a drop or the eyelid.
This procedure may appear strange to many people, as it involves attaching the upper eyelid to the whites of the eye to prevent its movement and hinder its natural actions, so a probe should be inserted under the eyelid.
Then lift it up or extend it with a thin, sharp instrument that is not too thick to cut the suture but rather slightly blunt so as not to cause pain to the patient during the procedure. If the suture tears, it will harm the eye due to its sharpness, and your incision will be considered as if you had cut the suture.
Then wait until the eyelid returns to its natural state and the suture is completely healed, then apply a saline solution or a diluted zanjabil (a type of mouthwash) to the eye. After that, separate the eyelid from the eye using a thin, soft thread.
Then place a thin, soft cloth soaked in egg white over the eye. After the third day, use diluted zanjabil until it is completely healed.
Chapter 16
In cutting the eyebrow and nasal cartilage.
The eyebrow is composed of two parts, either cartilaginous and resembles a hard, thin bone, or non-cartilaginous and resembles hardened glue, white in color if touched by iron or cut with a sharp instrument.
The excerpt does not contain any relevant information to be translated as it is a section title or an image caption.
Then, he opens his eyes and raises the eyelid with your hand. Then, you take a thin needle and extend it above. Then, you take a hair from a horse or a cow's tail, strong thread, and twist its tip a little and insert it in the middle of the eyelid.
Then, you push it with the needle and tie the eyelid with the thread, extend it above and burn the hair on the side of the eyelid that follows the eyebrow as if you are spreading it with a comb to the other end. Then, you cut the rest at the base of the eyelid with a fine nipper or small scissors and leave the natural flesh of the eyelid.
So that it does not expose the constant flow of tears, and the eyelid has been extended with a needle alone or with a thread as we mentioned. Then, you burn the tip with a fine nipper, its shape is:
So that the nipper does not touch the conjunctiva and cause a fissure in the eyebrow, then after cutting, you put something salty or Zanjabeel powder in the eye and leave it until another day, then treat it with what is appropriate for it to be clean.
If the ingrown eyelid is not spiny and cannot be penetrated by a needle or held in place by a probe, it often heals with medication as described in the previous section, but if you wish to excise it, open the eye's corner.
Take a soft, thin probe and place it gently on this shape. Gently scrape the eyelid from above with a gentle scraper, if you see that it is soft and disintegrates and the scraper affects it, apply some collyrium from your eye from zanjabil or red eye ointment or powdered salt and close the eye for another day.
Then, repeat the procedure until all of it disappears, unless if it obstructs your vision and is hot and thin, leave it and treat the hot tumor until it heals, then repeat the procedure with scraping until it heals. As for the flesh of the meaq.
If the meaq causes severe pain to the eye, it should be removed with a probe and some of it cut off without overdoing it so as not to cause lacrimation, then apply red eye ointment or zanjabil until it heals.
  :   
Chapter Seventeen: On Eye Diseases
In some people, a red fleshy growth may form in the eyes, covering the observer's view or approaching it, or flowing over the eyelids, and sometimes the eyelids may turn outward, resembling the lotus flower.
The treatment involves placing the patient's head on your stone, then opening their eyes and removing all the red flesh with appropriate forceps.
Or grasp it with a hook or a spoon, then cut the red flesh until it is all removed, avoiding injury to the eye during the procedure. The cutting can be done with the pincers we described for cutting the eyelid or with a small scissors. Like the one used to remove thorns, as described in the book you are reading.
If all the red flesh has been removed, then fill the eye with finely ground salt or drop in a reddish powder and other caustic medicines, and place a white cotton cloth on the eye from outside to protect the inflamed area.
If some red flesh remains and blood overpowers you, fearing the inflammation, leave the eye and treat it with what soothes the inflammation, then return to the procedure until it is clean, and do the same for the excess red flesh that appears in the eye of this kind.
It is essential that you avoid treating every weak eye with iron tools or by direct work, unless you see that the organ in question is suitable for such an operation.
Chapter Eighteen
In the treatment of cataracts from the eye.
Cataracts are red vessels that grow on the eye, preventing vision and weakening the eye over time. It is essential for you to first examine if the eye with cataracts is strong and does not have another disease besides cataracts.
Then, for the treatment of cataracts, you should order the patient to place their head on your stone, then secure those vessels with one or two needles according to your preference, and the needles should be thin and delicate in appearance.
Or, the needles could be double-pronged and in one body, like this appearance.
Then, carefully extract those vessels with a thin, delicate lancet, wiping the blood away gradually until you see the eye is clear of those vessels and the blood has coagulated. Do not harm the eye with the tips of the lancet, and perform the operation in half a day under sunlight.
It is essential in your work to be very careful not to cut other than those veins, and when you have a moment, apply a green or red onion to the eye for it to consume what remains of the splinters, as if you cannot remove all of them at that time, then dress the eye with whatever can alleviate its pain.
Leave it for several days until the pain subsides and the inflammation is healed, then perform the operation on it again with your eye until this image of the splinter is removed from it.
Leave it [and the tip of the splinter will be in the pupil and another will emerge from the corner of the eye and the other in front of the eye and you] in the work, that you open the eye with fixed or triangular forceps that hold it gently.
Look and the tip of the splinter will be in the pupil and another will emerge from the corner of the eye and the other in front of the eye and you, by choice, start by removing two snares from the upper eyelid, one at the end and the other at the beginning.
Hold it between the middle and the eyelid, then attach snares from under their edges, then hold it between the forceps and the probe and gently shake your hand until all the splinters are seen to have risen, if it is with a hook or a delicate pick.
The physician should incise the abscess on the bone and remove all the sinuses until it rises above the level of the bone, but do not cut the discharge as the pus and blood will stick to you.
Then cut with the knife as much as is above and below the sinus until there remains only in the ear, if possible, remove it from above the ear with the cautery as it is better and may be necessary in some people.
If it has been cut, it will hurt like a toothache and the heat of the tumor will cause pain, then repeat the operation on it.
Chapter 13
On the return of the nose to the face.
The physicians call the nose a "nasor" if they have treated it with cauterization or with a strong medicament as previously described and have not cured it, then there is no remedy for it but to incise the tumor at its maturity and extract all the moisture in it or the pus.
Until the bone becomes exposed, if the bone is exposed and you see any decay or discoloration in it, then clean it with this instrument of its shape:
And the "khishna" is made of Indian iron and its head is polished like a rasp with an inscription of the "mabrad" or "isklafaj" inscribed lightly, then place it on the position of the decay in the bone and rub it between your fingers while you hold your hand slightly until you know that that decay has been cleaned.
Do this repeatedly, then apply the dry retracting medicines to the position. If it becomes closed and flesh grows in it and the duration is cut off, it lasts for forty days and does not recur on it and does not cause harm and no accident occurs in it.
Know that it has been cleared, otherwise there is no remedy except to return the puncturer to the nose hole on this condition and that is to expose the bone again with iron or a sharp medicine. If the bone is exposed, take a mashbub on this condition:
The tip of the iron should be triangular and its base should be curved towards the tip as you see, then place it on the bone itself and that is near the edge and away from your finger a little bit, then rub your finger with the mashbub until the bone is expelled and felt by the patient.
If the wind comes out of him when he holds his finger on his nose, then force the position with dry retracting medicines as I told you, if flesh grows and the place becomes hard, then the matter that was inserted outside returns to the nose, it will be less harmful to the patient by God's will.
Chapter Twenty.
In cases of injury to the eye.
If the eyelid is torn without any damage to the sight or vision, it is appropriate to gently lift it and then stitch it with fine silk threads, without any pressure.
Then, a plaster made from alum, pomegranate rind, labdanum, and frankincense is applied to the eye. This is very beneficial. The recipe for the plaster is to take a large number of fine, smooth pieces of cloth, and tie each one into four knots.
Then, these are placed one on top of the other on a tray according to the eye's needs. A strong, thick suture is used to stitch them together, and the eyelid is re-stitched with fine silk threads without any pressure. The eyelid is left closed for a day and a night.
If the suture loosens during this time, it is appropriate to re-stitch it with fine silk threads after a day and a night, as we mentioned earlier. If the eye has returned to its normal state, then repeat the plaster, medications, stitching, and eyelid closure until it returns to its normal state.
Chapter 22.
In the case of the amputation of the little finger.
If a cancer appears on the palm of the hand, then it spreads and protrudes outside the fingers like the shape of a grape and disfigures the human form, so you should cut it off. The procedure is as follows:
Insert a needle from below upwards into the base of the grape, then insert another needle into it with a double-threaded needle from the side of the nail, and extract it, and leave the first needle as it is.
Then cut the position of the double-threaded needle and tie some of the grapes around the needle, press it firmly, then extract the needle and place a piece of cloth soaked in egg white on the wound and leave it until the threads fall off with the grape, then treat the wound as appropriate.
Until the wound is healed, and the grape has been pressed from all sides with a circle of cauterization until the wound becomes larger, then a thin thread is inserted into the corner of the eye so that the egg white moisture flows out and the eye falls off on the spot, then it is pressed until it is healed.
Chapter 22.
In the treatment of cataracts.
This is the phenomenon known as the "nystagmus", which is a period where the eyes converge like falling water, but there is none of it. The method to deal with this is that you make the patient sit on a chair elevated from the ground, then take their head with both your hands from both sides.
Then move him until you see the period settling down in front of your eye, then stabilize it and do not leave, the light goes out and the patient sees things as they were before, if it does not settle down, we know that it is water, but if it does not settle down as mentioned before.
If not, then make the patient sit between your hands, then take a thin needle and insert it slightly above the cornea into the connection of the eyelash with the cornea in the eyeball until the matter comes out.
Then pour hot water mixed with honey or boiled water and herbs and honey into the eye, then treat it with all the treatment until it is cured.
Chapter 32.
As we mentioned the types of water in the division and which one is suitable for the cup by clear and explained words, so then it should be taken from there on the health, so when this happens, it is necessary to make the patient sit between your hands facing the light near the sun.
Correctly tie the correct eye and tighten it tightly, then raise the eyelid of the affected eye with your left hand if the water is in the left eye, or with your right hand if it is in the right eye.
Then place the tip of the needle close to the eyelid with a thick thread of the same color as the eye from the smaller corner, then push the needle with force while guiding it with your hand until it pierces the whiteness of the eye and you feel the needle has reached an empty space.
The depth to which the needle should go is equal to the distance from the front of the eye to the back, which is the eyelid, and if it is seen by the observer as clear, then the needle should be withdrawn to the position where the water is.
Then slowly draw it down, little by little, if the water comes out of its position, so that the eyelid sees what has opened in front of it from its position and the needle is in the eye, then let it rest a little, if the water rises again, then lower it again without taking the needle out.
If it has settled and the water has not risen, then gently remove the needle with your hand, little by little, then dissolve a small amount of pure sandarac in water and wash the eye from inside out, then place all of it, whether it is cotton or wool, on the outside of the eye.
We take the root of red onion and white egg yolk and bind it to a healthy eye, but as for us and our contemporaries, we place upon it a fine powdered musk mixed with the whiteness of the egg yolk, for if the strong musk does not enter the eye due to its hardness, since there are people whose eyes are very hard. It is appropriate that you take the dress known as the "Bridal Dress" which has this image:
Then pierce it with the same needle, but do not worry about the piercing and only to place a fine spot for the musk to be applied as mentioned, and when your work is complete, prepare for the patient a firm bed on which he can lie on his back in a dark room.
He should avoid all movements and coughing, and make his food as soft as possible without moving his head to the right or left, and the bandage should remain on him until the third day, then he should be exposed to that dark room and test his sight.
Then show him things, then the bandage should be removed on the seventh day and it is not appropriate to do this during treatment or after your time, but rather avoid it before water rises quickly due to intense gazing.
If the tumor is hot, it is recommended to puncture the eye before the seventh day and cure it with what can soothe the tumor until it becomes calm. Then, when it becomes calm, you should cover his face with a veil that directs his gaze away from the dark place.
He gradually exits the house and engages in his daily activities, knowing that the cup does not require the learner to avoid observation multiple times. Therefore, when he performs the operation, I have heard from some Iraqis that he mentioned making a wide-mouthed cup in Iraq that absorbs water.
I have not seen anyone in our country make such a thing or read about it in any of the early books, and it may be a recent innovation. This is a picture of various types of cups that he can stand on due to his ignorance of them:
It is made of copper, especially, and its tip is sharp like a triangular point.
The twenty-fourth chapter.
In the treatment of a swollen piece of meat in the nose.
Pieces of meat of various types may have grown in the nose, some resembling a large number of scorpions with many legs, and some are cancerous tumors that are firmly attached to the skin like a plaster, and some are smooth flesh without being attached to the skin.
If any of this meat is tender and not rotten or cancerous, then it should be placed between your hands facing the sun and its belly opened. Then, the smith's awl should be inserted into those parts of the meat, then drawn out, and finally cut off with a sharp, thin, and pointed knife from one side.
Until you know that all the meat has been removed, if there remains something that you were unable to cut off, then grind it with a blunt instrument gently until nothing remains of it. If blood or a hot inflammation overcomes you, then stop.
Treat it as appropriate or if it was a cancerous tumor, then immediately cut it off until the blood stops and all the meat is removed. Then, put it in your nose after cutting it, with water or drink. If the nose opens and moisture from it goes to the throat.
Know that it has been purified, but if the moisture did not reach as appropriate, then know that there is meat within bones that have not been reached by the cutting instrument, so in that case, it is appropriate to take a thread of linen and tie some of its tightness.
Tie many knots in it and make between each knot a size of a finger or less, and the patient should put the tip of the thread into his nose with oil or whatever is available to him after making it like a probe, until it reaches the nostrils.
The thread is pulled out through the mouth and often young men do this act as described in the books, it is a matter that is easy for whoever wishes to do it, then the two ends of the thread are gathered, one end which came out through the mouth and the other which remained in the nose.
Then the meat is pressed using the knot in the thread until you know that the meat has been cut by the knot in the thread, then the thread is pulled out and it remains in the nose after wiping the blood with a cloth that she drank from the water jug used in Marrakech, she does this for three days or more.
Until the woman eats all that remains of the meat, then the last thing in the nose is a bullet for days until it comes out, if she needs treatment she used this.
This is a picture of the syringe that is used to spray medicine and drugs in the nose:
He puts a small, open-ended needle made of silver or copper into the syringe and its piston as well.
And if you want to make the syringe closed like a bottle and smooth the needle of the syringe.
It has a handle at the end as you see, he holds it when he heats the wax or whatever you want from the exudates or other liquid things.
Chapter Twenty-Five: Treatment of Wounds in the Head and Face.
In the nasal septum at the tip of the nose.
Often, a polyp grows at the tip of the nose, increasing in size and worsening appearance over time.
Therefore, it should be cut off at its first appearance and completely removed, then treated with either cauterization or a burning medication that acts as a cauterizer, if not cut early, it will continue to grow and have less sensitivity.
Do not expose it to iron, as it is a cancerous growth and I have seen many cases where this tumor was completely removed, resulting in great relief for its owner. If the tumor is smooth and not discolored, it may be possible to remove it entirely. Then, the surgeon should carefully cut it out without hesitation or caution, and treat the wound with something that dries and stops bleeding until it is completely healed.
Chapter Twenty-Six:
In sewing the nose, mouth, and ear. If the connection between them is torn away from a wound or something similar, know that when such a tear occurs in one of these cavities, the only thing that can be done is in some people.
When presenting any of these cases, if you encounter a wound that is sharp and bleeding heavily, it is recommended to gather the edges of the wound with stitching and then treat it until it heals completely. However, if the connection has already been broken and both sides have separated, it is advisable to clean each side with a hot iron until it stops bleeding.
Then gather the edges of the wound with stitching and close them, applying honey and salt mixed together on top of the dressing, along with a piece of marc from the palm tree or another type of hard marsh. Leave it closed for two or three days, then clean it.
Then change the medication and leave it until the stitches come out by themselves, then treat it with marsh until it heals completely. The method of stitching is to gather the separated parts either with a needle as described in sewing the abdomen or with thread as explained here.
Chapter 22
In extracting the stones that are present in the wounds.
Many people may have small, hard growths in their mouths that resemble the shape of a pea and vary in size, from smaller to larger. In such cases, it is recommended to turn the cheek and cut each stone with a surgical knife, then remove it with forceps.
Cut it from all sides, then fill the wound with powdered honeydew until the bleeding stops, then rinse with water and salt, and treat the wounds according to their types until the wounds are healed.
Chapter Eighteen.
In the removal of excess flesh in the throat.
Often, excess flesh grows on the throat, which is called "abolus". It should be held with a pincer or a cloth and cut at its root, leaving the wound to bleed or stop bleeding, then powdered honeydew is applied to the wound.
Or one of the dry compressing cloths, if that flesh returns after treatment, often it returns and is cut again and cauterized, as it does not return after that.
Chapter Nineteen.
In the extraction of teeth with iron.
Hard, rough, and foul-smelling tartar may accumulate on the surfaces of the teeth from inside and outside, and between the teeth, which may spread, stain, and turn green, leading to decay in the teeth and damage to the teeth for this reason.
The patient should sit between your legs, with his head on the stone, and remove the forceps and the tooth that has emerged from him, using a tool similar to sand until nothing remains of it, and do the same for black, green, yellow, and other colors until it is cleaned.
If the first incision does not go as planned, repeat the incision on different days until you achieve your desired outcome. Know that pressure requires various types of needles with different shapes according to what is available for your work.
Because the needle that is used to make the incision from inside is different from the needle that is used to make the incision from outside and the needle that is used to make the incision between the ribs in a different shape, and these are several types of needles that you will have all prepared.
Chapter 30.
In the extraction of teeth.
It is necessary to treat the tooth with all possible means and avoid extraction if possible, as it is a precious jewel until it is no longer possible to avoid extraction.
If the patient insists on extraction, it is necessary to firmly hold the tooth until it is secure in your hands. Often, the patient is deceived and believes that the tooth in the correct position is extracted, then the pain does not go away until the sick tooth is extracted, as we have seen many times from the actions of quacks.
If the tooth is secure in your hands, then it is necessary to place a strong forceps around the root with some strength until the tooth loosens from all sides, then move it with your fingers or with the elevators gently, little by little, until it becomes loose.
Then, when the dog was able to stand, he supported it well and the injured leg between your thighs had set, not moving. Then, apply pressure on its stability to prevent breaking it, if it does not come out, then take one of those tools and insert it underneath from all sides gently and move it as you did initially.
If the pressure is crushed or stuck, it is necessary to fill that crack with a splinter and cover it with a good seal from a soft, flexible material so that it does not burst when you tighten it with bandages and it is necessary to check around the neck from all sides.
And be careful not to break it so that some of it remains on the injured leg, which is better than the initial pain, and do not do what ignorant surgeons do in their casts and their early use of it without using what we have described.
Often, they cause great harm to people, either the entire bone or some of it remains. Or sometimes, some of the jawbone is broken as we have often seen, then it is rubbed with water or with honey and salt, if bleeding occurs from the site, often this happens, then apply a poultice and feed it with that.
If the zagh does not benefit you, use the Kulliyab, which are smooth and moveable by the hammer. First, they should be long in length, short in the grip, and thick so that they do not slip when gripped by the hammer. This is the shape of the larger Kulliyab:
They should be thick in the grip so that when gripped, they do not slip or bend. They should be short in length, made of Indian steel or well-smelted iron with rounded edges that fit into each other, allowing for a firm and tight grip.
The edges can also be made in the shape of a mortar, making them strong and sturdy.
Chapter 21.
On the principles of the edges and extracting broken tooth fragments.
If the edge remains stuck after breaking, it is recommended to place a piece of cotton soaked in olive oil or vinegar on the spot for a day or two until the area relaxes, then insert the forceps or Kulliyab. These resemble the edges of a bird's beak, which is called the parrot, and this is the shape of the Kulliyab:
They can be made in the shape of a mortar or a spoon. If they do not fit to extract the fragment, it is recommended to chip away at the edge and expose all the bone with the bone forceps, then insert the tool that resembles a small shovel, like this:
Short and thick branches should not be cut off as they may break, causing the original to be damaged. Instead, use other tools such as these, whose images are depicted below: the first is a triangular-shaped branch with some thickness.
Another delicate triangular image:
We can also use this tool with two prongs, whose image is also depicted below:
Apart from these tools and instruments mentioned in the pruning of branches, we can also use this tool that resembles a large sickle, whose image is depicted below:
A triangular-shaped branch with some thickness, but not too thick to prevent breaking and not sharp, as there are many tools for pruning branches and other instruments that cannot be counted. The skilled craftsman in this art may invent his own tools based on the work and the diseases themselves.
As there are many diseases that were not mentioned by the first authors, if a bone of the jaw or any other bone of the mouth rots, then examine it in its place with one of these tools and leeches mentioned for extracting roots.
We seek your assistance in drawing this figure.
There should be some pressure, slightly, to fix the bone so that it does not escape until the bone comes out. We apply medications suitable for this purpose, if the bone has a slow infection, remove it from its infection and blackness until it is purified, then treat it until it is clean.
Chapter 23.
In planting roots on others.
If the roots grow on other than their natural root, it is harmful to such figure, especially if it occurs in women and the young, it is better to look at it, if the root has grown from behind another root.
And if it cannot be planted or cooled, remove it, even if it is attached to another root, cut it with this tool, its image is shown here.
It resembles a small chisel, and it should be made of hard Indian steel with sharp edges, and the cutting is done in many days for the strength of the root and so as not to damage other roots.
It is all made of Indian steel, its handle is thin and sharp, like the needle used to make the brazier, it is cooled a little at a time in many days gently so that the root does not loosen and fall off, then it is soaked and cleaned with some medications.
If a tooth has broken off from it, part of it may cause pain to the tongue when speaking. It is advisable to cool it down as well until the sharpness of that fracture disappears and it becomes level and smooth, without causing pain to the tongue or distorting speech.
Chapter 30.
In the interdental bridge with silver wire or gold wire.
If the anterior teeth are loose and move away from a blow or fall, and the patient cannot bite on anything to prevent them from falling out, and treatment with anti-inflammatory drugs did not help, then...
The solution in this case is to use a gold or silver wire, but gold is better because silver tarnishes and corrodes after some days, while gold remains unchanged forever, not exposed to such conditions, and the wire should be medium-sized in thickness and tightened to the extent that it fits between the teeth.
The method of lacing is to insert the wire between the correct teeth and then tie it with both ends of the wire on the loose teeth, one or more, until the stitching reaches the correct tooth from the other side.
Then, return the sutures to the place where you started and tighten your hand gently and wisely until the skin does not move and your stitches are at the base of the tendons so that they do not escape. Then, cut the ends of the thread with scissors and gather them together and fold them over with a needle and hide them between the correct bone and the moving bone.
So that the tongue does not get entangled, then leave it tied as much as remains, if it breaks or comes off, tighten it with another thread like this throughout its life. This is a picture of the tendons and their arrangement in two correct bones and two moving bones as you see:
One or both of the bones may return to their place and be tied as we described and remain, but this is only done by a skilled craftsman, and one can carve a bone from the bones of a cow and make it into the shape of a tendon and put it in the place where the tendon was. And he is tied as we said, and it remains and enjoys that.
The fourth and thirty-second chapter.
On cutting the lingual frenum that prevents speech in those who cannot speak.
This lingual frenum may be either natural, born with the human being, or it may be a result of a wound that has healed.
The operation consists of opening the mouth and head of the patient on a stone, raising his tongue, then cutting the nerve bundle exposed by this exposure until the tongue is released from its hold. If there is some rigidity and complexity in it, indicating that the wound has become infected, a surgeon should carve and split it open until the nerve bundle emerges and the knot is dissolved.
Be cautious that the cutting does not reach the depth of the flesh, as this would cut a blood vessel there, causing bleeding. Then, rinse the wound with rose water or a solution of honey and cold water. Then, place under the tongue a silk thread that the patient can hold onto every night.
So that it does not stick again, if bleeding occurs, apply a powdered charcoal to the place, but if blood overcomes you, wipe the place with a cotton swab adjusted for this purpose. Then treat him with all treatments until he is cured.
Chapter Five and Thirty.
In the extraction of a tooth that has grown under the tongue.
It may happen under the tongue a small lump that resembles a tooth, preventing the tongue from performing its natural function, and sometimes bone until it fills the mouth, and the operation consists of opening the mouth of the patient facing the sun and examining the lump.
If you see him like a dark spot or black hard, and if the physician cannot feel any hardness in it, then do not expose yourself to him, for it is cancer. And even if it is slightly yellowish with moisture, cut it out with a sharp knife and split it open with a fine needle, and cleanse it from all sides.
If blood overcomes you while performing the operation, place a piece of cotton soaked in powdered charcoal on it until the blood stops flowing, then return to the operation until you extract it completely, then wash it with salt and water.
Then treat him with all the appropriate treatments until he is cured.
The sixth and thirty-third chapter.
In the treatment of breast cancer.
And what grows in the neck from all other tumors may expose internal glands similar to the glands that are exposed from outside, called breasts, if treated with what was mentioned in the section on amputation, it did not cure.
If the tumor is hard like a dark spot with little sensation, do not expose yourself to it with iron, and if it is red in color and its root is thick, also do not expose yourself to it with iron for fear of bleeding, but leave it until it becomes soft. Either cut it out or let it burst on its own.
If the white color is uniform and its origin is thin, then it should be cut, and the operation should be done after examining if it has completely settled and the heat has caused complete cooling or some degree of cooling.
Then, the patient should be placed in a chair under the sun with his head on your stone and his mouth opened. A servant should hold his tongue between your hands and use this tool to press it downwards: its image is shown below.
It should be made of silver or copper, thin like a knife. If you press the tongue with it and the tumor appears to you, then take a small hook and insert it into the tumor and extract it outwards as much as possible without extracting any part of the healthy flesh along with it.
Then, cut it off with this tool that resembles a pair of scissors, but its tips are sharp and curved, facing each other, made of Indian iron or Damascus steel.
If you do not have this tool, then use a sharp knife of this shape:
Sharp on one side and not sharp on the other. After cutting one tumor, cut the other in this manner, then after cutting, wash the patient with cold water or a solution of salt and water.
If the wound is bleeding excessively, immerse it in water that has been boiled with the quills of porcupines or the leaves of asafetida or similar substances until the bleeding stops. Then treat the wound until it heals completely. If there are other growths in the throat besides the lymph nodes, cut them off as mentioned in the section on cutting the lymph nodes, whether they are in the throat or not.
A woman was treated for a tumor that had grown inside her throat, causing difficulty in swallowing and nearly blocking her throat. The woman was unable to eat and could only drink water.
She was on the verge of death if she had lived for another day or two, as the tumor had grown so large that its branches protruded from her nose. She quickly grabbed a pair of pliers and forced one into her mouth, then pulled out a piece that was suitable for removal.
Then she cut it where she had grasped it from the nostril, then did the same with what protruded from the other nostril. She opened her mouth and held down her tongue, then she forced the pliers into the same tumor again and cut out some of it, but only blood flowed out.
The woman's throat was cleared and she immediately drank water, then resumed eating. We did not cut out any more of that tumor for a long time, as it kept growing back. This continued for a long time with both of them.
When I cut into the tumor inside the throat, it stopped growing, then I removed it from the side, and I do not know what God did to it after that.
The Seventh Chapter: On the Treatment of Wounds
In the Removal of a Tumor from the Throat
If a white, elongated tumor falls into the throat and swells up, it is called a 'staff'; if it is dense at the bottom and smooth on top, it is called an 'apple'. If treated as mentioned in the section on incision, it will not heal.
If the tumor was hot and had subsided, and it was thin, it should be cut out; if it was not all together and smooth, and did not have length, and was red or dark in color, or had no feeling, it should be avoided.
If the tumor was on the side of the throat, as mentioned in its whiteness and length, the surgeon should sit by the patient's head with a sunshade, insert the tool as mentioned, then the surgeon should push the tumor with the instrument.
She should be pulled down and cut with one of the tools mentioned in cutting the lemons, but only as much as necessary, without excess, for if you cut more than necessary, it will damage the voice and speech.
Then, after the cutting, you use what we described in the cutting of the two lentils and treat them until they are clean, if the wound of the cut opens again, it is necessary to use the wire in its cavity without fear or caution, and the face of the cavity is nothing but the severe medicine, which is to put the head of the wire on your stone.
Then, you press his tongue with the tool we mentioned, then take from the harsh water that we mentioned in the section on the cavity and mix it with him without wiping, and make it neither thick nor thin, and fill it with this device and its image:.
Its tip, which you put the medicine in, has a size like the size of a tablespoon of murr, and you put the device with the medicine on the patient's tongue itself and the wire is lying on its side so that saliva from inside his throat does not fall out of his throat anything that would harm him.
Then, you hold the medicine with your hand while grinding it on the patient's tongue for half an hour until you see that it has become black and the poison of the medicine has subsided, and if you want to take cotton, you wrap it around a tablespoon of murr and dip it in the medicine.
The cotton is introduced into a tube from above until the cotton adheres to the wound. This is done repeatedly until the desired amount of pulp is obtained from the grape. Then it is left for three or four days, as it decays and softens. If needed, the remedy is prepared again.
After the pulp, a moistened cotton pad soaked in oil is wiped around the grape to remove any remaining medication. Then it is rinsed with cold water and treated from outside with massages and from inside with the use of a probe until it is clean. This type of treatment is safer than surgery and less frightening.
The wound can also be treated gently with a mixture of pulp and surgery using incense. The following ingredients are taken: garlic, zofa, sathar, sudhab, shih, baboong, qaisum, and others from the herbs, which are all gathered together or some of them in a pot and soaked in water.
The pot is boiled and placed in the middle of the cover with a hole on it, on which the siphon device is made from silver or copper.
The part containing the garlic is inserted into the mouth of the siphon until the steam rises to the wound through the tube until the wound swells wonderfully. Then it is repeated on it until it decays. Do not make this treatment at the first sign of the tumor.
If often increases in the tumor, and it is only appropriate to do this at the moment of its hot burning, but if you do not have this tool, take a spoon and break off a piece of egg white and put it on its tip so that it does not burn the mouth of the patient.
Because the egg white shell prevents the heat of the steam from burning the mouth, and this is a good treatment with safety.
Chapter Eight and Thirty.
In removing the thorns and whatever else may arise in the throat.
Often, something like bone or thorn or large thorn or other things may arise in the throat, so it is appropriate to remove what was visible and fell on it after pressing the tongue with the tool at noon.
So that you may know what is in the throat, and what has not been visible to you and has disappeared in the throat, it is appropriate to warm the patient before he eats his food in his stomach because maybe the thing that pierced him with vomit or the patient swallows a piece of cloth or a rough piece.
Or he swallows a piece of dry bread or takes a piece of marine sponge and ties it with a thread, then he swallows it, so when it reaches the place of the thorn, pull the thread quickly and do this several times.
The spear often sticks in the shield or bone and comes out, but if it does not come out as mentioned earlier, use a tool made of lead on this image.
The instrument should be thinner than a camel's hair and at its tip there is a tube that the surgeon enters into the wound with gentleness, while raising his head above and holding his breath to avoid causing vomiting, and he pushes the bone or spear out, or the doctor inserts it with his hand.
The surgeon's insertion of it is better for his knowledge of the position of the offending object, and he pushes it down or pulls it up with the tool as much as is possible for him until it comes out.
Chapter 93.
In removing the offending object from the throat.
If you have treated the offending object as mentioned in the division of treatments with drugs and it did not work, then look at the throat of the surgeon under the sun after he has bitten his tongue with the tool that was described to you.
If your eyes see the offending object, then pull it out with a small forceps or a delicate but firm grip, if you cannot do so, then take a hollow tube and insert it into the throat of the surgeon near the offending object, then insert iron protected by fire into the tube.
The patient should do this repeatedly and endure not drinking water for the whole day, then take a basin filled with cold water and open his mouth in it and rinse with it, not swallowing any of it, and move the water around with his hand from time to time.
If the gum drops on the place, if it feels the water, then if it does not come out as described, the throat will excrete urine and feces with the tool described in the book of Ali ibn Abbas al-Majusi.
The work in the enema is that you take a pot with a hole in it covered by a cloth in the middle, and put the tip of the tool through that hole, then pour the enema and place the patient's mouth on the end of the tube and close his mouth so that the enema does not come out until he knows that the enema has reached his throat.
If the gum does not drop on the place, but only on the cloth, then repeat the enema and make the patient endure thirst and eat salt and garlic and do not drink water, for it is necessary to remove it with this method, and this is a picture of the tool that attracts the gum from the throat if it falls on it.
This is similar to the labia, as you see, except that it has this cleansing which enters into the throat and its tip resembles the beak of a bird in it, with roughness of the cold. If it is shed on something, it does not leave it.
Another tool is used to press the tongue, which is a wide iron ring as large as the mouth above the tongue, entering into the mouth standing on one side of it, so the mouth remains open without the will of the patient and he cannot remove it until he inclines it.
The method of the tool that opens the mouth in this measurement with an eye.
Chapter 40.
In it, they make from the speech at the base of the tumors and narrow it.
The tumors have many types, intricate according to what is mentioned one by one in this book and they differ in their base and narrowness from two sides: one of them from the type of the tumor itself and what it contains of moisture.
The second type is from the body parts where it occurs, because the tumor that occurs in the head is not the same as the tumor that occurs in the abdomen, and the tumor that occurs in a part of meat is not the same as the tumor that occurs in a joint, and for each one there is a rule for treatment.
Among the tumors, those that should not be removed except after the curdling of the blood in them and their maturity, and among these are those that should be removed although they have not reached full maturity, like tumors near the joints.
Because if the tumor occurs near a joint and its duration is long enough to cause necrosis around it, it may damage tendons or nerves of that joint, making it a cause for disability of that limb, or the tumor may be near a major organ.
Because if you delay removal until it curdles, you may damage that major organ, or it may be near the throat, so it should be removed as a preliminary, not fully matured tumor near the throat to prevent necrosis from spreading inside the throat and becoming incurable.
And it may reach a point where it cannot be cured, and you should know the time to remove mature tumors that have reached full maturity when the pain of the tumor has subsided, the fever has gone, there is a lack of redness and swelling, and the tumor head and other signs have receded.
And it is recommended to remove the tumor from the lowest possible position if possible, so that the bleeding can flow downwards or from a less painful position of the tumor and with less resistance, and the removal should be done along the length of the body if the tumors are near the hands and feet.
In the positions of muscles, tendons, nerves, and vessels, and in general on all horizontal surfaces that have no folds, and as for those that do have folds, one should use a probe according to the specific position, and if the tumor is in the fleshy areas, it is best to leave the probe.
Until its maturity is achieved as we mentioned earlier, if you probe it before that, it will prolong the flow of pus from it and cause much harm and hardening of his lips and swelling, and some tumors may be probed on the surface of the body when necessary or according to what is needed by the organ.
One should use a narrow probe for small tumors and a wide or numerous probes on the size of the tumor, and some tumors may need to be punctured and cut if they have become like a boil.
It has reached a point where it has become like what is shown in many incisions and excavations, and some of them cut through like the shape of paper, such as the Arabic letter "alif" or the letter "ba".
And some of them are used with even cuts and half-moon cuts, and others, and if it does not have a head like flat smooth tumors, one should use a simple probe only, and if the tumor is large and has gathered for a long time and probed it, do not rush to extract all the pus at that time.
Remove a portion of it, then stretch the tumor to another day, then remove another portion of the scab, repeat this process gradually until all of it is removed.
Especially if the patient is weak in strength, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an elderly person with wrinkles, often the vital spirit is destroyed along with the removal of the scab, so much so that the patient may die and you would not know it. This door is extremely dangerous.
After removing these tumors, it is recommended to clean the wound and examine it. If the wound of the tumor is small or the cavities are simple, use the felt from the silk or cotton pulp. If the tumor is large and the cavities are numerous.
It is recommended to insert felt into each cavity until they touch each other, and if the tumor has been cut from the skin or sliced, it is recommended to soak it in cotton pulp or dry silk felt and stretch it to the third day.
Then remove it and treat it with the appropriate ointments until it is clean, if there is bleeding at the time of your work, use cold water and vinegar after drinking in them a piece of silk cloth and hold it on the place of the bleeding repeatedly.
If the duration of bleeding is prolonged, it is necessary to use the remedies and treatments and antidotes that we have described in many places of this book and from the sections, if you are in a time of winter and the tumor's location is abundant in nerves, it is advisable to apply hot drinks and warm oil.
And place them on the location, and if you are in summer and the locations are of flesh, it is advisable to apply the remedies with water and oil or with a drink and oil all of that cold until if the third day as we said, it is advisable to remove the tumor and wipe it.
And use in its treatment whatever is necessary until it is clean, this is what you need to know about the treatment of tumors in general and as for the detailed method, we have mentioned every tumor how to treat it briefly.
Chapter 20.
On the treatment of tumors that appear on the scalp.
Tumors appear on the scalp and are of types that witches carry them, they have conditions like a chicken's comb and many of its kinds such as scabs and some that contain moisture similar to the mucus.
From it are those that contain moisture similar to soup and stew, etc., and those that are solidly congealed. All of them have no risk in their incision and extraction, unless something stops you at the time of incision.
The work in their incision is to first rinse them with the tool that has the shape of it, after that, the one called the 'maduss' until you know what is inside. If what is inside is moisture, then incise it lengthwise, a simple incision on this shape:
Start the incision from line ~b~ to line ~j~. If the moisture is drained, remove the bag that contained that moisture and cut it all, leaving nothing of it. Often, if something remains, it will return.
Then, soak a cotton in the fresh gall and if it is available, in saltwater. Fill the wound with it and leave it for another day, as it eats what remains of the bag. Then, prepare it again with the gall twice or three times if needed.
Until you are sure that nothing remains of the bag, then treat the wound with the gall until it is clean. If the tumor contains a fatty substance, incise it on this shape:
A sharp, curved knife is used to pry open the wound and remove the splinters from all sides. If a blood vessel obstructs you, do as instructed later. Similarly, if the tumor is calcified from the incision, treat it accordingly.
Treat the calcified tumor as mentioned earlier, and incising it is easier because it has little blood and moisture. Some of these head tumors in some people have no moisture at all, which I have personally incised upon.
The head of an elderly woman had a tumor as hard as flint, white and impossible to break, even if someone threw it against something, it would not shatter. None of the other head tumors were like this, except those found in children's heads.
And at the origin of the ears, incise it all with a simple incision and remove its base to facilitate the flow of the material downwards, then treat it with whatever treatment matches it.
The second and fortieth chapters.
In incising the kidneys that often appear in the neck, these tumors often appear in the neck and under the armpits and also in other parts of the body. The one that appears in the neck is usually a single one but can be many and some grow from others.
All pigs have a specific dorsal fin like those in fish and head tumors as we described, and there are many types of these pigs, some of which are calcified, some of which contain fluids, and some of which are corrupt and do not respond to treatment.
I have not seen any of these pigs with a healthy condition when touched, and its appearance was close to the color of the skin, moving in all directions, and it was not attached to the neck nerve or blood vessel or vein, and it was not inflamed. It is appropriate to cut it simply from top to bottom along the body in this shape, from line ~g~ to line ~b~.
And to peel it from all sides and extend the skin flaps with a spear or two spears or many spears as needed, as we said in head tumors, and extract it little by little, and it should be on the neck so that it does not cut a nerve or nerve, and the probe should not be too sharp.
So that your hand does not cut too much or cause bleeding, do not cut what you do not need to cut, if you cut a nerve or blood vessel and it stops working, put gauze or some cotton that stops bleeding in the wound.
When the wound is deep, leave it until the sharpness of the tumor subsides and the wound relaxes and begins to fester. If the blood stops flowing at that time, return to your work until you have drained it all. Then examine with your little finger to see if there are any remaining splinters, and if there are, cut them off and clean them.
If there is a large amount of bone in the splinters, it is better not to cut those splinters from their source, but rather to tie them with a strong, double-threaded thread and leave them until they fall out on their own without harm. Then dress the wound with cotton soaked in the Egyptian mercurous chloride, which has absorbed it.
If all the splinters have been cut, it is better to bring together the edges of the wound and stitch them from their original position after knowing that none remain. If you see that a fragment of bone remains, then treat it.
It is better to cut to its source and squeeze it out, and use stitching and what we mentioned, and if the splinters contain moisture, wipe them with a simple cotton swab where you can see the position of its ripeness, and place the cotton swab below as we said.
Then, after using the squeezing instrument (Albucasis), you use the Egyptian probe and similar instruments to remove any remaining decay until you see the wound has been cleaned, then treat it with moistened healing sponges until it is healed.
The third and fortieth chapter.
In the region of the hypochondrium, about a tumor that occurs inside the throat.
The ancients mentioned this region in the hypochondrium, and I have not seen anyone in our country perform it, and this is a mere talk of theirs; as for those who deal with dissection, it is advisable for them to avoid this region since they do not benefit from it.
Because all the vessels and lungs are flat, and as for those who have a hot tumor in the mouth or throat or jaws if there is no difficulty in the gum, it is necessary to use the region of the hypochondrium to avoid the trouble that would be from choking.
It is advisable if we want to incise the hypochondrium under three circles from the circles of the gum or four small incisions with a width between two circles as much as the incision in the cheek, not in the gum, and this position is suitable for the incision.
Because it is free of flesh and blood vessels from it are far, so if the physician is careful, he should extend the skin of the neck with a probe then incise the skin until he reaches the gum, avoiding blood vessels if he sees anything from them.
Then, he cuts the incision that we described, and he deduces the location of the sinus from the orifice of the saliva that comes out of it along with what is torn and from the interruption of the sound and leaving the wound open for a certain time. If the time has passed and the fear of choking has subsided, then he unites the edges of the wound from the skin.
Then, he cuts it alone without the gauze, and then the medicines that cause the flesh to grow are used until it becomes clean, said the author of this book, interpreting the meaning of this statement we mentioned: if they saw that the patient had closed his mouth by one of these tumors that they mentioned.
And the patient died and they thought that he would die, they went to the incision of the abdomen so that the patient could breathe on the place of the wound some breaths and escape from death, but they only ordered to leave the wound open until the illness subsides and its duration is three days and more.
At that time, they ordered to suture the wound and treat it until it becomes clean, which I saw myself: a servant took a knife and sent it on her neck, she cut some of the lung tissue with it, and she was treated for it, but she was found to be hoarse like the sacrificed one, so they uncovered the wound.
Found the blood that flowed from the wound to be thin, I was certain that it had not cut an artery or a vein, and the wind was exiting the wound, so I cleansed the wound and treated it until it healed without any complications, revealing nothing except for a slight whistling sound when breathing.
After several days, she returned to her best condition, from which we can conclude that there is no danger in piercing the diaphragm.
The fortieth chapter.
Regarding the incision into the tumor that appears in the neck from outside and is called the tumor of the neck.
This tumor, called the tumor of the neck, is a large mass on the body and is common in women, occurring in two types.
Either it is natural or it is external, so if it is natural, there is no remedy for it, and if it is external, it consists of two parts, one of which is similar to scars, and the other is similar to a tumor that arises from the complexity of the vein, and there is danger in its incision. Therefore, it is not appropriate to incise it with a sharp iron unless it is small and you have scrubbed and explored it with a cotton swab, then cauterized it, it will resemble a scar and will not be connected to any nerve, so it can be incised like other tissues. The excerpt translates to: "If it contains what is within it, if it is in a bag, extract it all, otherwise examine all of it and then treat the affected area with what is appropriate for treatment.
The chapter title translates to: "Chapter Forty-Five".
The section title translates to: "On the Types of Goods".
The excerpt translates to: "Goods are many in type and all types of them have been mentioned in the division, so it is appropriate for us to mention here the difference between goods and haram (forbidden) which is a problem, so I say that haram has heat, poison, and severe pains until the heat of the forbidden substance cools down. The excerpt translates to: "Then the poison settles in heat and sharpness, while goods do not have heat, poison, or pains, and it is contained in a bag of silk which has a special covering and its beginning is like hummus and becomes like bread and larger and smaller.
The excerpt translates to: "It is of two types, either it is oily or it contains moisture and the colors of moisture are many as mentioned in the division, so if you come across treating goods, it is appropriate to cleanse and examine them first with the tool called the mortar according to its shape as mentioned in the section that follows.
The size of the tumor is measured, then the needle is removed and observe what comes out in its trace. If it comes out moisture, no matter what color it was, cut it simply as mentioned for all other tumors. But if it does not come out moisture in the trace of the needle, know that it is scabrous.
Cut a deep, firm incision on it as mentioned in the picture, and stitch it with sutures, peel off the skin from all sides gently and preserve it in a vessel if possible so that it can come out completely with the specimen.
If the vessel breaks during the operation and you cannot extract it completely, often it is shown like that. So extract it piece by piece until nothing remains of it. For if anything remains, it is likely to be less or more, the specimen usually behaves like that in such cases.
If it overpowers you and something remains, rub the wound with some sharp caustic substances during your rest, tighten the wound and place something on top of it that can neutralize the hot tumor, then treat it with all other treatments until it is clean. If the specimen is large, cut its mouth and treat it with whatever is used to bind.
If a clot or non-clot blood is encountered and there is bleeding, first clean the place with powdered zaj (a type of caustic substance) and leave it tightened for two or three days until the wound rots and the heat of the blood subsides, then return to cutting what remains of the specimen.
Chapter Sixty-Four: The Treatment of Fractures and Dislocations.
In the Images of Instruments.
Those which are used in the back and belly of them are images of spoons, which are three types of them: large, middle, and small.
Image of a large spoon:
Image of a medium spoon:
Image of a small spoon:
Made of folded iron with squared ends to quickly enter the wounds, these are images of probes and called 'bard', which are also three types: large, middle, and small. Image of a large probe:
Image of a medium probe:
Image of a small probe:
Used to explore wounds, surgeries, and secretions from what is inside them of bones and other things. A probe made of silk-covered, smooth, and polished like spoons, from Chinese silver, or spatula, or copper, or iron, or silver, and the best of them are those made of spatula.
Probes can also be made of black lead and used to suck secretions from what is inside them of pus, which is then filtered to remove its impurities, and this filtration is also three types: long, medium, and short.
As much as is needed, make the cavity of a lancet wide and narrow, like the shape of a large bullet.
The shape of a bullet in the middle.
The shape of a small bullet.
The types of lancets are many, because there are simple ones with one prong and three main types: large, medium, and small. There are also blind lancets, which are three types, and lancets with prongs, which are three types, and curved lancets with prongs. And there are three types with three prongs, and all of these types are needed in their respective places. The shape of a simple large lancet: The shape of a medium simple lancet. The shape of a small simple lancet.
The shape of a large blind lancet. The shape of a medium blind lancet.
The shape of a small blind lancet.
The shape of a large lancet with prongs. The shape of a medium lancet with prongs. The shape of a small lancet with prongs.
Large carpenter's tool with three blades.
Image of a medium-sized carpenter's tool with three blades. Image of a small carpenter's tool with three blades.
These are the trephines used to drill and scrape wounds and infections, there are three types: large, medium-sized, and small. Image of a large trephine.
Image of a medium-sized trephine.
Image of a small trephine.
Their blades are limited and the other parts are not, but they were made this way to be used in scraping wounds when there is fear of cutting skin or nerve. They provide some relief from the burning sensation felt during scraping of the tumor.
These are the curettes, there are three types: large, medium-sized, and small. Image of a large curette.
They are made of brass, which is almost as hard as iron. The tip of each one resembles a wide spoon with two layers, the top layer has serrated teeth like the beak of a bird, which can be pushed in and out as desired.
The cautery used to close the spaces between the fingers, at the base of the tumor, is not felt by the patient and it comes in three types: large, medium, and small. The image of a large cautery:
The cauteries used to stop bleeding, come in three types: large, medium, and small. The image of a large cauterizing iron:
These cauterizing irons are made of brass or porcelain, and are usually of a short length as seen. It is recommended to have both large and small cauterizing irons at hand to stop bleeding quickly when needed, and in case no medication is available.
However, these cauterizing irons should not be used to stop bleeding in every part of the body, but rather in fleshy areas such as the thigh, buttock, arm, chest, abdomen, and other similar fleshy parts.
And they can also be made into other small tools resembling corks on this image:
The excerpt is a section title or an image caption. The translation of the Arabic text into English is: "If it bleeds from the place of the incision or when cutting flesh or a vessel, it can be made into a compress on this image.
The translation of the Arabic text into English is: "Chapter 74.
The translation of the Arabic text into English is: "In the treatment of the male breast.
The translation of the Arabic text into English is: "That which resembles the breast of women, some people's breasts may swell due to the heat of fever until it resembles the breast of women, and it remains a disgusting scar. Therefore, if one dislikes this, it is recommended to incise the breast with a crescent-shaped incision on this shape.
The translation of the Arabic text into English is: "From line ~b~ to line ~g~. The translation of the Arabic text into English is: "Then remove all the pus, then fill the wound with the salted mustard paste, then bring together the edges of the wound by sutures and treat it until it heals, if the breast moves downwards and relaxes for its bone as it appears to women.
The translation of the Arabic text into English is: "It is recommended to incise its upper sides with two incisions that resemble crescent shapes, each one connected to the other at their ends until the larger line surrounds the smaller one on this image. From line ~b~ to line ~j~, then shave the skin that is between the two lines and remove the scab, and use what we mentioned about sewing and sutures and whatever is needed for treatment until it heals completely.
If you do not understand what needs to be cut, then cut it for the sake of preventing excessive bleeding or before the bleeding starts, it is recommended to stuff the wound with cotton soaked in honey and leave it until it consumes the remaining scab, then treat it until it heals completely.
Chapter 84.
In the tumors that appear under the nail.
These tumors that appear under the nail are of the type called solid pus, which contains a pouch and some of it contains pus, so if it does not contain pus, it is recommended to make an incision in the shape of a crescent moon.
From line ~b~ to line ~j~, if all the contents of the tumor have been emptied, then stuff it with cotton soaked in honey and leave it until the next day, then remove the cotton.
And treat it with the appropriate honey until it heals completely, if the tumor is of the type called boils, then make an incision on it as we mentioned in the incision for boils, whether it extends to the length of the finger, then use the kyieh as we mentioned earlier.
Chapter 94: Treatment of Fractures in the Spine
In the region of the tumor that is exposed before the artery or vein, which is called aneurysm.
If the artery is cut and the skin that is above it is torn greatly, often a tumor is exposed from that, and also a vein is exposed to show a puncture and tumor.
The signs by which one knows if the tumor and puncture are from before the artery or from before the vein, the tumor if it is from before the artery, it is long and united in depth of the body, and if the tumor is pushed with your finger, it feels as if it has a ridge.
And that which is from before the vein, the tumor is smooth on the surface of the body, and cutting into these tumors is dangerous, especially if it is in the leg and the neck and in many places of the body and it was very great, it was necessary to avoid treating it with iron.
And that which was not from it in the limbs or in the head, one should avoid, and if it was from swelling of the artery's mouth, cut into the skin a long cut then open the cut with scissors then remove the artery and free it from the adhesions.
Until it opens, then insert a needle underneath it and pierce it through to the other side and tie the artery with a double-headed needle in two places as you were taught in the section on tying the arteries in the book of bleeding. Then scrape the point where the two sutures meet until all the blood comes out.
Then the tumor is dissolved, then use the remedy that produces milk until the stitches fall off, then treat it with the appropriate ointments until it heals.
If the tumor was previously located in front of the vein, it is necessary to grasp as much of the tumor and skin as possible with your hand, then insert a needle below the place where you grasped and pierce it through until it comes out from the other side. Then tie the tumor tightly with a good suture on both sides according to what you were taught in tying the grape from both ends of the thread, if you are afraid that the threads will slip, then insert another needle with another thread under the entire tumor at the intersection of the first needle.
Then tighten your stitches in four places, then cut the tumor in its middle until what is inside comes out. Cut the skin's flap and leave what was attached to it, then apply a poultice soaked in a drink and oil. Then use the treatment that is done by traction and pressure until it becomes free.
The Fiftieth Chapter.
In the tumor that is exposed from the nerve cord.
Similarly, the tumor is exposed in the artery and vein, so the tumor is exposed in the nerve if it occurs in it due to a blow or excessive fatigue or similar, and this is more common in the positions of the shoulders and neck.
In every place where the joints move and it is a soft tumor that resembles the color of the rest of the body, and it is often without pain, but if pressed hard, he feels a sensation of pain similar to rheumatism, and the tumor is not united deep in the body.
But it is under the skin and moves to all sides, not going towards the front or back, so whatever was in the joints should not be exposed to iron, because perhaps it caused a scar, and what was in the head or forehead.
If the tumor is small, grab it with a needle and cut it from its source, and if it is large, tie it with a suture and extract it, then remove it and stitch the wound and treat it until it becomes free.
Translation: Chapter 55.
Translation: On the incision of the thighs that are exposed in the abdomen.
Translation: It is often exposed in the abdomens and other bodies of some people, called the fetid thighs due to its resemblance to mold, its original form is thin and its head is thick, it can have small ones and it can also have larger ones.
Translation: I have seen a man in whose abdomen there were two fetid thighs that were very similar to mold, their original form was thin and white, they had cracks and moisture always flowed from them, so I cut them off and weighed them, one was about eighteen ounces and the other was about sixteen ounces.
Translation: And the operation on cutting them is to look, if the upper part is moist and the color of the fetid thighs is white and wet thin in its original form, then cut it with a wide-bladed knife and let it be near your fire until much blood flows out when cutting it.
Translation: If blood overwhelms you, then burn it, if you see the upper part is loose and afraid of being cut with iron, take a strong copper wire and tie it around the fetid thigh and leave it for two days, then add more copper wire and it will continue to tighten the copper wire.
If the throat becomes inflamed until it breaks and falls out of its own accord without cause, if the throat was originally thick, then in its cutting there will be some fear and trembling, especially what was in the belly, but it may be possible to cut half of it or part of it.
Then it is stitched to prevent it from returning, then it is treated until the wound is cleansed, and be careful not to expose a throat cut that is thin in appearance and has little sensation, as it may be a sign of cancer, and I will mention cancer after this.
The second and fifty-second chapter.
In the treatment of a hernia in a woman.
A hernia in a woman can be caused by many reasons, either from the rupture of the saphenous vein on the abdomen from which the intestine or the mesentery escapes as appears in other books, or from blood that issues from a vein or artery as mentioned before, or from wind that causes inflammation in it.
If it was before the rupture of the saphenous vein and the escape of the intestine, then the tumor will have a color similar to the body's color and will be painless and different in appearance. And if it was before the escape of the mesentery, its condition will be more different as mentioned earlier, and if you press it with your fingers, it will disappear and then return, and sometimes there is a tremor with him and he becomes very large at the entrance of the bath and severe fatigue, but if it was before moisture, then it will be painless.
It is important that the tumor is not too large or too small, and if it is before the blood, it will appear as a dark spot, but if it is before the meat, it will be a hard, solid, and immovable mass.
If it is before the wind, it will feel smooth, and in this case, if it is near the vein, artery, or windpipe, it is best to avoid treatment as there is danger and harm, as I have informed you in the chapter on tumors that occur near the veins and arteries.
If it is near the kidney or liver, it is best to order the patient to hold himself upright and steady, then apply a bandage around the tumor entirely. Then order him to lie on his back with his belly facing up, then apply a wide bandage around the tumor at the position you applied the bandage, then extend the middle of the tumor above with a large needle, and tie the position of the bandage with a strong silk thread.
The knot of the tie should be loosened, then open the middle of the extended tumor above the tie and insert your little finger into it, if you find the kidney, pull the knot and push the kidney back inside the belly, but if you find the liver, extend it with a needle.
Cut his glans, for if a blood vessel or nerve resists you, crush it with a strong instrument and return to your work. Take two needles and insert them into the crushed area, then tie them around the tumor in two places where you have already pierced it. Then, cut off the tumor at four points.
If you wish, remove the needles and leave the area until the wounded flesh heals and falls off by itself or cut it if it has rotted and smells bad. Then treat it with ointments until it is completely healed, if there is any pus remaining in the wound.
Or if there is moisture, as we said earlier, drain the tumor and the moisture found in it, then treat it with ointments that heal the wound.
The third chapter.
In the treatment of cancer.
We mentioned in the previous chapter that there are different types of cancer and how to treat them with medications, warning against treating it with iron so as not to cause inflammation. We also mentioned the cancer that develops in the uterus and warned against treating it.
The ancients said that if the cancer is in a place where it can be completely removed, such as the breast or thigh and other limbs, it should be removed in its entirety, especially if it is small and new. However, if it has spread and become large, it should not be approached.
I have not found anyone who could cleanse it from him nor have I seen anyone before me who reached that, and if it is possible to reach it as we said, then advance it little by little from the dark time until it becomes easy, then cut it off if it is in the sinew filled with pus.
Then advance the ulcer into a position where it can be worked on, then apply the appropriate ointments for the sarcoma, then cover it from all sides with the skin while examining to ensure nothing remains of its roots and do not cut it off quickly, but let the blood flow.
Instead, irrigate the area and remove all thick blood with your hand or with whatever tools you have available, for if it obstructs your work, there will be a great flow of blood from cutting an artery or vein until the blood stops, then treat him with all other treatments until he is cleansed.
The fourth and fiftieth chapter.
In the treatment of boils.
We have already informed you in the section on fomentation about the types of fomentation, how water should be mixed, and the signs of each type and its treatment with drugs, which is only cured by iron is the zacqya boil alone and does not approach the tablia or the fleshy boil at all.
If you have previously treated this type of skin disease with medication and it has not improved, then examine it further. If the cause is a wound that has become weak or if there is another disease present, such as a wound.
If it is coughing or diarrhea and similar, then do not treat it with iron as it is harmful. If you see that the wound is strong and there is no other disease present except for the skin disease alone, and it is not a child nor an elderly person, then the treatment is to place the wound between your hands. And a servant behind him who massages his belly with his hands and pushes the water down towards the side of the pain, then you take a piece of cloth and place it on this image.
It is limited on both sides and long, like a cloth, except that there is some foul smell in it so that it does not cause harm when used for the work until it reaches the intestines. Then look to see if the skin disease is coming from the side of the intestines.
It is appropriate to remove it from the side of the ribs by three fingers below, on top of the pain, if the skin disease is coming from a previous liver disease, then your incision should be from the side of the ribs by three fingers, if it is coming from a previous kidney disease, then your incision should be on the right side by three fingers.
It is also important that the incision should not be made on the side where the patient intends to lie, in order to prevent the drool from flowing to that weak position, then pierce the entire skin with the leather tool, then insert the tool into that incision and raise your hand.
Between the skin and the fascia, as if you are scraping it, and the amount you scrape is the amount of the nail or more, then pierce the fascia until the scraped part reaches an empty position, which is the position of water, then extract it and insert the tool, whose image is this.
It is similar to a tube made of fine copper, which is made of silver or copper or asparagus, smooth and woven, with a small hole at the bottom and three holes on the sides, two from one side and one from the other side, as you see.
And he may place its tip on the shape of a pen, like this image of it.
At its upper tip, there is a ring. If the tool reaches the water, he should let go of his watch on the tool, then it will splash from the water at an average amount in time, because if you splashed more than what is appropriate in time, it may cause the patient to die due to animal spirit loss.
He shows him a deception that approaches death, but he exerts himself from it according to his strength and what is indicated to him by the conditions of the patient, such as the strength of his pulse beat and the beauty of his complexion, then the instrument is removed and the water is held back, and this is done because it retains its position for a certain time.
Because of the skin that holds the hole on the sphacelus that you informed to extract it on that method, then the instrument is reinserted another day if the patient seems likely for that.
And also from the water a small amount do this for days and you are on guard until there remains only a small amount of water, if the patient becomes weak and leaves much water, then treat him with burying in hot sand.
And much sweating in the bath and sun, and patient him on thirst and treat him with dry medicines until he is cleansed, and give him food for the stomach, liver and intestine after removing the water as you mentioned in what was previously stated.
Chapter 50.
For the treatment of children born and positions of urine from them not punctured or the puncture is narrow or in the wrong position.
The translation of the excerpt is: "Some boys may be born without a navel, unharmed from their mother's womb and stomach, and it is appropriate to make a navel for them at the time of birth.
The translation of the excerpt is: "With a very thin needle, on this image:
The translation of the excerpt is: "Then, place a thin silver wire in the puncture and tie it and hold it for three or four days, until when he wants to urinate, release him from it, and if you do not use silver, it may be possible that the urine passing over the spot may block it.
The translation of the excerpt is: "As for those whose puncture is narrow, it should be treated with silver for many days until it becomes wider, and those who have their puncture in an incorrect position, such as those born with the puncture at the end of the umbilical cord, they cannot urinate towards their front.
The translation of the excerpt is: "Until he raises his legs above and does not urinate before the placenta comes out, as it may prevent the placenta from reaching the uterus in a standing position, which is a very bad reason, and the solution in this case is to place the child on his back.
The translation of the excerpt is: "Then, extend his stomach with your left hand to a great extent and clean the placenta with a comb or a sharp needle like the size of a pen or as if you are removing something so that it becomes like a funnel and the puncture falls in the middle as it should be.
When performing surgery, if there is bleeding, often it is necessary to apply something that stops the blood flow and treat the wound until it heals completely.
Chapter 65.
In the fistula that is exposed in the gum, the crown, and the root, and the decay, and the contact of the gum with the crown.
Frequently, this fistula appears in the tooth, which is a sign of decay, and it can be either bad or not bad. If it is not bad, it should be attached to a fine wire.
Then, cut it until it is completely clean, then apply a piece of cotton soaked in the Egyptian mummia, then treat it with the Nile lotus after that until it heals completely. If the fistula is bad and has a dark color, it is recommended to use the kii after cutting and cleaning it.
If the fistula is in the gum and has not been cleaned, and some of the fistula was inside the gum and some was outside, it is recommended to remove the fistula that was inside first until it dissolves, then treat it from the outside.
Because if you treated them together, the gum may not be cleaned properly, and it can also appear in females and in the gum, decay and corruption. It is recommended to remove all that has decayed and to prevent further decay or corruption.
Then apply honey to it afterwards, mixed with crushed pomegranate peel and cardamom, and then treat it with all the treatments until it heals. If there is a wound that bleeds, use ka'k with halawiya paste on this shape.
Indeed, ka'k is beneficial for both conditions, i.e., bleeding and wounds if they have become infected. If the cotton has rotten and its threads have disappeared at any time, it should be inserted into the urethra with a copper tube filled with libbol ul-ali on it. As for the cotton stick touching the glans penis.
This touching only occurs in someone whose cotton stick is correct and has not been ordered to change it before. If there is a wound or boil, it is recommended to scrape it with a needle until the thread dissolves and the cotton stick is removed from all sides.
If it is difficult to distinguish between the cotton stick and the urethra, it is recommended to scrape a little from the cotton stick and the urethra. This is because the urethra is thin, so it may have been punctured quickly for its softness. Then, separate them with a thin needle that has been boiled in cold water to prevent them from touching each other again.
Then he treats with a drink that holds until it dissolves.
The seventh and fifty chapter.
In the purification of boys and treatment of what appears to them from defects.
The circumcision is not something other than the separation of the prepuce like other surgeries, except that when we do it with our will and use it in boys especially, it is necessary to draw the best work in it.
And the easiest way to safety, I say that the earliest ones did not mention circumcision in anything of their books because it was not used in their rituals and it is only what we have acquired.
By experiment, and that I found the majority of craftsmen and surgeons using purification with Musa and Muqass and using Falaka and Rabat with thread and cutting with thimble and I have tried all these faces.
So I did not find better than purification with Muqass and Rabat with thread because the purification with Musa often causes the skin to be lost because the skin of the forehead is two layers, so if you cut the upper layer, the lower layer remains.
So he is forced to cut again and it is not repeated and the purification with Falaka does not match with cutting the tip of the penis because perhaps it entered its hole, and if the purification with thimble perhaps the skin was torn and spoiled your work or the boy's skin was short by nature.
Many are born in this manner and do not require purification, as I have observed. However, the use of the probe and threading with a needle has proven its benefit to me because the probe cuts from above like it cuts from below.
When you use your hand to thread the two needles, cut them to the same length in one time and in one time, the tip of the needle will become almost like a wall for the skin of the wound from all sides without any mistake falling on it. The first step is to imagine the boy.
Especially if he understands a little that you only thread the needle in his wound and bring him back another day, then make him happy and secretly tell him all the things you can do for him with his mind, then stop him between your hands raised high.
He should not be sitting and hide the probe in your hand or under your foot so that the boy's eye does not fall on it or anything from the machines, then enter your hand into his wound and blow on the skin and move it up until the head of the wound comes out.
Then clean him from what gathers in it, then tie the taught position with a double thread, then tie below it a little second stitch, then hold your thumb and the sphincter muscle of the lower tie firmly and cut between the stitches. Then quickly lift the skin above and extract the head of the splinter. Then allow a little blood to flow as it is better and less likely to cause inflammation. Then clean it with a moist cotton swab. Then sprinkle some powdered burnt aloe vera on it, which is the best I have tried or ground harraric gum, it is also beneficial.
Then quickly lift the skin above and extract the head of the splinter. Then allow a little blood to flow as it is better and less likely to cause inflammation. Then clean it with a moist cotton swab. Then sprinkle some powdered burnt aloe vera on it, which is the best I have tried or ground harraric gum, it is also beneficial. Then apply a paste made of boiled egg yolk mixed with rose water and rose oil on the splinters using a cotton swab. Leave it on for several days, then treat it with other remedies until it heals completely.
This is an image of the instrument used for purification:
The scissors should be sharp and straight, with a hook at the end for extracting the splinter. The length of the blades should be equal to the length of the handles. If the splinter is completely removed or partially removed during cutting, it is necessary to extend it with your finger before removing it to prevent inflammation.
If you cannot hold it with your finger, use a forceps to remove it. If the splinter has been under the skin for more than three days and is still inflamed and painful, leave it alone until the inflammation subsides, then gently remove it.
Cut it according to what is available to you, and preserve the head of the fracture, for if you cut something from the head of the fracture, it will not harm, so treat it with the adhesive substances that we described in the article on adhesives.
But if you cut more than the required amount of skin and it shrinks, it will not harm much either, so treat it with what we mentioned until it heals.
The Eighth Chapter.
In the treatment of bladder stone in the urethra.
The bladder stone in the urethra is due to its blockage by a stone, thick blood, dried blood, or rotten meat and so on, so if you treat it with what we mentioned in the treatment of stone in the urethra, follow the recommended treatments.
But if the urine did not come out and you saw that its blockage by a stone before had harmed the neck of the urethra, then it is recommended to lie on his back with his legs straight, then he should sit on his buttocks and extend his belly towards his back and hold himself as much as possible.
Then the neck of the urethra is forced to push the stone back, so if it does not come out as mentioned and the matter becomes difficult for the patient, then it is recommended to use the tool called a catheter, which looks like this:
The instrument is made of silver and is thin, smooth, and shaped like a bird's feather quill in its fineness. It is about a span and a half long, with a fine cutting edge at its tip. To secure it, take a double thread of silk or wool and tie a strong knot at its end.
The end of the thread is inserted into the nostril and bent downwards with a hook if necessary, to prevent it from entering the tube too deeply. Then, the nostrils are anointed with oil or butter or the white of an egg, and the patient is made to sit on a chair.
The thread is then moistened with warm oil, butter, or thin water, and inserted into the nostril until it reaches the opening. Then, the nostril is turned upwards towards the side of the nose, and the thread is pushed into it.
Until the nostril is turned upwards and the thread is pushed into it, then when it reaches near the nasopharynx, the patient tilts their head downwards and the thread is pushed into it until it reaches the pharynx and the patient feels it has reached an empty space.
This is done because the path that the mucus takes has a bend, so the thread is gently pulled with the silk until the mucus follows it, then it is removed and the mucus is expelled, and the nostrils are returned.
Tie a piece of cloth around the penis until the erection subsides and the impotent man finds relief.
Chapter 95.
How to inject the penis with the zaqqum.
The tools used for this are made of silver or horn with a long tube at the tip, designed to spray water and medication. This is called the zaqqum.
It is made of silver or horn with a long tube at the tip, shaped like a milking spoon except for one end, which has three holes, two on one side and one on the other, as shown.
The hollow part where the medication is placed should be filled to capacity without excess, so that if it absorbs any moisture, it will be retained, and if it is squeezed, the medication will be expelled as far as possible, like the nazzah used in naval battles.
If you want to introduce moisture into the penis, insert the tip of the zaqqum into the moisture and pull it up with the milker until the moisture is absorbed into the hollow part of the zaqqum, then insert its tip into the urethra as described in the qathatir, and squeeze the moisture out with the milker.
Indeed, that moisture reaches the urethra on its own until the patient feels it, and this is also a beautiful punctured image that inoculates the urethra:
It is made of silver or spatula, its head is shaped like a small pestle and under it there is a groove where the thread is placed, then it takes the urine and places the moisture that you want to inoculate the urethra with, then it ties them together firmly with a double-threaded suture.
Then that moisture is slightly heated on the fire, then the tip of the syringe is inserted into the urethra, then you press your hand on the urethra with the moisture firmly until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the urethra.
If you do not have a urethra, take a piece of linen and make a circle from it, pierce it in all its parts, then insert a strong thread into that hole as it is wound around, then gather the circle as the group gathers after placing whatever moisture, powders, and water you want inside it.
Then tie it to the machine and make it as you made the urethra from your hand until the moisture reaches the urethra.
Chapter Sixty.
In the extraction of the tooth.
We have mentioned in the section on separation that there are different types of toothache and its treatment with drugs, and we have mentioned the difference between toothache that occurs in the kidneys and toothache that occurs in the urethra, and all its signs, and we have mentioned the toothache that occurs in the hand and the jaw.
And that toothache that occurs in the urethra, especially that which occurs during urination, and I describe it with a detailed but concise explanation.
I say that toothache that occurs in the urethra is more common among boys, and its signs include urine exiting the urethra like water in its flow.
And it appears in him with sediment, and he feels pain in it, and disturbs it, and often it spreads and causes the presence of kidney stones in many of them, and it is easy for boys to have it until they reach fourteen years old, and it is difficult in the elderly, but as for young men, it is moderate.
And whoever has larger stones, his treatment is easier, and whoever has smaller stones, it is the opposite. So if we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to inject the urethra with a syringe that removes all the sediment in it, because it may prevent the presence of the stone during examination.
Then, the patient is taken by his legs and raised until the foreskin falls off or is pulled out from its elevated position repeatedly. Then, he is placed between your hands with his hands under his buttocks, and you examine him.
If you feel the foreskin in the space, then immediately press it with your nail from your watch if it does not come under your touch, then it is necessary to wipe the little finger of your right hand with oil from your left hand if the patient is a child or the middle finger.
If he is a complete virgin, insert it into his anus and search for the foreskin until it comes under your nail, then slightly move it towards the neck of the penis. Then, grasp it with your finger and push it outwards to the place you want to cut.
And order a servant to clean the penis with his hand and order another servant to extend his right hand above and his left hand underneath the skin of the foreskin towards the side away from the place where the cut will be made. Then, take the bronze knife which has this shape:
Cut between the fossa and the foreskin, not in the middle but to the side of the left urethra, and the cut will be on the same foreskin and your finger in the fossa while you press it outwards so that the cut is wide from outside and narrow from inside to the extent that the foreskin can come out from it.
Do not attempt to press the finger in the tumor located at the side of the shoulder, as it may come out easily without difficulty. However, know that there may be angles and letters in the tumor that can make its removal difficult.
Among these, there are some that resemble the blade of a knife and are easily removed. However, if they have angles and letters, it may slightly increase the difficulty in removing them. If they do not come out easily, it is recommended to use a sharp-edged tool like a scalpel.
To apply pressure on the tumor, do not let go of it and may use a delicate tool with a sharp tip from below. If you cannot do so, slightly widen the incision. If blood overpowers you, cut it with a scalpel.
If there are more than one, first push the largest one into the mouth of the wound, then cut it, and then push the smaller ones afterwards, doing so for each one if there are more than two. If it is very large, it is not appropriate to make a large incision on it as it may expose the patient to two harms.
Either he may die or it may cause continuous urinary incontinence as the position of the tumor may not be removed easily, but try to push it out or break it into pieces with forceps until it comes out completely.
When you have finished your work, clean the wound with kinder and patience, and apply a bandage and a poultice of oil and wine or oil and red lead and cold water to cool the hot tumor, then let the patient lie on his back for three days.
If the wound becomes suppurating, wash it with much water and oil, then treat it with the Marhama Nakhlah and the Marhama Basilikon until it is clean. If there is pus in the wound and a hot, thick, and similar to blood in the urine, and the patient cannot urinate, this indicates that the blood has come out with the urine.
Then insert your finger into the wound and remove that blood, as it may cause corruption of the urine and its putrefaction. Then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and apply each type of remedy according to what is suitable for the treatment until it is clean.
During the treatment, it is necessary to bind the buttocks and bring them together to support the remedies applied to the wound, as if the fistula is small and has become in the urethra and has grown there and the urine cannot come out, then treat it with what I have mentioned before it becomes hard and closed.
Often, this treatment has spared the need for incision, as I have tried it and found that taking a piece of iron from folded metal and shaping it like this:
A triangular piece of iron sharp at the tip and inserted into a tube, then tie a thread to the handle under the sheath to prevent it from returning to the bladder, then insert the iron piece into the urethra gently until the iron piece reaches the same sheath.
Then guide the iron piece in the same sheath little by little while you are trying to pierce it until it comes out from the other side, as the urine will flow out from its source. Then press your hand on what remains of the sheath outside the handle, as it will swell and come out with the urine, and the obstruction is removed.
If it is not possible for you to perform this treatment, then tie a thread under the sheath and another thread above the sheath, then cut through the sheath in the same handle between the two threads and then remove it.
Then wash the threads and clean the clotted blood that has accumulated in the wound, as it is only necessary to tie the thread under the sheath to prevent it from returning to the bladder and tying the other thread from above so that if the thread breaks after removing the sheath, the skin will return to its place and cover the wound.
Therefore, if you have tied the upper thread, it is recommended that you lift the skin upwards so that it returns to its place when you are free and covers the wound as we mentioned.
Chapter Six
In extracting the placenta for women.
The placenta is rarely formed in women, and if one of them has a placenta, it is difficult to treat her and many faces refuse to let the doctor see her because she might have been a virgin and the second reason is that you cannot find a woman who allows herself to be seen by the doctor.
If she is pure or from the prohibited degrees, and the third reason is that you cannot find a woman who improves this work, especially the work done by hand, and the fourth reason is that the position of the cut on the placenta from women is far from the position of the placenta underneath, so you need to make a deep cut.
In such a case, there is a risk, so if necessity calls for it, a woman doctor should be chosen and if she is not available, then ask for a pure and trustworthy male doctor or prepare a woman who is familiar with this work in women's matters or a woman who indicates in this work.
Prepare her and order her to do all that you order her to do regarding the placenta first, which is to examine if the woman is a virgin, it is recommended that she insert her finger into her vagina and examine the placenta if she finds it and press it under her finger.
When she commands to cut her, if she is not a virgin and is thick-walled, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the vaginal opening and examine the hymen after placing her left hand on the anus and scraping it well.
If she found it, it is appropriate to elevate it from the mouth of the vagina down to the limit of her endurance until she reaches its base at the bottom of the buttocks, then cut it from the front side of the vaginal opening at the base of the buttocks in whichever direction it faces and feels the hymen in that direction.
Her finger should not leave the hymen, pressed underneath it, and the cut should be small at first, then insert the probe into that small cut. If she feels the hymen, increase the cut to the extent of what she knows the hymen can be removed from it, and know that there are many types of hymens.
Some are small and large, smooth and rough, long and twisted, and perforated with holes. Know their types so that you can determine what you want. If blood dominates, drain it from the position of the fleece-like sponge and hold it for a while until the bleeding stops, then return to your work.
Until the placenta is expelled, and you prepare for yourself from among the instruments mentioned in the extraction of the placenta for men to assist you in your work, if bleeding overwhelms you and you know that the pulse indicates that a blood vessel has been severed, place cotton on the affected area.
Tighten the wound firmly and leave it alone, do not repeat the process. Leave the placenta and do not extract it, for perhaps the patient might die. Then treat the wound, if the severity of the bleeding subsides after days and the area becomes healed, return to your work until the placenta is expelled.
Chapter 2 and Chapter 6.
In the case of the naval injuries.
Naval injuries are simply a collection of moisture in the white flesh that is underneath the skin of the breasts surrounding the nipple and is called the nipple, and it may have a special pouch that nature prepares for it at one end of the nipple.
Until he thinks it is another egg and there is between the skin of the breast and the white flesh that we mentioned, which does not occur except in rare cases. This injury arises from weakness that exposes women to it, and this material is inserted into her and it may result from a blow to women.
This moisture has many colors, either it is white or red or black or yellow, and it is mostly white, and the signs by which it is known.
When the water meets in the swelling, which we mentioned as white, then the tumor is smooth and short in length, like an egg, and the deformity does not appear because the moisture surrounds it from all sides.
And if the moisture has a thin membrane, then the tumor is smooth on one side like an egg white.
For this reason, a person may think that it is another egg white, and if the moisture is between the skin of the vulva and the white swelling, then it is felt under the touch, and if you want to know the color of the moisture, then press the tumor with the square sponge that we showed its picture, and whatever comes out of the sponge is judged by what is inside.
If we come to treatment with iron, the patient should be ordered to vomit if it is possible for him, and then his body should be seen full, then he should lie on his back on something slightly high, and a large number of cushions should be placed underneath him, then you sit on his right side.
The servant is commanded to sit on the right side of the patient and extend his penis towards one of the sides of the scrotum, then towards the direction of the navel. After that, a wide, flat object is taken and the scrotum is cut from the middle along its length until near the anus.
The cut should be made in a straight line parallel to the line that divides the scrotum into two halves until it reaches the white, thick septum. It is then scraped and protected from being cut further. Your scraping should be done from the side that adheres to the egg yolk, as much as possible, and the scraping should be done as deep as you can.
Then the filled septum is squeezed widely with wide, flat objects and all the water is removed. Then, the edges of the cut are separated with needles and the septum is extended above without touching the scrotum. The septum is then cut as much as possible, either in one piece or in pieces.
Especially the delicate side, if you do not scrape it completely, you have not ensured that the water will not return. If the egg yolk comes out of its skin while you are working, and when you finish cutting the septum, then gather the edges of the scrotum with stitches.
Then he treated the rest of surgical cases until he was cured. If the egg yolk got spoiled due to another disease, it is necessary to tie the vessels in the incision area to prevent bleeding, then cut the wound from the incision and remove the yolk, then treat him as mentioned before.
If the water is mixed in both sides, know that it is two, then cut the other side as you did in the first one, whether it is equal or not. Then wipe the blood.
And enter into the incisions cotton that has been soaked in oil or in the fat of the rose, and it comes out from another cotton that has been soaked in water and oil, and smear it on the wounds and abdominal folds, and put it on top of a sewn incision, which is the benefits. And tie it from above with a suture that has six ends, like this picture:
Then take two incisions and stitch them together, and stuff it with the soaked cotton on this example, and make the ends that are tied from silk or wet cotton, and gather them in a belt of linen, and one of the ends ties to the back.
The second ties to the sides and the ends on the buttocks from below, and the remaining ends on the shoulders, and gather all the thread in a belt of linen, and this suture can also be made with wood instead of cutting with iron.
Take a small, delicate scalpel and use it to incise the skin of the scrotum as described earlier until the white, thick membrane covering the testicles is exposed.
Then, it resembles the Greek eye, and you should use it to remove that membrane while it is still moist until all the moisture is removed. Then, extend the membrane with the spatula and scrape it off with the scalpel, cutting it into pieces as you can, until you extract all of it and preserve some of the egg white without touching it with fire.
Know that this procedure is safer and better than cutting, so if you encounter any obstruction in the incision or at any time, a hot inflammation, bleeding, or anything else, you should treat it as appropriate according to what we have mentioned.
If the patient is impatient and does not bear this procedure due to its pain, then he should use the blunt instrument as we have described if it is available to you according to what we have mentioned.
The position should be supine, and the patient should sit on a high chair, then use a wide-mouthed spoon to remove the tumor from below, place the scalpel along the body, and make the incision wide enough so that all the water comes out. Then, place gauze on the wound and bandage it.
Leave him to suck out the remaining water, then treat the wound until it is cleansed. If the discharge of water persists, it may be due to the fact that the white membrane in the mouth of the wound obstructs the exit of the water.
Then, it is recommended to insert a probe or the tool that extracts water from the wound of the beloved one, which has its image or increase slightly in opening the wound.
And know that water may return and gather after six months or so, if it gathers, then treat it in the same manner and drive away the evil days.
The third and sixth chapter.
On the treatment of fleshy wounds.
Know that these wounds are among the most dangerous, leading to death in many cases. Therefore, they are left and avoided, and I remember the work done on them and the types of tumors.
I say that many tumors have occurred in bodies made of women, and this is due to various reasons, either from a favored husband who is placed with women or from a blow, and the color of the tumor is like the color of the body and there is no water for it.
The tumor is jaundiced and sometimes it is a calcified tumor, its color is like mud and there is no feeling to it. It may also be due to the complication of the veins and their distension as he has mentioned or from the distension of the arteries, but if it is from the distension of the veins, it is recognized by the disappearance of the tumor.
If you press it with your fingers and it should not be exposed to the teeth, and if it is from the distension of the arteries, then nothing disappears from it when pressed with the fingers, and this type may sometimes split both it and the rest of the meat.
That is to split the skin of the testicle then extend the white egg above and extract it from the white fluid and remove the clot from the veins and tie the veins and cut the clot after removing it from all sides of the eggs, if the egg has been contaminated with those meat plants.
The egg should be extracted and cut, and if there is a contamination between something from the whites or in between the veins, then all of that contamination should be removed and cut it completely straight.
If the meat plant is in the position of contamination that is from behind, then all of it should be cut and extract the egg as we said, if you have done your work then wash the wound with the moistened sawdust of the cardoon and wine then treat it with all the treatment until it becomes clean.
Chapter Four and Sixty-One.
In the treatment of adrenal glands with dalia.
Dalia is a tumor that is partially melted, resembling a hook, and it affects the females' movement, sports, and walking. In the treatment of this disease from the deception mentioned earlier, it is similar to what was previously mentioned.
But we should mention the procedure in it as the first ones did, so I say that it is appropriate for the affected person to sit on a high chair then push down the pubic hair with a comb and then grasp the skin of the genitals with your fingers along with the vessels that are close to the penis.
And another servant grasp it and extend it greatly then shred it with a wide, sharp needle until the vessels are exposed, then scrape from all sides as you were told in the chapter about the arteries in the adenag, then insert a needle into it with a double thread.
And tie it at the first places that showed the dalia and also at the last ones, then shred it in the middle in a vertical line along the length of the body and extract what gathered in it of the rotten, corrupt fluids.
Then, treat the inguinal region with the same methods used in other surgeries that you wish to perform there. If it is necessary to remove all the vessels that feed one of the females, there is no harm in doing so, as long as the female is removed along with the vessels to prevent the egg from being wasted. Before cutting the vessels, they become rotten and are of no use.
The fifth and sixth chapters.
In the treatment of inguinal hernias.
The occurrence of these hernias happens through a tear in the abdominal wall near the groin, in a direction between the two sides of the belly, and the intestine protrudes from that opening into one of the females.
This tear can occur either from a tear in the abdominal wall or from its extension, and these two types of causes have many reasons such as a blow, a sudden movement, a scream, or lifting something heavy and so on. The sign if it is from the extension of the abdominal wall is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time.
And it does not happen suddenly, and the tumor is level with the depth before the abdominal wall grinds the intestine, and the sign if it is from a tear in the abdominal wall is that it occurs from the beginning with a severe pain and the tumor is different in appearance under the skin near by.
The exit of the stone and its departure from the bladder, and it may exit with the stone the gravel, and this operation is called a lithotrity and gravel operation, and it may be done with a stream, and the stone may remain in the urethra and cause damage to the urinary tract.
Because it causes severe pain and discomfort, especially if it is crushed, and treatment of these types of stones with iron is dangerous, so one should be aware of the risk of falling into it, the method of work is to command the patient to return the stone to its original position inside his body.
Then he lies on his back between your hands and raises his legs, then extends the skin that follows the thighs upwards and splits the skin of the groin completely along its length, then inserts spatulas into the incision as much as needed to open it.
The incision should be as large as possible to allow the egg to come out, then scrape the bladder tissues under the skin of the groin until the white bladder on both sides is completely exposed, at that time insert your little finger into what follows the egg.
Between the white bladder under the skin of the egg and the second bladder from which the fistula comes out, extend your left hand inside the skin of the groin and at the same time extend the white bladder upwards with your right hand and lift the egg with the bladder to the side of the incision.
The servant should pour the egg whites on top and release the complete grip from behind. Check with your finger to ensure there is no remaining yolk in the white, firm albumen. If you find any, remove it and discard it into the belly below.
Then, take a needle with thick thread made from ten threads and insert it at the end of the white, under the skin of the abdomen following the groove. Then cut the ends of the thread's tips until there are four threads. Then, bundle some of it onto itself firmly and tie the white to the groove under the skin of the abdomen from both sides. Also, secure the thread's ends firmly and tie them together tightly so that nothing can reach the vessels that supply it. To prevent any heat from exposing it, also tie a second knot outside the first one, away from it by less than two fingers. Then, from the groove under the skin of the abdomen, take enough white to equal the size of a finger bone.
To prevent any heat from exposing it, also tie a second knot outside the first one, away from it by less than two fingers. Then, from the groove under the skin of the abdomen, take enough white to equal the size of a finger bone. Cut the rest of it into strips and remove the egg with it. Then, cut under the skin of the abdomen a groove through which blood and the white will flow as we described earlier. Then, use the moistened cotton and place it in the wound and use the tie that was described.
The white cloth that we mentioned after cutting it should be avoided from bleeding, as it often exposes this, and the bandage is left until it falls off by itself. If its falling is slow, then it should be soaked in warm water and held on it until it falls off.
Then the wound is treated with all the treatments of surgeries until it heals.
The sixth and seventh chapters.
In the sinusitis, these sinuses have not seen anyone who invented their treatment with iron and we mentioned that the first ones said to make as we described in the sinus that is with a dilator and this is to connect the sinuses after cutting them open from below.
Then cut in the middle and treat the tumor with what opens it until the sinuses fall off and treat the wound as we mentioned until it heals.
The seventh and eighth chapters.
In the cleft that is in the armpit.
The cleft in the armpit may expose as we mentioned and nothing from the inguinal area falls down to the females and if it does fall, it is slow and returns in all times.
But if the time is long, it increases the cutting in the cloth until the inguinal area and the thigh fall out of the wound and expose that from the extension of the cleft that is in the armpit as we mentioned. The incision should be prolonged, then relaxed, and the position should be stretched and turned, and its treatment should be done with the same cautery as you have described in its description.
He may also be treated with iron on this method, which is to make the patient lie on his back between your hands, then cut the position of the wound in a straight line across it at a width of three fingers, then close the incisions under the skin.
Until if the white incision that follows is exposed, you take a cord and place it on the position of the previous incision, then insert it to the depth of the abdomen, then stitch the two positions together at the end of the cord from the incision and sew them together.
Then you pull the end of the cord and do not cut the remaining incision, and do not touch the white substance and nothing else as you have taught me in the treatment of traumatic wounds, then treat him with surgical treatment.
If the stitches are cut and the wound is cauterized until it heals, then the incision will close and there will be no increase in the size of the wound.
And the best cauterizing agent for this position is because it is closest to safety.
The eighth chapter.
In the relaxation of the skin of the scrotum.
Often, the skin of the scrotum relaxes in some people without relaxing the muscles inside it and deteriorating its appearance, so it is appropriate for those who wish to treat it that the patient lies on his back.
And cut all the skin that has relaxed on the thick skin, then gather the lips, and if you wish to first stitch the edge of the relaxed skin with three or four stitches and then remove the sutures from the stitching, then cut between them.
Then treat it with the treatment of all surgeries until it heals and the stitches fall off.
Chapter 9 and 60.
In the incision.
The incision is forbidden in our religion.
Therefore, it was appropriate for me not to mention it in my book, but I only mentioned it for two reasons: one of them being that if a doctor is asked about it, he should know the treatment for it, and the other reason being that we often need to make an incision on some animals for our benefit.
For example, the horse, the cow, and cats and so on from animals, so I say that the incision is done in two ways: either by scraping or cutting, and the way of scraping is that we put the animal in hot water until its skin relaxes and becomes soft and slippery.
Then, with your hand, gently rub it until it dissolves and does not stick when touched. As for the incision and cutting, it is necessary to hold the animal and scrape its hide with your left hand, then connect the incisions and cut each egg separately.
Until the two eggs emerge, cut them after scraping and do not leave any scar on them except for the thin scar that is on the vessels, and this beating from the incision is better than the rubbing.
Because the rubbing may have left something from the females, so the animal might have become pregnant, then treat the wound until it heals.
Chapter 70.
In the treatment of the hernia.
The hernia in men occurs in two types, one of which is that it appears below the abdomen or on the hide of the genitals between the females in the shape of a female vulva with hair and urine may leak from what is on the hide of the genitals.
And in women, there is one type that is above the vagina on the pubis like the male testicles, small and hanging out of one of them like a penis, and the other two are like females, and the treatment of the three types.
The two types of men and the one type of woman, it is necessary to cut those excessive flesh until the effect of it is removed, then treat them with the treatment of all surgeries until they are purified. As for the second type of man who discharges urine that is in the skin of the penis, there is no work or benefit from it.
Chapter Seven.
In the removal of the afterbirth and abdominal flesh from women.
The afterbirth may have increased in the womb due to a natural cause, causing it to become bloated and ugly in appearance, and it may increase in some women to such an extent that it spreads like men and becomes like them in size.
It is necessary to hold the afterbirth with your hand or a forceps and cut it, but do not rush in the cutting, especially in the depth of the womb so that blood does not flow out.
Then treat it with the treatment of surgeries until it is purified. As for the abdominal flesh, it is flesh that grows in the womb until it fills it.
And sometimes it comes out outside like the umbilical cord. And for this reason, some early physicians call it the umbilical cord disease, so it is necessary to cut it like the afterbirth, whether or not it is purified.
The second chapter and seventy: On the treatment of wounds caused by weapons.
In the treatment of incisions.
Incision is when the woman's virginity is not broken, or when the opening is small and either natural (born with it) or artificial (caused by an external factor). Artificial incisions are often due to excessive growth of tissue.
Or thin or thick, and it may be in the depth of the uterus, sides, top, or bottom, preventing intercourse, pregnancy, childbirth, and sometimes menstruation. Knowing this is determined by inspection of the vulva.
If the hymen is visible and close, then if it is not visible, examine it with fingers or a speculum. If the hymen is thin and close to the labia, then break it by applying pressure on the labia, creating an appearance of tearing. Then, use your fingers from both hands to dilate the vaginal opening.
If the woman is lying on her back, spread her legs and extend the labia with force until the thin hymen tears, opening the vaginal opening. Then, apply a cloth soaked in oil to the area and reunite the woman daily to prevent the area from healing again.
If the swelling is thick and dense, it is appropriate to cut it with a wide-bladed knife resembling the leaf of an aspen tree. If the plug is made of flesh from a boiled plant, it should be attached with snannir and cut, so that you have medicines to stop bleeding without causing inflammation, such as caustics and leeches and cheese, mixed with egg white.
Then, use a wide bore copper tube to prevent the wound from closing quickly, hold it for several days and use a dry cotton thread as a suture, then treat with other remedies for infection until it heals, and it may show plants of meat in the uterus, it is appropriate to cut on this method.
If it is not a tumor, then the cancerous tumor that exists in the uterus does not show to iron and bettah.
Chapter 37.
In the treatment of boils, abscesses, and red pustules that appear in women's private parts.
As for boils, it is a swelling of the glands until blood flows from them in large amounts constantly. If boils are left untreated, they become abscesses, and their types, symptoms, and treatment have been mentioned in the previous section.
What is treatable and what is not, I say: the kidneys and the ovaries, if they are deep within the uterus and not visible to touch, cannot be treated with iron; but if they were in the mouth of the uterus and could be touched, they are the ones that can be treated.
It is recommended that the woman enters a cold place, then stretches the ovaries with a cloth or a sharp object and cuts them from their roots, then applies a remedy from one of the blood-stopping agents without cauterization.
Like qaaqiyah and shiyyan and laban and so on, then raise her legs against the wall for an hour, then dip them in cold water; if the bleeding continues, sit her in a pot of smoke of samak, cardamom, musk and so on, then take flour of barley and mix it with honey and vinegar.
And spread it on her back, if the bleeding stops, otherwise take the hard mud and the pebbles without a condition, then take cotton and dip it in the extract of tarith or the extract of lion's tongue or the extract of allium with musk drink and fix the position.
If the tumor settles, treat the position with the marc until it is clean, and as for the red lumps, they resemble the hard scales of the hedgehog, so it is recommended to cut what has appeared from it according to what was mentioned in the ovaries, whether or not it is treated until it is clean.
47th Chapter: The Treatment of Wounds
In the wound that is exposed on the uterus.
Many types of tumors may be exposed on the uterus, such as cancer, indurated tumor, ulcers, fissures, corroding lesions, fistulas, perforations, and inflamed tumors. All these diseases and their types and symptoms have been mentioned in the previous section.
It should be noted in this article that the inflamed tumor which is exposed on the uterus, if it is one of the tumors that collects pus, how to treat it with iron is mentioned. If the pain of the tumor at its beginning is severe with fever and inflammation, it should be examined.
If you feel that it is red, do not rush to treat it and treat it with what helps maturation until when these symptoms subside, then it is recommended that the woman sit on a chair with two seats and lean on her back.
And she should bring her legs together towards the lower abdomen, and her buttocks should be open, and her arms should be under her knees, and they should be tied with a bandage that is suitable.
Therefore, then the midwife should sit to the right of her and use the tool that opens the mouth of the uterus in the form that comes later, and if you want to use this tool, it is recommended to measure the depth of the woman's uterus so that what enters from the tool is not more than the depth of the uterus.
If the instrument is very long, it should be placed with its tip on the nipple of the uterus to prevent the entire instrument from entering deep into the uterus. The loop should be positioned from the upper side of the instrument.
While you hold the instrument, the assistant should manage the loop until the cervix is opened. If the membrane appears and you can feel it with your finger, and if it is thin and delicate, it is recommended to cut it at its base with a wide-bladed scissors as soon as the entire membrane has been removed.
It is recommended to place a thin, greased silk thread soaked in rose oil or green oil with some honey in it inside the wound and extend it out of the incision into the cervix and then outside onto the uterus and on the nipple. A clean cotton swab soaked in boiled flour water should be placed outside.
Then, after two days, apply the mercurous chloride that is suitable for this purpose until it is completely removed.
The uterus and wound can be washed by injecting water and honey, then rinsing with boiled water containing the root of the sos or zandaron long herb. Then return to the mercurous chloride. If the membrane is deeply embedded inside the uterus.
It is necessary to avoid treating him with iron and instead treat him as mentioned in the division.
Chapter 75.
In the teaching of fractures, how to treat live bones that have exited from their natural shape.
The fracture specialist should first know the natural shape of childbirth and its signs, such as when the woman leans downwards and longs to inhale deeply and her breathing becomes easier.
And if the child exits quickly, know that this birth is in its natural shape and the head comes out first with the shoulder or hanging from the neck, if you see these signs, it is necessary to cut her abdomen so that the child exits quickly.
If it exits on its head, the shoulder comes out with it and it is cleaned well from that mucous, and if it does not exit in this way, it is unnatural and corrupt because it may exit with its legs and its hands before its head and legs.
And one of its arms or leg may exit, or its head and arm, or it may exit twisted, and sometimes it may turn over on its back and such corrupt shapes, so the fracture specialist should be sharp in all these matters and warn against mistakes.
I clearly explain every type of presentation and how to recognize it, so that you can make a diagnosis and establish a treatment. If the fetus emerges naturally from its mother's head and she experiences severe pain and difficulty in delivering it, and if her strength has diminished, then I have her sit on a chair and I order women to assist in delivering it.
Then, I moisten her genitals with a warm poultice and soft cotton, and then the midwife inserts a small, blunt instrument between her fingers to tear or tear open the membranes until any fluid inside is released, and she massages the woman's abdomen until the fetus emerges.
If it does not emerge, it is recommended to inject the woman with a mixture of hibiscus juice and shiraz oil, then order her to cough and massage her mouth and nose, as the fetus will emerge from its position. If the fingers of the fetus emerge first, they should be gently returned.
If they do not enter, place the woman on a table and raise her legs above her head, then shake the table on the ground, and the woman should hold onto something so as not to fall during the shaking. If the hands of the fetus still do not emerge and the fetus dies, cut them off and remove the rest of the fetus.
Tie his hands with a rope and pull them gently, for if the fetus emerges from between his legs, it is necessary to push them upwards and gradually turn the fetus until it is aligned, then take hold of one of his legs and slowly extend it.
If they have emerged to the buttocks, command her to push and strike them with a blade, for it will emerge. If it does not emerge with the described method, gradually pull the fetus until it takes on its natural shape, then it will emerge smoothly. If she refuses to follow the described method, do everything else.
Take one of the Khatm leaves, the leaves of the Habba plant, sherige, and a diluted musk, and strike all of them on the mortar with a strong blow, then apply it to the woman's genitals and below her belly, then make her sit in warm water until the placenta emerges.
If you see that it has emerged below her, make a bag from a cloth and let her bear it for an hour. Then make her sit on a chair, strike her, close her mouth and nose, and gently massage her belly. The fetus will emerge from its position, and it will emerge from between his legs and arms.
If this condition occurs, the physician should gently insert his fingers a little into her vagina, then she lies on her back with her legs raised and her hands underneath her buttocks, and he massages her breasts, then he applies a small amount of oil over her abdomen. Then he removes all the pads under her legs until they are completely exposed, if the fetus has not yet come out, then he takes both of her legs and moves them vigorously, then he applies a small amount of oil over her thighs, until the fetus rises above, then the midwife inserts her hand and gently pushes the fetus back inside.
The woman should push until the fetus comes out, if the fetus comes out with one of his hands stretched out, then he should hold onto it, if she cannot hold onto it, then the woman should stand up and make her walk, if she cannot walk, then she should lie down.
Her bed and shake her legs vigorously, then use the ointment that was mentioned from the lubricants, if she expels it, then make her sit on a chair, then treat the hand and push the fetus back into its natural position, give the woman something to drink and order her to push until the fetus comes out.
The extraction of the fetus by pushing its head out with his hands, facing its back towards its mother's back, it is appropriate to hold the hand of the fetus and gently turn it a little at a time and adjust it gently. When it is stable, lift it onto its mother's belly as we described for the ointments and lotions.
Then, it is appropriate to gently move her a little at a time. If she does this, then make her sit on the chair and tell her to lean to her right side, then massage her back with the knuckles as it comes out, the extraction of the fetus grasping its side.
If it comes out through the mouth of the uterus in this manner with the forceps, then the forceps should be opened until it is free from moisture. If it sticks to the face and neck of the fetus, cut it from the cord so that it does not suffocate and die. Then push the fetus back inside until it is in the correct position.
And the woman should be massaged many times as it comes out easily, the extraction of twins or many fetuses, know that twins often give birth to three or four and they live except in rare cases, but five is a thing outside of nature and they do not all live.
If they are surrounded by many people, but they are separated by a barrier between them, each one of them is tied in a separate suture, and as the single jinn exits naturally and easily, so do they exit, some with a foul odor as we have described.
If some of them have difficulty during childbirth and become abnormal as we have described, then treat them as we have mentioned, and the instrument should be gentle and do what it normally does with patience and tact, adapting to every shape according to what is available to it from the path leading to safety.
Mentioned is what one might imagine in the womb of women, that they fall out, and one might imagine one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, or more than ten, and it is true that a woman had seven and another had fifteen, all of them imagined to be that way.
According to the wise one, all of this should be in the knowledge of the instrument, for perhaps it will encounter such a situation someday, and then it should respond appropriately.
Chapter 67.
In the extraction of a dead fetus.
If the dead fetus was treated with what was mentioned in the section on treatment, and it did not come out, then one must proceed to do it manually. If the woman is strong and has no symptoms that one might fear causing harm from them, then she should lie on her back on a bed.
The excerpt translates to: "Her head is tilted downwards and her legs are raised high, and a nurse should control her from both sides or tie her to the bed so that her body does not adhere to the placenta when the umbilical cord is cut.
Then, he moistens her mouth with the wet gauze mixed with honey and barley flour and a piece of cloth, then smears the vaginal opening with this gauze and honey, then inserts it into the uterus gently, then searches for a place where the midwives can reach from inside the womb, and the corresponding positions for that.
Look, if the fetus is positioned to come out on her head, then the midwives should reach it with their hands in her eyes or on her temples or in her mouth or in her anus or under her hair or between her legs or near the ribs or under the shoulder blades.
And if its coming out is on her legs, then it is in the ankles and the middle ribs, and the midwife should hold it with her right hand and direct her fingers between the fingers of her left hand, then gently insert her hand and the midwife should reach it with her fingers in some of those positions we mentioned.
Until she reaches something empty, then another midwife or a third one should insert her fingers if necessary for the attraction to be equal and not inclined to one side, then extend the extension evenly and not just on stability, but also move it to all sides.
It is not easy to extract him as he is made with a hammer at the socket, and it is appropriate that the bone be rocked from that side. If some fingers are stuck, it is appropriate to smear the adjacent finger with oil and insert it from that side to guide what is stuck. If some of the fetus comes out, the surgeons move to other positions.
Then lift it a little and do this until the fetus comes out completely, if one hand came out before the other and could not be returned due to its swelling, it is appropriate to tie a ligature on it then pull it until the whole of it comes out, then cut it.
Either in the wrist or in the elbow, and so on, it is appropriate to do in the other hand and in the legs, if the head of the fetus is large and there is narrowness in its exit or if there is water collected in its head, it is appropriate to insert a curved hook between the fingers.
And split its head to let out the water or squeeze it with the instrument called the mashdak, which comes in the shape of other tools mentioned in the book that follows.
Similarly, do this if the fetus has a large head by nature, split the skull or squeeze it with the mashdak as we mentioned then extract the bones with forceps, if the head and swelling occur at extraction, split until the moisture in the chest is removed.
If the ribs do not unite and cannot be mobilized for extraction, then cut them off as much as possible, especially if they are located below the abdomen or have become infected, it is advisable to remove them completely to allow drainage of the fluid.
If the fetus is on its legs, it is easy to grasp and bring it towards the mouth of the womb, but if pressure is applied to the abdomen or chest, it is advisable to grasp it with a hook that has been tightened on your hand and cut open the abdomen or chest until whatever is inside comes out.
If all the organs have been removed and the head has returned, then insert the left hand into the vagina if the mouth of the womb is open, then insert your hand into the neck of the womb and pull out the head with it, then grasp it with your fingers and pull it back into the womb. Then insert a sponge or two sponges into it and grasp the head with them.
If the mouth of the womb has fused with a hot, swollen mass, it is not advisable to force it, but rather to use soft, moist materials and apply warm compresses and soak in cool water to soften and reduce the swelling.
If the fetus is on its side, it is advisable to use the methods mentioned for live fetuses if possible, but if not, then cut it off and remove it. It is important not to leave any tissue inside the uterus. After your treatment is complete, use the methods mentioned for treating hot, swollen tumors that may occur in the womb.
If the bleeding is visible, let it flow into the stagnant water and use all treatments, for I have seen a woman who had become pregnant, then the fetus died in her womb, and she was then impregnated again.
Then the other fetus also died after a long time, and a swelling appeared in her breast, and it inflated until it burst, and he made her suck on his finger. She was taken for treatment, but it took a long time to heal the wound, so they placed strong magnets on it to attract it.
Then a bone came out, and after some days, another bone came out. She was surprised by this because the abdomen had no bones in it. She realized that these were the bones of the dead fetus, so she examined the wound and extracted many bones from the head of the fetus.
I did not stop until I extracted many bones from her, and the woman was in good health. She lived like this for a long time, with a stream of pus flowing from the wound, but only now have I come to relate this rare case.
Because there is knowledge and help for the physician who tries to treat with his hands.
The seventh chapter.
In this section are illustrations of the tools needed for the extraction of the fetus.
Image of a hook used to open the mouth of the uterus.
This forceps is used to grasp the fetus with hooks at both ends of the metal, except that this hook should be gentler than the forceps and either made of ivory or wood, and the width of each piece of wood should be the length of two fingers.
Their length is about the width of a finger, and their width is about two fingers. In the middle of the metal pieces, there are two rods made of the same wood as the metal, which are about half a finger long or slightly less, and their width is about two fingers or slightly more.
These are the ones that are inserted into the mouth of the uterus to open it when using the hooks, another image of a tool similar to this but gentler and less forceful.
It is made of ivory or wood in the shape of a spoon, except that it has two rods at its end as you see, each rod is about the length of a finger and their width is two fingers. If you want to open the uterus with it.
Then the woman sits on a bed with her legs spread apart, and the man inserts the two rods into the mouth of the uterus while holding the end of the tool between his thighs, then opens his hand with the tool as you would with a spoon, either on the scale of how much opening of the uterus you want. Until you make the flap as you desire, a pattern of another lobe as mentioned by the ancients.
Pattern of the instrument that pushes the fetus out.
Pattern of the chisel that forces the fetus's head.
Its shape resembles a saw with teeth at the end, as you see. It can be made straight like a knife on this pattern, with teeth like those of a shark, which cuts and pleases.
Pattern of another instrument also:
Pattern of a chisel:
This chisel has a slight sharpness so it won't break when pulling the fetus with it, pattern of a chisel with two grooves:
Pattern of wide, flat scissors for cutting the fetus:
All these tools, the more their types increased and were prepared by the maker, the faster he worked and the higher his reputation among people. Therefore, do not underestimate any tool that you might need.
Chapter Eighty-Seven.
In the extraction of the mummy.
If the mummy is hard after the blows, the midwife should be ordered to hold herself and then massage her with oil and push your hand into her mouth and buttocks. If it comes out by this method, otherwise use a spoon.
The excerpt reads: "Drill a hole in the lid and place in it the opened galls of the fig tree, such as the vodka and the saphrage and the shabt and the papunja and the sheh and the slikha and the cantharides. All these drugs or some of them are moistened with water and then placed on the fire. Then a copper tube is placed on the hole in the lid and the other end in the mouth of the uterus.
The excerpt reads: "Hold it until the steam reaches the bottom of the womb, then rub as we said. Indeed, the mushima will come out quickly. If it does not come out after this treatment and has not come out, then order the midwife to dip her right hand in lard or the juice of the khatmni.
The excerpt reads: "Then insert it into the mouth and feel for the mushima with it. If it touches it, grasp it and pull it out little by little until it comes out. If it is stuck deep in the womb, insert the hand as we described until you find the mushima, then gently pull it out a little at a time.
The excerpt reads: "Lest the womb tear when pulled forcefully, it is better to gently move it to the sides, left and right, then increase the pulling gradually. For at that time it will yield and be freed from the attachment. If the mouth of the womb is closed, we have described the treatment as rubbing and treating the lid and the galls.
If all that we have described does not come out, then you should force it back with violence during the process of reinsertion. However, it is recommended to tie what comes out from it to the mouth of the woman, then inject it into the buttock of the woman, and it will cleanse her after days.
However, if it is cleansed, then it emits a foul smell to the stomach and head, which harms the patient, so it is recommended to use appropriate vapor therapy.
Therefore, some of the early ones tried vapor of the herb and dry tea, a picture of the tool that heats in it the woman during retention of semen and menstruation and so on.
It is made of copper resembling the quill or made of brass, the narrow end is placed on the forehead and the wide end on the fire, the incense is wrapped around it, hold it until that incense is gone and return the rest.
The ninth section.
In the treatment of the unbroken quill.
Many boys and their quills may not be broken, which is blocked by a thin skin, so the midwife should pierce that skin with her finger, otherwise, she should pull it out with a sharp needle and warn the muscle not to touch it.
Then, place a wet cotton swab soaked in alcohol and oil on it, then treat it with a probe until it is clean, if you fear that it may block, insert a lead pipe into the hole for several days and remove it when the child urinates.
The closure of the fistula may also be due to a wound or tumor, in which case it should be opened and then treated as mentioned earlier for treatment and cauterization.
Chapter Eighty.
In the treatment of fistulas that occur in the lower part.
Fistulas that occur in the lower part are complex and thick, which occurs near the anus from outside or in the space from one of the sides, and the fistula is one or more.
If that complexity is prolonged, it opens and drains clear watery fluid or thin pus, which may be from these fistulas that open to the rectum and to the large intestine and are not open, which can be recognized by what comes out of it when using the diuretic.
And perhaps it may come out of it the intestine, and it may be from these fistulas if they are open to the urethra and to the urethral canal, and they may also be open to the hip joint and to the groin, and what is known as the open fistula to the anus is also not open.
It is important to insert your index finger into the seat and to insert a thin, sharp spatula made of brass or iron into the nares if there is no opening in the nares. If there is an opening, then insert a thin, sharp spatula made of copper or hair from a horse's tail.
Until you feel the spatula or hair in your finger, if you do not feel it at all and nothing comes out from the wound such as blood, wind, or maggots as we mentioned, then know that it is not open and proceed with treatment.
If the nares are open to the urethra or bladder, then the indication is the exit of urine from it and its refusal to mix with the medication. However, if it is open to the hip joint or the penis, then the indication is the spatula reaching there.
If there is no injury to the bone and pain in the direction of the wound, and constant discharge from it, and if it does not respond to treatment and does not mix with medication, then all these open nares are not indicative of healing.
Treatment of these is futile for those who are ignorant of medicine. However, for those that are not open and not chronic, it is recommended to try iron on them as I have described and experimented with, which is to place the patient on their back between your hands.
He should raise his legs upwards and bend his buttocks towards his belly, then insert the brass or lead probe until he knows where the probe ends, if the patient feels pain towards the anus, it is necessary to insert your little finger into the anus.
If you feel the probe in your little finger, it has penetrated on its own without touching between your finger and it with soap or meat, then know for certain that it is open, so do not struggle in it, as we said, there is no harm from it.
They said that it is expelled in some people with difficulty and from the treatment that is hoped to be beneficial, it is necessary to apply a thin grease according to the size of the anus as previously mentioned, then insert it warm into the anus until it reaches near the anus, then withdraw it twice or three times.
Until he knows that all those excessive and congealed meats that resemble a bird's beak have been burned, then treat him with a thick poultice of fat in the oil until those burned meats come out, then treat him with mild laxatives.
If not, he will never be expelled by any other treatment, and if the probe was inserted and did not reach your little finger in the anus and there was a thick layer of meat or soap between them, then saw the patient later, the skin was split from the first part of the anus. When passing through the narrow path with the saw, you continue until you reach the end of the saw where it ends, and the saw is removed and falls, then clean those rotten meat pieces that resemble the bird's quill and nothing remains from them.
Then treat it with the marsh-mallow honey until it is clean, for if blood overcomes you and you are between your work and cutting those rotten meat pieces, do what is best for you and quicker benefit by burning them with fire or a strong medicine, because burning with fire collects two good things: burning those excessive meat pieces.
Cut the blood and drain the moisture, then treat it with the fennel powdered in oil or salted butter until the wound is cleaned and those burnt meat pieces come out in the dressing, then treat the wound at that time with the marsh-mallow honey prepared for hardened meat.
This is medicine that contains suction and draining, so if it clings, it has been cleansed and does not return, but if the saw has reached deep into the wound and beyond the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the wound and search for it.
If you feel the saw and there is a layer of fat or meat between you and it, and it is close to the breathing hole, then the work in it is only by chance and hope, because you must use one of three ways: as we said.
Or, you may lacerate it until you reach its base in order to insert a seton and treat it from nearby, but do not lacerate excessively lest you cut the surrounding muscle, which would cause the patient to have involuntary discharge of feces. Then treat it with what we mentioned earlier.
Or, you may push that hook and pierce it after laceration until near the anus as we mentioned earlier, either with a hook or another sharp instrument. Then clean all the rotten flesh in the laceration to where you can reach.
Then, ram the entire wound with laceration and the upper mouth until it is closed, leaving the nasor open inside the anus, which would be less harmful to the patient. However, the nasor may break on this condition.
If the hook was inserted into the nasor and it was on one side of the anus towards the skin surface and surrounded the anus, then take a hook with a sharp tip like a lancet on this image:
Then insert a thread with five or more threads into the hook, and insert the hook into the nasor until it reaches its base, if it is open from inside the anus close by.
Remove the suture from the wound by inserting your finger into the wound and pulling out the thread of the suture, then gather both ends of the thread together and tie them tightly, leaving it for a day or two. Whenever the thread cuts into the flesh, tighten it well until the flesh between the threads rots and falls off, then treat the wound until it heals and becomes clean.
If the mouth of the needle is not wide enough, you can only insert it deeply into the flesh, as you can, to avoid cutting the muscle. Then, do as we mentioned earlier until it heals and becomes clean.
The sharp, serrated needle used for suturing should be very sharp on one side and not so sharp on the other to avoid cutting anything that does not need to be cut as you see.
Chapter 80.
On the bursting of veins and cutting them and treating the rupture.
Veins are of two types, either they are inside the wound resembling red blisters or like grapes, and they have small and large ones, and blood always flows from them.
One of them is one, and many are numerous, and they are outside the uterus, except that those which are outside the uterus are in the most case having little moisture, from which flows clear or slightly bloody urine continuously, and it is of the color of the body.
The treatment for those which are inside the uterus is to command the midwife to press and twist until the uterus is expelled and the placenta appears, then quickly grab it with forceps or grasp it with your fingers, then cut it at its roots, unless it has not absorbed moisture and relaxed due to its moisture.
Then rub it with a rough cloth or a piece of hard leather, then grasp it with your fingers, then cut it, then sprinkle some sharp spices on it so that it can take the place of the uterus or cook it according to what was mentioned in the chapter of the uterus.
Then treat it with all the treatments until it is clean, if the placenta does not come out, then inject the midwife with a small amount of anesthesia to wash what is in the placenta and facilitate its exit when the midwife twists.
Take it with your fingers or fasten it with a needle, then cut it and treat it as mentioned earlier until it is clean. If one dislikes using iron, it is recommended to use a razor blade, taking a thread and threading it through the needle.
Then pull the thread upwards and insert it into the wound from the other side, tie both ends of the thread below the needle, and tighten the thread strongly. Tie the thread and remove the needle, do this for all the wounds, leaving one that is not stitched.
To let out the clotted blood, then place a moistened piece of cotton or wool on the wound and instruct the patient to remain still, then leave it until the wound falls off. If the wound falls off, treat it with the poultices and other treatments until it is clean.
For the treatment of fissures, often appearing as openings in the zibul and entanglement of the skin, if it has not responded to medication, it is recommended to scrape it with a razor blade or your finger until it becomes moist and the top layer of dead skin that prevents it from healing is removed.
Then treat it until it softens to the desired extent, if it does not soften, repeat with a stronger garment than the first until it becomes red and then cleanse it, for it will be purified.
The second section of the eightieth.
In the treatment of the inverted nipples, and non-inverted nipples, and the flat nipples, and the warts.
Indeed, the nipple is nothing but a swollen mass of tissue that resembles the head of a nail and is found throughout the body, especially at the soles of the feet and fingers, and it causes pain when walking.
It is necessary to cut around the nipple and hold it with a pair of forceps or a needle holder, then remove it from its root, and if you wish, apply a dressing on it as mentioned in its chapter, and as for the flat warts, each one of them is a small, rough, callous growth that is elevated above the surface of the skin.
They often appear on the hands of boys and treatment is to extend the wart and cut it or grind it with a thread or hair until it falls off, and if you wish, apply a dressing on it as mentioned in its chapter, or with heat or a strong medication.
The inverted and non-inverted warts can also be removed by the tool that I mentioned in the treatment of the warts, and as for the warts, they are also small, callous growths that penetrate deeply into the skin and if they are affected by cold, they feel like the pricking of ants.
The entire body, or more specifically, the hands, should be treated with a pipe made from the tail feather of an ostrich or a strong eagle's feather. This pipe should be wrapped around the affected area in a circular manner, and then the hand should be moved along the pipe until the area around the affected part is pierced.
The pipe should be inserted deep into the flesh and the worm should be extracted from its original place. If desired, this can also be done using a brass or iron pipe of the same shape.
The top of the pipe should be made into a small, open mouth to make it easier for the fingers to control and straighten it. If desired, the worm can be kept in the same way as mentioned in the book "Kitab al-Thalathil" in the chapter on worms.
Chapter 3 and 80.
In the shapes of instruments used for injection in cases of constipation, diarrhea, and vomiting.
The needle can be made from silver, porcelain, brass, or iron, and it can be made in various sizes depending on the user's preference. The needles used for treating young children with constipation should be small, and those with narrow or painful stools should have very fine, thin needles. The shape of the needle should be large.
The upper part of the tooth that connects with the gum should be wide on this side, having a barrier where the gum connects with the tooth as you see, and its lower part that enters the socket should be smooth and very thin, with two holes on one side and one hole on the other.
The size of the hole should be slightly thicker than the needle or very slightly thinner, and the gum that you put medicine in from an animal's penis or from a reed should be made in the shape of a small bridge, with a diameter of one finger.
He drills many small holes, as he spins, and there should be a thickness of a finger between each hole, then he inserts a thick, tight thread of twisted silk from ten to twelve threads into those holes and gathers the gum like a bridge. If he puts medicine in it, he should press firmly on the head of the syringe between the two stones with a thick, tight thread, then inject it. This is the shape of the gum and the hole:
How to inflate it so that the reed or penis is filled with medicine while it is raised above the level of the patient, and be careful not to make it too hot or too cold, then the patient lies on his back and raises his legs up.
He places a sponge or lint underneath, then anoints the tip of the needle with oil, egg white, hen's droppings, or similar substances. He then inserts it into the wound gently, and the assistant, using both hands, rubs it vigorously until all the matter from the needle is removed into the basin.
Then he removes the needle and shakes the patient's legs against the wall, if the medicine causes it to come out, let him hold on to what he can, even if it means staying up all night. If he is given injections in the abdomen for diarrhea and hastens its exit, then the injections should be repeated until it is freed.
If there are sharp objects or painful masses in the wound, then the needle should be very fine and smooth, unlike the needles used for boys. Here is an image of a fine, smooth needle: [Image of a fine, smooth needle]
Chapter 48.
In the treatment of surgeries.
You mentioned in the division of treatments that some injuries cause cysts, and I am remembering to mention their treatment by hand and with medications for completeness. Therefore, I say that surgeries differ according to the type of injury and the location of the wound.
The things that are done in surgeries are many, such as removing a stone or cutting with a sword or knife or stabbing with a razor or arrow or spear and so on from many things.
And as for the surgeries according to the positions of the body, it is like the wound that occurs on the head or neck or chest or abdomen or liver and so on from the organs.
And I am describing the treatment of some surgeries to make them a standard and rule for all surgeries, and I begin with simple head surgeries especially because the complex ones will be mentioned in the first chapter of this third book.
So I say that if a simple wound occurs on the head and it is not a fracture of a bone, and if it was from removing a stone or similar and he had only cut the skin, and the wound was large, and I feared that cancer would occur, I immediately applied cauterization to the site. And do not delay that and extract from him as much blood as his strength allows, unless it is prevented by a stopper or especially if the blood flowing from the wound is thin and the cauterization should be from the opposite side of the wound.
Warn the patient from overeating, drinking, and heavy foods, as they can hinder healing. He should reduce his food intake, avoid meat and drinks, and if a hot, sharp object pierces him, it is better to extract it alone or with a drink containing vinegar.
If the hot object is embedded in his flesh and has not changed due to the air's moisture, which I will describe later, then bear it alone. However, if it has changed due to the air, then apply some ointment to it.
Until the suture extends, then treat him until he is cured. If the wound is large and resulted from a sword cut or similar, and the lips did not meet with benefit, then sew them together as I will describe in suturing abdominal surgeons.
If the skin is exposed bone and adhered, but only in a thin layer, then cut it off. Then treat the wound with drugs that solidify flesh as a substitute for the skin. The patient should eat foods that are durable, such as heads, hooves, and similar.
If decay occurred in the skin but did not adhere to bone, then cut off the entire decayed part and remove it. If there is a vessel or gland that bleeds from these wounds, and blood has not stopped with drugs, then search for the vessel.
If it does not improve, apply the moss and bind it. If necessity requires and what we mentioned does not help, then cut it until the bleeding stops. If these wounds are small and simple, let him rest and he will be fine with just applying this remedy to them while they are still bleeding.
Before the air dries it, the remedy for the moss is to take a part of camel's milk, a part of frankincense, and three parts of gum arabic, whether it is the cooling type or not. Grind them all together and spread it on the wound, then apply a clean cloth over it.
Then, it is bandaged from above with the bandages and left as it is without moving it until it stops hurting. For the remedy does not come off of it until it is clean. Sometimes, the gum arabic alone can do this if the camel's milk and frankincense are not available.
Also, this action can be done with his eyes in many large wounds if he mastered applying it to them and bandaging them, and the wounds were simple and did not change due to the air, unless some changes occurred because of the air, especially in the summer.
In this case, the treatment of the wound involves applying some of the prepared mushrooms or applying a dough made from barley flour mixed with water and honey until it reaches the bottom of the wound, then proceeding with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
If the wound involves a fracture in the bone and it is a simple one, then it should be treated by applying a splint to hold the broken parts together, as mentioned in the treatment of head fractures in the chapter on surgery of the neck. There is no difference in treatment between this type of wound and a simple head fracture.
If the nerve or blood vessel has been completely cut, there is no other option but to avoid treating it with strong grips like iron tongs and pincers, as they can damage the nerve and cause it to shrink.
Nothing cold should be placed on the wound because the essence of the nerve is cold and its connection to the brain, which is the most delicate organ, and what is treated with it from mild drugs such as cleansed noura mixed with sweet water repeatedly mixed with oil or rubbed with rose and tootia.
If you have also washed with sweet water and the rest of the metallic stones, the moist mushrooms, and if the wound is large, then use sutures or tie its lips together with bandages, then proceed with the treatment until it heals.
If the wound is deep and a foreign body has been lodged in it, and if the matter has collected at the bottom of it, and the tetanus bacteria have multiplied therein, then apply pressure on the lowest part of the wound to expel it. If a blood vessel has been severed and the blood is flowing out, then ligature it, or cauterize it, or compress it if necessary.
If the wound has severed some of the intestines or all of them, and the entrails have fallen out, then gather both flaps of the skin with sutures on the belly button, but do not touch the entrails, rather, return them to their natural position and secure them in place, then tighten the sutures firmly and leave it for several days.
Then treat him with compressive bandages until it heals, but if the wound has affected the bone, then explore it and if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all of them or as much as possible, and leave what cannot be extracted until the wound heals and becomes clean and easy to remove.
If the wound is open and bleeding, then apply the remedy we mentioned earlier for it, but if it heals and a bone becomes exposed and protrudes from the wound, then treat it with the methods mentioned in its section, in the chapter on chest surgery and between the shoulder blades.
If a wound from a spear or sword has an opening and you perceive wind coming out of it when the patient exhales, then know that it is a dangerous wound. If it does not have an opening and its appearance is red with blood, do not make the first incision in it, nor tighten it to prevent the blood from collecting in its cavity.
If it retreats towards the heart and kills the patient, then make a small incision in it and open it twice during the day. If you do not have a probe, place a sponge in the wound to absorb the discharge from it. Place the patient on his side over the wound.
If it has collected in the wound and this has occurred after three days or more without any signs of inflammation, shortness of breath, or discomfort in the patient's condition, and you see that all other aspects are normal, then know that the wound is healed. Treat it with tents and continue with other treatments until it is completely healed.
If you cannot see it and the fever persists, then know that it has become chronic. Treat it from its cause, place the patient on his side over the wound to allow for drainage, and if it is a chest or back wound, treat it with sutures as appropriate.
If it is large or if it is small, if it has penetrated into the bone and has broken off pieces from it, then examine the wound and immediately remove those pieces, if they are clean, but if they are not clean, leave them until they become clean.
If it heals, then it facilitates its removal, and as for other injuries in other organs, their treatment is determined according to what we have mentioned in the case of the limbs.
Chapter 58
In abdominal surgery and the removal and suture of the intestines.
The wound that is exposed to the abdomen may be large or small, and it may be in the middle. If it is large, it may remove intestines or multiple intestines, making their insertion and suturing more difficult and harsher.
Even the small wound may also be difficult due to another reason, it is necessary that its return is more difficult and the intestines, if they do not immediately enter their position from the beginning, will swell and harden, making it difficult to insert them. Therefore, the medium-sized wound is better because it does not make the return of the intestines as difficult as in these two types.
And know that suturing the abdomen is on four faces of the sutures, which are general and can be used for suturing the abdomen and other body surgeries, and the other two are special and apply to all surgeries except that they are especially used for suturing the abdomen.
If the wound is small and something emerges from it, such as a piece of bone or an object that is difficult to remove, this could be due to two reasons: either because the wound is too small for the object to pass through, or because the bone or object was exposed to cold air before the injury.
If this is the case, it is recommended to heat the object by soaking a wet sponge or a dry one in warm water alone or with some ingredients such as frankincense, senna, and sodium carbonate until the object softens and can be removed.
This can also be done by using a drink that contains honey, which is better than water alone in dissolving the object. If you see that the object has been removed, then soak the bone in warm water containing salt or sugar to facilitate its entry with the least effort.
If it is still difficult to remove the object after this treatment, then shave a little of the bone around the wound using the tool that is used to sharpen chisels. The first treatment is better than shaving if it succeeds in removing the object, and shaving is only necessary when there is no other option and the situation is desperate. This is an image of the tool:
The sharp side of the tool should be limited, and the other side should not be sharp. The blunt end should not be a blade but rather a slight file. This tool resembles a small saw as you can see. If the wound has expanded and the bone has entered, it is recommended that the removal should be in its natural shape.
If it is possible, the best place for him to lie is on his back, with his legs elevated higher than his head. If the injury is widespread and located in the lower abdomen, he should lie on his stomach, with his legs raised higher than his head. If the injury is in the upper abdomen, he should lie on his back, with his head and chest elevated higher than his lower body.
Similarly, if the injury is in one of the sides of the abdomen, always position the patient so that the side with the incision is higher than the other side. This is suitable for both major and intermediate surgeries.
For minor surgeries, position the patient according to what you can manage, then have an assistant nearby who can hold the incision with both hands and pull it open, exposing the wound piece by piece for the suture.
This is the general principle of suture: take a needle or multiple needles according to the size of the wound, then start from the edge of the incision, inserting the needle without threading it into the skin edges. Then, gather the skin edges from both sides, creating four flaps, and suture them together using a double-stranded thread, stitching from both sides until the wound edges meet firmly.
Then, leave a bowl of thick blood and insert another needle into it. Then, tie it with the thread as you did with the first needle until you empty the entire wound. Let the needle be medium between the thickness and thinness.
Because the thin needle is too weak, it will easily cut the flesh and the thick ones are also difficult to enter the skin. Therefore, it should be medium in thickness and thinness, and the needle should not be inserted close to the edge of the skin.
So that the flesh does not tear quickly and the wound does not open before the needle enters, do not also move the needle too far by sewing to prevent the wound from refusing to close. Then, cut the ends of the needle so that it does not harm the patient while sleeping and make benefits for him from breaking the skin on all sides where the needle is held.
Leave it until you know that the wound has healed, and this type of sewing with a needle is so effective in small surgeries because it may suffice in its sewing with one or two or more needles.
Or, the second feature of sewing is to gather the four flaps of the skin and the four flaps of the flesh in one stroke with a needle that has an unfolded thread of medium thickness, then if these four flaps have been sewn with this needle, repeat the needle from the same side you started with.
The thread should be inserted from the top of the wound to make stitching according to the sewing of the shirt that is used for clothing and placing between each stitch and the next, after pressing the small finger, and this stitching is known by everyone.
With this stitching, a surgeon performed an operation on a man's abdomen who had been cut by a knife, and the wound was more than a centimeter wide and had extended from his navel to about two centimeters from the middle of the abdomen.
I replaced it after his navel was outside the wound for forty-two hours, and the wound healed in about fifteen days, and I treated him until he recovered and lived for many years afterwards, able to do everything. The doctors judged that he would not fully recover.
It is amazing that I did not treat him with any medicine because I was in a place where there was nothing, so I put cotton soaked in honey on the wound twice a day and I washed it with honey water until it healed.
As for the two types of special stitching, I remember it from a saying by Gallinus, which is to start stitching from the skin and insert the needle from outside to inside. If the needle penetrates the skin and the muscle going towards the middle of the abdomen, then it is in the right length for the whole abdomen.
Leave the flap of skin from the side into which you inserted the needle and remove the needle. Insert it again in the other flap from inside to outside, then if you have removed it, insert it once more from outside to inside in the same flap.
Leave the flap of skin in this side and insert the needle into the other flap from inside to outside, and while removing it from the skin, insert it into the edge of the wound until you remove all of it.
Then start again from this side with its eye and line it up with the edge of the skin in the other side, remove the needle from the skin that is close to it, then return it to that skin and line up the edge of the skin in this side with the edge of the wound.
Remove it from the skin that is on this side, and do this again and again until the suture is complete on that example, and the description of this stitch is a stitch like that of the feathers for the quills.
Stitch the skin once from one side with the edge of the skin and leave it from the other side until it is full, and as for the second type of stitching that he also mentioned, this is his exact words.
And it is that they should suture her like an example, as some healers do by gathering all the parts to their corresponding counterparts in the body, and sewing the edge of the wound to its opposite edge, and the edge of the incision to its opposite edge, and this is done as I have described to you.
It is appropriate to insert the needle into the edge of the incision that is closest to you from the outside, and then penetrate it into the incision itself alone, and leave the edges of the wound, then withdraw the needle and penetrate it from the outside into the edge of the wound on both sides, and then withdraw it again.
And penetrate it from the inside to the outside into the edge of the incision on the other side, which is on the opposite side, and this stroke of sewing is better than the general sewing, which is the sewing that I have mentioned, for this is the saying of Galen, and some say that sewing the belly can be done with two needles. And this is done by inserting one thread into both of them, and beginning by inserting the needle from your side and penetrating it to the other side, and then inserting the other needle from the opposite side and penetrating it from your side according to the sewing of the shoes.
Know that if the wound is in the middle of the abdomen, its sutures are harder than those of other parts of the abdomen. As for the treatment of the wound, its rule is like that of other surgeries, that is, if you reach the wound quickly before it changes due to air and you massage the muscle, cut it, and correctly suture it, then apply salt on it.
If the wound has changed due to air, apply some warm compresses until it becomes clean and the sutures fall out and the scabs and pus form, then treat it like the treatment of other surgeries until it heals completely.
If you do not have medicines, apply warm cotton soaked in olive oil twice a day as I told you until it heals completely. You will not need other treatment in most cases if the surgeries are simple. However, if you fear that the wound may involve the main organs in pain,
You should soak a clean cloth in moderately warm olive oil or in rose oil and place it around the places between the thighs and the groin, as often this indicates pain or infection. Then, drain it with black tincture of iodine.
If the pus has reached the abdomen and become an open wound to his intestines, and you know that if it was thick intestine, it is easier to remove, and if it was thin intestine, it is harder to remove.
As for the intestine known as the fasting intestine, it does not allow removal of a surgical instrument that falls into it because of its abundance of nerves and their bones, and its thinness and closeness to the nerve, which is its nature. And if it was the thread that came out of the wound and you managed to grab it quickly, then cut it according to your preference, depending on the type of intestine.
If it has been a while and it has turned green or black, it is appropriate to suture it with a thread over the place where it turned black from, so that blood does not expose. Indeed, in the thread, there are nerves and veins, then cut what is below it, the stitch.
And make the ends of the thread outside the incision, so it is easier for you to pull and remove it when the thread falls and dressing the wound, mentioning the wound that is exposed in the intestine, if it was a small tear.
Some people may be able to heal from a small tear in the intestine due to a spear wound in their belly, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, so I sewed the wound and it became a fistula that excretes urine and feces. So I treated him as if I did not intend to remove it. I never ceased to cleanse and disinfect the wound until it was completely healed, and when I saw that the wound had healed, I feared for the patient that some untoward incident might occur in his abdomen. However, nothing of that sort happened, and he remained in the best of health. Indeed, he eats, drinks, marries, enters the bathhouse, and is engaged in his daily activities. Some of those who have experience mention that if a wound appears in the abdomen and it is small, it is appropriate to cover it with this remedy.
And that is to take the large ants' heads, then gather the edges of the wound, and place a live ant with its mouth open on the edges of the wound. If it bites him and closes its mouth, it will stick and not come off. Then another ant is placed near the first one.
And she continues to do this with several ants according to the size of the wound, then she pours water on him and bandages the wound. Those heads will remain stuck in the abdomen until the abdomen becomes clean and heals, and nothing bad happens to the patient regarding the wound. It is also possible for the abdomen to be stitched with fine thread.
The one who wants to remove the adhesive animal from an injection needle after it has entered should take the tip of this thread from the adhesive substance, then soak it in a solution of vinegar, and then tie a fine, open silk thread to its tip. Then, that thread is inserted into the needle. In it, the Egyptian thread is used to sew up the mouth of the wound, then it is drawn back to the opening, and this stitching with the ants and the Egyptian thread is only on the path of greed and hope.
If, however, the rupture is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the thin intestines, there is no remedy for it and nothing can be done to save the patient.
Chapter Sixty-Eight.
In the treatment of mumps and swelling.
Know that every wound or tumor, if it becomes old and aged and has become a ulcer and never heals and the gland is always swollen, it is called mumps on the whole in any organ where it is called swelling, and we call it mumps.
In reality, it is a complicated, hardened, white lump with no pain, with an opening like the opening of a bird's feather.
And for this reason, some people called it a feather, and it can sometimes be moist and always swells the gland, and sometimes the moisture disappears in certain times, and this moisture can be much or little, thick or thin.
And I presented in the division at the time of surgical operations that every ulcer does not heal and does not grow flesh because of one of nine reasons, one of which is lack of blood in the body or its thinness, or because there is flesh inside it and on its edges, hard flesh that prevents the growth of good flesh. If it is numerous in evil and putrefaction, or if the wound itself is putrid and the matter that extends it is of poor quality, or if the medicine is not suitable for its treatment, or if corruption has occurred in the wound from a type of pus, or if it is a specific case in the wound.
If it is numerous in evil and putrefaction, or if the wound itself is putrid and the matter that extends it is of poor quality, or if the medicine is not suitable for its treatment, or if corruption has occurred in the wound from a type of pus, or if it is a specific case in the wound. Also, as shown in the city of Syracuse, where diseases mature slowly and tumors grow naturally, or if there is a single bone or multiple bones, all these causes, symptoms, and treatments with medicines are explained in detail in the section.
Here, I must inform you of the treatment of abscesses and boils that occur by handwork, knowing that abscesses can occur in all body parts, including those that end in large tumors or nerves.
or to the salivary glands or to the pancreas or to the kidneys or to a rib from the ribs or to a vertebra from the spine or to a joint from the complex joints like the hand and foot, and some of these lead to the vicinity of a major organ such as the heart, etc.
Therefore, if any of these abscesses were on such a location, it is one of the difficult-to-treat diseases that do not accept treatment and require hard work and ignorance to treat. If any of the abscesses did not reach such locations, it is hoped and desired for treatment.
If you wish to know this, take a probe of copper or iron if the patient is standing upright, and examine him with it. If there is a fracture in the patient, examine it with a probe of fine lead because lead is malleable.
If the patient has many teeth, you cannot determine a fracture with the probe because the moisture from saliva will flow to other teeth and drip.
Then, determine the direction of the probe to know if there is bone or nerve or whether the patient's fracture was far or near or whether he had many teeth and stood still. All this depends on your skill in examination and the pain felt when you touch the affected area.
And regarding the signs and causes of the tumor, if you have examined all these with certainty, then proceed to treatment with confidence, which is to look for it.
If the patient is near or in a safe place away from joints, nerves, blood vessels, veins, or any of the places mentioned earlier, split the fracture as described and remove what is inside it, such as pus, bad meat, and excess meat.
If there is meat or pus in his mouth, treat him until he is clean, especially if the tooth is far back and in good position, it is recommended to cut into the depth as much as possible, then clean all the infected flesh from his mouth.
Then use the dirty iron (instrument) in the strong medicines and insert it into the tooth root that you can reach with the iron, do this repeatedly until he eats all the strong medicine remaining in the tooth root.
Then force him with the pliers that can remove meat correctly until he is clean, if he does not become clean by that, continue as you previously described, if the cause of the tooth is bone and it is good for you to remove it, then examine it and cut into it as you told me unless something prevents you from doing so.
If you have removed the bone and it had some decay and discoloration, clean it until the decay goes away then treat him with what can be used to heal him until he is clean, if he does not become clean and you gave him a purgative as he usually did.
Know that you have not reached all the removal of decay, expose everything on him again and examine his cleaning and purify him with the most effort you can, then force him, if he is clean otherwise know that that decay was far from the decay, expose everything on him again.
Investigate the fracture and clean it to the utmost of your ability, as if it were a small bone that was rotten. If you can extract it, extract it with soft, smooth forceps suitable for that purpose.
If there are many bones, investigate and extract them all, leaving nothing behind. If you encounter any tendons beneath them and there is no risk of cutting them, cut those tendons and the flesh if it is present, and clean the bones.
If you cannot extract the bones at that time, apply something that will heal the wound and leave it for several days until the flesh and tendons around the bones heal. Protect the wound so that it does not close again during your work.
Indeed, if you fear that, apply a wet gauze soaked in bicarbonate of soda mixed with oil or a wet gauze soaked in Egyptian manna or one of the other mannas, as they will make it easy to extract and remove the bones once they have healed the tendons.
If it is a large bone like the thigh bone or the hip bone and only the part facing upwards has rotted, incise it cleanly until that rottenness and decay disappear, then suture the wound. However, if a large part of it has rotted and the decay has reached the bone marrow, it must be removed.
Cut the entire piece until it reaches the end of the decay, then treat it until it heals. I inform you that this man had a bone fracture in his leg, which was exposed to show as an example and aid in your treatment.
At the age of thirty, he had pain in his leg due to movement from within the body, causing the materials to reach the leg and swell, forming a large tumor. The cause was not external, and with time, along with the mistakes of doctors, the tumor opened.
Many bad materials were removed from him, and he was treated poorly until the leg healed and many mouths formed in it, all stretching the skin and body fluids. A group of doctors treated him for two years, but none of them had skill in handcraft.
Until he came to me and I saw his leg, and the materials were flowing from those mouths in a great stream, and the body of the man was yellow. I inserted the probe into one of those mouths, and it reached the bone, then I examined all the mouths.
I found that some of them flowed into each other from all sides of the leg, so I opened one of those mouths until I revealed part of the bone, and I found it rotten, having eaten away and turned black and decayed and punctured until the puncture reached the brain. I spread out what had been revealed to me.
I have managed to remove the rotten bone and I believe that there is nothing else in the bone but the decay that I cut and spread, and I had already extracted it, then I applied strong medicines for a longer period of time, but it did not heal, so I returned and exposed the bone again above the first exposure.
I found the decay connected to the bone, so I spread what appeared to me from that decay, then I pounded it forcefully, but it did not heal, and it did not stick either, so I exposed it again, but I kept cutting the bone piece by piece and pounding it until I removed about a span of bone.
Then I extracted it with a spoon and treated it with medicines, and it healed quickly and completely, but this repetition was necessary for his work and division to the state of weakness and low probability and my fear of him dying because he often had excessive stupor that caused him to die completely.
Then he put hard meat in the place of the bone and it cured his condition in his body, restored his strength, and he returned to normal, and he did not have any ailment that would harm him while walking, but if the bone was rotten in a part of the body, it would have broken.
It is necessary to publish it on this property, which is that you should take a bandage and stretch it at the end of the bone that is not attached, and command someone to extend it above and make another bandage from a coarser cloth than the first one.
Then, you should bandage it on the meat that is under the bone and extend its end to attract the meat downwards while you expose the meat from the place you want to publish it so that it does not hurt the patient's flesh and place a board or plank under the bone from below firmly.
Because if you do that, the patient will not refrain from cutting the rotten bone, and it is necessary that the publication should be above the place of decay a little so that it does not become decayed in the cavity of the bone and does not appear on its surface for touch, so you will have to publish it again.
If the bone is rotten and not attached but connected to each other and the decay is in its middle or some parts, then expose the meat from all its sides completely, then place the board from below, then publish it from the first side where the decay is.
Then, if you finish publishing it from the other side and the publication should be away from the decay a little as we said, then if the decay is in a joint, cut the rotten joint itself and publish the bone where it connects from the other side.
If the damage is in the connection of joints, there is no remedy other than reduction. If the damage is in the palm of the hand or the sole of the foot, the matter of treatment is extremely difficult, but it is necessary to scrape away the damage as it appears and reduce and cleanse it however you can.
What remedy should you use when blood or nerve does not obstruct you, and know that the saws and chisels for cutting these bones are many according to the position of the bones, their attachment, their thickness, their softness, their size, their age, and their flexibility and disintegration. Therefore, it is necessary for you to have a tool suitable for each type of work.
And know that the work itself may indicate the type of tool you need if you have a long apprenticeship and knowledge of the skills of this craft, because it is from the mastery of the craft and witnessing many cases of diseases. For he may deduce for himself what tools are suitable for each disease, and I will describe many tools for you at the end of this book.
Make them examples that you imitate and a standard by which you measure others, God willing, an image of a masher:
Figure of a lance.
Figure of a small lance.
Figure of a large lance.
The head of this simple figure is in the shape of the head of a lance, decorated with a design like that of an eagle and it is used to replace broken joints or large wide bones. Figure simple other small.
Figure simple wide.
His upper shaft and its grooves are made of iron and his sleeve is made from a hardwood with a tight grain, Figure simple in it hollow.
Figure simple other delicate.
Figure simple other pointed end.
Figure simple small resembling the spear.
Figure other small cut.
His tip like a needle used in many places of the bone tissue, Figure simple used to replace bones that have been broken.
His tip triangular sharp sides made of Indian iron and also all that we mentioned of simple figures and cuts, Figure simple.
Chapter 78.
In the amputation of limbs and dispersing bones.
Limbs may rot either from an external cause or from an internal cause. If you treat this corruption with medicine and it does not improve, and you see that the corruption is spreading within the limb and nothing can stop it.
It is necessary to cut off that part of the limb until the corruption reaches, so that the greater evil, which is death or a great calamity, is better than losing the limb. A sign that indicates this is when the limb becomes completely black as if it has been burned by fire.
Or if it becomes black and then the corruption spreads to other parts of the body, then cut off that part immediately, as well as if the cause of the corruption is the spread of certain poisons such as sea urchins or snakes or scorpions and so on.
If the corruption or spread is at the tip of the finger, then cut off the finger and do not delay, as the corruption will spread to the hand. Similarly, if it has reached the hand, then cut it off from its base and do not delay, as the corruption will spread to the elbow.
Similarly, if it has reached the arm, then cut off the arm at the elbow joint itself, as long as the corruption has not spread to near the shoulder, do not cut off the shoulder, as this will cause death of the patient. Use other treatments according to the patient's strength.
In the case of a foot injury, if it affects the toe, cut off the toe at one of the joints. If it affects the instep, cut off the entire leg at the knee joint.
If the injury has spread above the knee, there is no remedy except to leave it and let the patient die in peace. The method of cutting off a limb or spreading it out involves tying a rope at the lower part of the place you want to cut and another rope above it.
The servant should extend the rope at the lower part downwards and the other rope upwards, and scrape the flesh between the ropes with a wide blade until all the flesh is exposed, then cut or spread it out. It is recommended to put incisions in the skin from all sides.
To avoid causing excessive pain and heat to the affected area, if bleeding occurs during your work, quickly cover the area or apply some clotting agents to stop the bleeding, then return to your treatment until it stops.
Then tie the injured limb with a rope that fits it and treat it until it is healed. I inform you of an example of a bandage for a leg in a leg, which I will describe to you, as it happened in his leg blackness similar to fire.
The corruption (of the finger) was the first thing that occurred in his finger until the whole leg was affected. When he saw the corruption, he tried to remove the infected part from the body due to the severe pain and inflammation. He cut it at the joint, and it was cured.
When a long time had passed, he saw the corruption with his own eyes in the finger of his right hand (the thumb). He came to me and asked for that favor (treatment) from the medicines I had on my hand after cleaning his body, but it did not retreat (heal), so he continued trying in the other finger.
He then caught the corruption in his hand and called me to cut off his hand, but I refused him, hoping for my treatment (cure) to work, and also fearing that he might die during the amputation because the power of the leg was falling, so when he lost hope from me, he went back to his country.
I was informed that he cut off his hand himself and was cured, but I only told this story to be a help for what happens from this kind of disease and to be a proof that one can rely on and act upon.
The eighth chapter and the eightieth.
In the treatment of abscesses and how to inject them with medicines.
If a tumor occurs in some of the fleshy organs and its duration extends until it reaches its full extent, then it bursts or melts away and all that was within it in terms of duration comes out and the location remains empty as if it were an empty vessel.
The skin that is like a scab, which has not reached its full extent of corruption so as to affect bone or nerve or muscle, from here it is appropriate to call it hidden and not to call it spreading unless its duration extends until the corruption affects one of these organs.
Then it is called spreading or zakama, and its treatment is to cut that skin completely as it grows, especially if it has become like a scab and it is certain that it does not stick to the location due to its corruption.
If one hoped that the skin would stick and it had not reached corruption, that is, if it was a tumor in the flesh and it was small, then he treated it with cauterization, which is to look at the hidden part and if it was large and the pus that comes out of it has a strong smell, then he cauterized it with Egyptian medicine.
Which is honey, oil, and cinnamon and parts of onion all mixed together in a container and cooked on the fire until the medicine thickens and it comes out like honey, then take what you need from it and dilute it with water and honey and inject it into the hidden part and close his mouth and leave the medicine in him for two hours.
Then, in the evening, do that for several days until the wound purifies and the pus disappears. It may also be treated with ashes of cedar or bdellium wood water if this medicine is not available.
Then, squeeze it and inject it until it is confirmed that the wound has been purified. If there is no chance of the Egyptian medicine or water of ashes, then inject it with honey mixed with some powdered cinnamon.
Or inject it with honey and vinegar mixed together because the honey purifies and cleanses, and the vinegar adheres to the wound, especially if it has a thick consistency and is not too sour. If you have done this several times and confirmed that the wound has been purified, then inject it with something that promotes flesh growth in it.
Such as taking from the olive and macerating it with red wine and thick vinegar, or inject it with some of the other drugs and oils that we have proven their properties in the article on oils, if the wound is narrow so that a syringe needle cannot fit into it.
Expand it a little with iron or place a dirty wick in the Egyptian oil or sariq oil until it becomes wide enough, and also if the mouth is also wide, then gather its sides with stitching and leave only as much as the syringe needle can enter without adding more.
If the tooth that is discharging pus is raised above the level of the gum, then split it at its lowest point so that the pus can drain downwards, for if the pus becomes trapped in the cavity of the tooth, it will prevent the flesh from growing there.
If you cannot split the cavity downwards as desired, then insert a probe that will allow the pus to drain easily according to what is available to you, but ensure that nothing remains trapped in the cavity.
As for the caustic substances that are applied to the cavity from outside, their manner of application is as follows: take one of the caustic substances according to your desire and extend it over a piece of cloth, and let the cloth be as large as can cover the entire cavity. Then, with the probe, make an opening in front of the cavity that is larger than the mouth of the cavity, then extend the thin caustic substance over another cloth, and place it on the opening, keeping it away from the mouth of the cavity to allow the pus to drain easily, but do not remove the large cloth until afterward.
For several days, and as for the one on the mouth of the cavity, it should be removed at all times to allow any pus that has collected in it to drain out, and to determine whether the discharge is abundant or scant, serous or purulent.
And also examine the position of the hidden place itself, whether its owner feels pain in it or not, and whether there is a tumor in it or not, and if there is a tumor, then if you proceed with treatment in this way and see the substance that comes out easily from the mouth of the hidden place.
Then know that the hidden place has become attached or almost attached, then leave it for a day or on the third day, and when the wound heals, change the drainage and renew the dressing, because if something comes out of the hidden place after a long time, do not despair of attachment.
For some people, the growth of flesh in surgery is slow and for others, it is the opposite, so if something comes out of the hidden place after many days, it is not pus but rather discharge, then know that the hidden place has not become attached.
If the matter continues, then add moisture to the drugs and let the drugs be in their wetness and in their dryness, like the linen cloth if it has increased in its value by adding more than the mastic, and whoever is most skilled in what he treats with should take the linen cloth.
And it is boiled with red wax and sprinkled with the old, moderate alcohol in its wetness, then it is compressed and used, and this action can be done if the linen cloth honey has not been available to you, if it has been cooked until it becomes thick and used or taken from the marrow, skin, and cinnamon, and all of it is mixed and the residue is placed on the honey while it is on the fire. Then, apply honey on the wound and bandage it over the wound or apply the cooked honey until it thickens and sprinkle the powders on it and place the wound dressing on it and bandage it.
In such cases, one can use long zarand al-tawil, asml al-samanjuniyy, kirsnan powder, and single or mixed qantraiyun that has been sieved, soaked, and dried, and then applied on the cooked honey that was prepared and used. If the wound does not heal with this treatment, know that there is decay inside it.
It has been used in bones or other hard tissues or scars, and treatment is as mentioned earlier.
Chapter 89.
In the treatment of ingrown nails, crushed fingernails, and extra toenails, and splitting of the fingertips.
The ingrown nail is a large amount of tissue that grows under the fingernail of the hand or foot, and sometimes grows in other nails. If the condition persists and treatment is neglected, it becomes inflamed and hot.
Or it may rot and eventually eat the nail root, sometimes even the entire nail, and sometimes the decay reaches the bone until it has a pungent smell and the fingertip becomes wide and its color becomes yellowish. If treated with what was mentioned in the division and did not heal, then
It is necessary to cut all the cicatrization that grows from the wound with an iron, then stitch the wound afterwards, as this is very beneficial. However, if the bone is intact and the wound was also intact, it is not necessary to do so.
If the angle of the wound was filled with meat and caused it to rot and decay, it is necessary to place a thin piece of cloth under the angle of the wound that rots the meat and lift it upwards, then cut away that meat gently.
Then place the remaining meat with burning and caustic remedies until it all disappears, then treat it with poultices until it is clean. However, if the decay has affected the bone, it is necessary to cut away that bone and remove it, as it will not be clean as long as there is bone affected by decay.
If you see that the decay and rotting are spreading in the finger, cut it off at one of the joints as mentioned earlier, then treat it until it is clean. However, if the wound was hit by a blow or pierced and caused severe pain, it is necessary to extract the bone first.
Then sharpen the wound with a sharp, twisted needle from above downwards and avoid letting it reach the flesh beneath the wound, as this would cause pain to the bone and severe pain, and could be a cause of excessive flesh growth in the area. Then treat the area with what alleviates the pain.
As for the extra digit that sometimes appears in some people's hands, it may be entirely fleshy or may have bones in part of it, and may also have a nail, with the plant part of it originating from the base of one of the finger joints.
And its plant part may grow in some of the finger joints and not move, while the part that grows at the finger joint may move. If it is only fleshy, it can be easily cut off by cutting it at its base with a wide-bladed knife.
And as for the part that grows at the base of the joint, its treatment is difficult and it should not be cut off. But if it grows at one of the fingers, it is recommended to first cut its flesh evenly to the bone, then spread the bone with one of those spreading instruments appropriate for that.
Then treat it until it is healed. And as for the entanglement that exposes some fingers to each other, it often occurs and is due to the birth of the human and occurs at the time of a wound or burn by fire and so on, it is recommended to separate that entanglement.
Until the fingers return to their natural shape, then put between them a thread or a piece of cotton soaked in rose oil so that they do not stick together quickly and separate them or place a thin piece of lead between them until the position returns to what is appropriate.
Likewise, if there is an injury where some fingers are entangled in the hand, cut that entanglement according to what is appropriate and suitable to restore the shape of the organ.
Chapter Nineteen.
In cutting the fingers.
The fingers are tendons that are thick, dark, and flexible, occurring in many parts of the body, most commonly in the legs, especially in the feet, knees, and hips. Therefore, it is first recommended to use the black silk thread for several strong pulls.
Then, the affected person should apply pressure to it using a basilique, and if treatment with iron is used, it should be done in two ways: one way is to cut and remove the black blood and the other way is to squeeze and remove the pus. If cutting, it should be done in such a way that the leg heals first with warm water.
Until the thick, clotted blood is removed, then the leg of the affected person should be bandaged from the hip to the foot, and then the pus should be cut in one place or two places or three wide cuts.
Then, the black blood is squeezed out from the bottom of the leg to the top and from the top to the bottom until the appropriate amount of blood is removed or as much as the affected person can tolerate. Then, it should be bandaged and instructed to avoid foods that cause the black silk thread.
When the veins are filled and cause harm to the patient, if he is bald, then circumcision of the patient's leg is performed if there is much hair on it. Then, the bath attendant introduces hot water into the leg until it reddens and drains the blood, or a strong exercise is performed.
If a bath attendant is not available until the body part warms up, then the skin is cut lengthwise facing the vein, either at the end near the ankle or at the bottom near the heel. Then, the skin is opened with needles and the blood is drained from all sides until it is visible to the touch.
When it appears red and swollen, if the skin is removed, you will also see it as if it were a tumor. Then, cotton is introduced underneath until it rises and exits the skin. It is then tied with a blind, soft string, and another cut is made nearby that cut, about the length of three fingers.
Then, the skin is drained from above the vein until it is visible. Then, it is raised with cotton as before and tied with another string as before. Then, another cut or several cuts are made if necessary.
Then loosen and cut it at the end of the groove near the heel, then draw it out and loosen it until it comes out of the second groove. Then draw it up to the groove above it and do this until it is drawn out of the third groove, all of them. When it all comes out, cut it.
If it does not come out by loosening and drawing, then insert a strong double-threaded needle and tie it, draw it, and insert the cotton underneath it. Bend it with your hand to all sides until it comes out, and do not let it break. If it breaks, it will be difficult for you to draw it.
Then, place a harmful drug on the wound from it, if you have drawn it all out, then put it in the surgical position with moistened cotton soaked in water and oil or fat and treat it until it is clean. If the cause is a splinter with sharp edges that can be turned to various sides.
If it is not in a straight position as we said, then you should cut it at all the edges and positions where it can be turned and then tie it with thread until it is drawn out completely, and do not let it break when you cut or pierce it, for it will be difficult for you to draw it if it breaks.
Figure of the nose that the drill pierces.
Figure of the blind craftsman.
She does not have sharpening like other craftsmen and is not sharp-pointed so as to not cut the flesh and to be thickly-knitted, smooth for if she were fine, she would cut the flesh by its fineness, but it has advantage of being thicker as we said.
Chapter 89.
In the vein of civil blood.
This blood is produced in the legs in hot countries like Hijaz and Arab countries and in hot, humid places and possibly produced in other parts of the body besides the legs and produced by an infection that occurs under the skin.
As it occurs in the living bodies of animals and fish, and the blood that is produced between the skin and flesh, and a sign that begins the occurrence of this blood is that it occurs in the leg with severe heat then the place becomes inflamed then the blood begins to come out from that inflammation.
Like it is the root of a plant or an animal, if its tip appears from it, it should be bandaged with a small piece of lead weighing from one to two dirhams and knitted and left the lead hanging from the leg.
Whenever something emerges from it (the wound) to the outside, wrap it in zinc and tie it. If it is too long, cut off a part of it and wrap the rest. Do not cut it from its source before it fully emerges, for if you do, it will shrink and enter the flesh, causing inflammation and infection at the site and a severe wound.
Therefore, it should be massaged and gently pulled out little by little until it fully emerges from the body, leaving nothing behind in the body. In some people, this liquid may emerge in lengths of five or ten palm spans.
I have been informed that it emerged from a man's leg in a length of twenty palm spans. If you cut it off for me, I will insert a needle into its opening and gently pull out a long piece of flesh along with the body until all the matter inside it is removed, and then attempt to heal the site using medicines for several days.
Then treat it with the treatment of tumors, as this liquid may have many fibers, especially if it appears in the knee joint or the leg itself, causing many openings and exiting from each fiber. Treat it as mentioned in the division and as previously stated.
Chapter 29: Treatment of Fractures and Dislocations
In the case of a fracture occurring in the neck under the jaw, it is called "Al-Alla' al-Bakr.
This disease is called "Al-Alla' al-Bakr" in some countries, because it often appears on cattle and is a small worm that grows between the skin and flesh, spreading throughout the body, both ascending and descending.
It becomes apparent by touch that it is a continuous chain of organs until it breaks, where it exits and forms from a mixture of some impurities, as it appears in worms and insects, and the heart in the belly.
It is expected that its harm is when it enters the body and rises to the head and reaches the eye, so that it opens in the eye and exits, which is often seen, so if you want to treat it and remove it, it is only possible by feeling it.
It is necessary to tie it above and below with a strong rope, then cut it and remove it, if it has entered the flesh and you cannot find it, carry it to the hot place by fire until it burns.
If you see it has reached the head near the eye, tighten it underneath on the forehead with a strong tension, then cut it and extract it. It is recommended for the patient to purify his body with easy-to-digest medicines that help remove foul and decayed substances and to avoid foods that cause putrefaction.
Chapter 39.
In the cutting of the disease known as the "nasopharyngeal tumor".
This disease, known as "nafar" in our country, is a pain that appears in some organs and then spreads from one organ to another. I have already described it to you.
I was called to a patient in some remote areas and examined her arms, then noticed a swelling that moved like a stream of air inside the arm rope. After an hour, I saw that this swelling was moving upwards towards the shoulder as fast as possible, like a snake.
If you ask from one place to another, the pain disappears from that place and becomes fixed in the shoulder, then wait for an hour and move throughout the body until it reaches the other arm, then tell me that your whole body is spinning as I have seen.
I was amazed at the speed with which it moved from one part to another, and I had never seen this disease with my own eyes until I saw a group of people experiencing pain that moved from one part to another, but I did not see it in this way myself.
I did not understand this until I realized that the woman was from the countryside, with a thin body and exposed bones, which is why it became apparent to touch in this case, but it would not be noticeable in people of good health and those with moist, hidden, and covered bones.
If you want to treat it and the owner of it feels pain, if it appears to you with your eyes as we mentioned, then press above and below it with a needle until that hidden wind comes out and the area is cleared.
If you did not see it with your eyes, then treat it by stripping the body and whatever does not dispel wind and reveal it, such as herbs like mint and juniper, and so on.
Chapter 49.
In extracting arrows.
Arrows differ depending on their types and the parts of the body where they are located. As for their differences based on their types, there are large ones and small ones, and some are made of glass with engravings, some are made of glass without engravings, and some have three angles and four angles.
From these, there are some that have tongues and some that do not. Those that have tongues are based on the organs that are found in them, such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, spleen, intestines, and bladder, among others. If a dart has struck one of these organs and you have noticed the signs of death that I have described to you, it is best to avoid removing that dart from them, for in most cases, death will overtake its owner. If these signs have not appeared for you and the dart has not become lodged in the cavity of the organ, then remove it and treat the wound. Among the signs of the brain, if a dart has pierced it and perforated the bone and wounded the sinew that is on the brain, then it will manifest intense headaches, spasms, and dizziness.
If these signs have not appeared for you and the dart has not become lodged in the cavity of the organ, then remove it and treat the wound. Among the signs of the brain, if a dart has pierced it and perforated the bone and wounded the sinew that is on the brain, then it will manifest intense headaches, spasms, and dizziness. Redness in the eyes and redness of the tongue, convulsions, confusion, vomiting, and possibly blood coming from the nose or ears, and possibly the loss of speech and voice, and white moisture like dough coming from the wound, like juice from meat.
If these signs have appeared for you, then refrain from treating the wound and removing the dart if it has not already been removed. However, if the signs of the dart are in the heart and it is close to the left breast and feels hard, like it has pierced something solid rather than nothing.
When the sword's movement resembles a heartbeat and black blood flows from the wound, followed by cold limbs and chills, know that death is near and inevitable. A sign of the sword is when it pierces the lung, causing the exit of creamy blood from the wound.
When the veins below the neck pulsate, the color of the skin changes, and the breathing becomes high and rapid, and the patient seeks deep breaths of cold air, it indicates that the sword has pierced the diaphragm in the chest. If so, it is close to the smaller ribs and accompanied by intense pain and heavy breathing.
All the abdominal organs contract and move, and if the sword has pierced the liver, it is accompanied by severe pain and the exit of blood that resembles the liver in its redness. If the sword has pierced the stomach, it may cause the exit of undigested food from the wound.
If the symptom is visible, and if the sword has pierced the abdomen and caused inflammation with the exit of urine or feces or mucus that has broken, there is no treatment or way to remove the sword. If the sword has pierced the bladder and caused the exit of urine, there is no treatment or way to remove the sword.
If something protrudes to the outside and the pain is severe, know that it has died. However, other parts such as the face, eye, neck, shoulder, arm, back, loins, thigh, and leg have already succumbed to the condition.
When a dart does not pierce an artery or nerve, and the dart is not poisoned, I inform you of some observations regarding this type of wound to guide your treatment. A dart once entered the leg near the eyebrow at the root of the nose.
Then I extracted it from the other side under the earlobe and he was cured without any complications in his eye. Another dart entered through the earlobe below the lower eyelid, and the dart had disappeared; only its small tip remained stuck in the wood.
A large dart made of iron, square in shape and smooth, with no eyelets, was extracted from a Christian's neck without any complications, and there was no bad occurrence in his eye. Another dart was removed from the shoulder of a Jew, and it was round in shape.
He had eyelets, so I made incisions between them and extracted it from his neck gently. The Christian was cured and survived. Another dart was removed from a man's abdomen, and we knew that he would die from it.
When the period of thirty days or thereabouts had passed and nothing changed in his condition, he was pierced with a sharp instrument and the wound was opened upon him. He was then extracted and he survived without any harm, and no adverse event occurred to him. I saw a man who had been stabbed in the back, and the wound was treated in the same manner.
After seven years, the spearhead came out of his thigh, and I saw a woman who had been stabbed in her abdomen with a spear. The wound was treated in the same manner, and the spearhead remained without causing any change in her condition or any harm to her natural functions.
I also saw another man who had been stabbed in his face, and the wound was treated in the same manner. He did not suffer much pain, and there were many similar cases. I extracted a spear from a nobleman who had been stabbed in the middle of his nose, and it had slightly deviated to the left side.
The spear had completely disappeared, so I called for its extraction after three days of its being inside him. The wound was found to be very narrow and tight, so I probed it with a fine probe and could not feel anything. However, he felt pain and tenderness under his right ear from the back side.
It is advisable that this splinter be from the tip of the arrow, and if it is, close the wound with a bandage that has strong adhesive power and wait for a few days to see if the wound becomes inflamed or shows signs of the arrowhead. If nothing happens, it indicates that the arrowhead has reached the wound.
I applied the bandage for many days, but nothing happened, so I left it on the wound until one day he felt the arrowhead inside his nose. He informed me of this, and I applied a strong antiseptic ointment to the wound for many days.
Until the wound opened and he felt the sharp tip of the arrow that stuck to the wood, then I increased the application of that strong antiseptic ointment until the tip of the arrow appeared visibly and he carried it with him for about four months.
Then, when the wound expanded and I was able to insert my fingers into it, I grasped and moved them, but he did not respond to exit, so I continued to massage him and stimulate him with various instruments until one day I firmly grasped him with forceps in the same shape as shown at the end of the chapter.
Doctors used to judge that the splinter of his nose should not be removed, so they closed the wound and healed it without causing any harm to him at all. I am telling you about the method of extracting some splinters as a measure and proof of what I have not mentioned.
Because parts of this craft and its details cannot be understood by description or encompassed in a book, only the skilled artisan can measure a little against much and with what is present he infers new work and new tools when faced with unusual circumstances.
If it falls from this craft, I say that the splinters are only extracted from the body parts where they grew in two ways: either by attraction from the place where they entered or against the other side, and those that come out from where they entered.
Either the splinter is prominent in a place of flesh, it attracts and comes out, but if it does not come out from its time when it entered, you should leave it for several days until the flesh around it becomes soft, making it easier to attract and extract it. And likewise, if it grows in a bone.
If it does not expel itself, leave it for a few days and then try to extract it every day by traction and manipulation, as it usually expels itself. If it still does not expel after several days, it is necessary to perforate around the splinter in the same bone from all sides with a fine needle until the splinter is enlarged, then extract it.
If the splinter is in the skull bone and has penetrated into one of the brain's sinuses and symptoms of the mentioned conditions appear, then do not attempt to extract the splinter and leave it until it heals on its own after several days.
If you attempt to extract the splinter, and if it is deeply embedded and does not expel itself, then use perforation around the splinter as described before, then treat the wound until it heals. If the splinter has disappeared from its position in the body. If it has disappeared from feeling, then use a probe to search for it. If you feel it, then use some tools suitable for extracting it. If the wound is too narrow and the splinter is in the flesh, not bone, nerve, or muscle, then do not attempt to extract it.
Remove the skin from him until the wound expands and the arrow is extracted, if he has ears, hold them firmly from all sides with every possible method you can use and if you cannot extract the arrow from the broken ears, stretch them until it is removed.
If you attempt to extract the arrow from any position, use your fingers with nails in all directions until it is removed and be careful not to break the arrow as it will be difficult for you to grasp and remove it, if you cannot do so at that time.
Leave it for several days until the flesh around him rots then attempt again as it will be easier at that time, if bleeding stops use the methods mentioned in the chapter on wounds and be careful not to cut nerves or tendons or veins and use every possible method.
In every possible way you can extract the arrow and do so gently, carefully and firmly as described to you, and when grasping the arrow it is best for you to shape your fingers as they were when the arrow entered as this will be more effective.
If you cannot do so, use any shape possible, and as for the arrow that exits from the other side, it may have emerged with something outside or you may find the tip of the arrow by feeling from above the skin nearby and see it pointing outwards.
He should cut it and make the cut equal to the size of nine fingers, then pull it out, as it is easier for it to come out. If it sticks in the bone, press your finger on the bone until the spear pierces the bone and expands for itself, then pull it out.
If not, leave it for a few days until it comes out by itself, then if the spearhead is in it, push it out with your finger, but if the spearhead has fallen and you want to use force, insert the auger machine into its hole in the bone and then push it out with it.
If the spear is hollow, push it out with a machine that fits into that hole, as the spear will come out easily in this way. If the spear is poisoned, it is necessary to remove all the meat that has absorbed the poison if possible, then treat it with what is appropriate for that.
If the spear that is inside the chest or stomach or bladder or side and is close to being crushed by the auger, and you can cut it, cut and preserve from cutting nerves or tendons and remove it.
Then suture the wound if necessary, then treat it until it heals. The image of the cicatrices that attract spears:
If the wound is large and round, like a flying bird's beak, it should be made to seem as if it has been cooled, even if it has not. It can be made into different types of sizes, large or small, depending on the size of the spearhead, its width, the size of the wound, and its narrowness.
Picture of a broken arrow:.
Picture of an intact arrow:".
This is the tip of the arrow, like a needle, to make it easier to enter and push into the broken spear.
Chapter 59.
In the section of the ribs.
The ribs that are usually removed in the body, thirty of them, sixteen in the head, two pairs of arteries known as the carotid arteries and veins, which are in the visible neck, and two pairs of arteries known as the retinal arteries and veins, which are in the eye sockets.
The rib that is raised in the middle of the forehead, and the rib that is in the tip of the nose and the cheeks, which are in the neck, and the two arteries that are in the upper lip and the lower lip, and these ribs known as the collarbones, and the arteries under the tongue.
And as for the ribs that are removed in the arm and hand, they are five ribs, one of which is called the scapula, also known as the shoulder blade, and it is called the middle rib, which is made up of two parts of the basilique and a part of the scapula, and it is also known as the body rib.
The basilisk is a topic in the insane side and it is also called the ibtah, and it is commonly known as the navel belt and arm rope, and it is the subject on the zinda, which is what sticks together in it, and it is what appears above the eyebrow, a clear appearance, and the Asilam.
It is the blood that lies between the knife and the bone, which has two names, and in the leg and foot three veins, one of which is under the kneecap from the insane side and the second the sapfn and its place near the heel from the insane side and female blood and its place near the neck from the insane side.
In the other leg, three veins like them, and as for the two veins behind the ears, their function is to prevent chronic headaches, fever, and skin diseases, and how to block them as described.
So that the patient cuts his head and massages the tip of the veins in the place of the two veins with a rough massage well, then the patient hangs his neck with a turban until the veins and their places behind the ears in the low parts of the head are exposed, and you search for them with your finger, and where you feel the pulse of them under your finger, there is the opening.
Then take a sharp knife, which is known as the lancet, and insert it under the skin until the blade reaches the bone. Then lift your hand with the skin and flesh above and cut the skin and flesh together, torn and divided, and the length of the cut should be the size of two fingers thick.
Then release the amount of blood that you wish, and then squeeze them together with the forceps and leave them until they are clean. It was previously mentioned in the first book to cut and pull them out. However, for the two arteries in the temples, their purpose is to relieve chronic headaches, severe headaches, persistent sinus congestion, and severe eye strain caused by excessive rubbing of the eyes.
How to squeeze them as I have described, the skilled surgeon will press his thumb firmly on the skin until the arteries appear clearly and their pulsation can be felt beneath your finger. At that time, you will learn the location of the artery, then lift the skin from above the artery to the level of your thumb, and cut it.
Then insert the lancet from below and lift the skin above, and tear it as you did with the other arteries, release the amount of blood that you need, then clean the wound of the skilled surgeon and place your finger on the artery for one hour.
Then, place a cotton and wool bandage on it, tie it tightly from above, and leave it until it is clean. They have mentioned its incision and excision and suture in the first book. However, if there is a pustule on the forehead, it is beneficial to extract it after extracting the qiyafah for chronic facial ulcers like scabs, pimples, and red bumps.
How to extract it as I described for you, the physician should press his neck with a cloak until the pus comes out. Then, he should take the tool called the fs, and this is its image:
Then, place the needle from the head of the fs on the same pus and strike it from above with a brush or something else in that way, and let the blood flow on the desired container. Then, clean the physician's neck and tie it until it is clean.
He may use a wide needle, but it is not appropriate for the needle to be sharp-tipped like other needles, but rather it should be slightly blunt and extract it on the incision because the bone is close, so that if the needle is thin, it might break in it.
As for the two pustules in the eyelids, they are beneficial for eye problems like styes, redness, and other face diseases. As for how to extract them, it is that the physician should press his neck with a cloak, then extract them while you are standing on his head and let the incision be on the incision towards the length slightly with a small, wide needle.
If the location has no flesh in it, and if the abscess is thin-skinned, it may burst, so you should apply a piece of cotton to it and bind it with a bandage for one night, then loosen it, and as for pus from the nose, it is beneficial in severe fevers.
Severe headache and diseases of the face, such as redness in the nose, especially if it is chronic, and how to treat it is for the patient to raise his neck and hold his nose with his left hand and take a thin, long piece of cotton.
Then insert it into the middle of the nostril itself, between the bridge of the nose on stability because pus does not feel there, so blood will come out from there, and it is necessary to gently wipe the cotton with a little blood and then loosen it, as it heals quickly.
As for the warts, they are beneficial in relieving shortness of breath and beginning of asthma and black skin diseases that appear on the surface of the skin such as blackheads, pimples, rough scabs, and crusts, and how to treat them is for the patient to tie a bandage underneath them on his neck and the practitioner stands on top of the patient.
The incision is made on a stool, then the blood is drawn along the length, widely but slightly, then the fat is scraped off in an appropriate amount or as needed, then do the same with the other blood, then apply the suture.
The incisions are sutured firmly but not too tightly to avoid choking the patient, and leave it for the next day as it helps heal the wound. However, for the incisions of the throat, they should be sutured after drawing out the tongue, as it benefits from preventing lockjaw, decaying of the gums, cracked lips, splitting of the lips, and decayed sores.
The incisions in the nose and around it should be sutured by placing the patient in front of you, then covering his neck with a cloth, then turning his lips to look at the incisions, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left, and checking their color.
Also, if they are thin and dark around them, cut them in irregular pieces, as it is difficult to identify what they are. If you are unsure, cut larger pieces and examine them, and do the same with the incisions in the lower lip.
The incisions under the tongue are beneficial and should be sutured after drawing out the tongue, as they are useful for the throat infections from diseases like thrush and mouth diseases. The method of suturing them is to place the patient between your hands with a sun shoe, raise his tongue, and look under the tongue on one side for an incision and on the other side for an incision, and check their color to black.
They should be cut and preserved without puncturing them, as there are vessels beneath them that might cause bleeding from those vessels. As for the three tendons that are usually cut in the elbow, they are the ones that are commonly cut in people, and their cutting is done on two sides.
Either insert a wide-bladed knife or an olive oil-soaked one into the incision, or cut it with a sharp-edged knife and this is the image of the wide-bladed knife: [image of the wide-bladed knife].
It should be wide enough as you see to open the tendons that are hollow and filled with prominent, visible, thick blood like tar, and this is the image of the olive oil-soaked knife: [image of the olive oil-soaked knife].
And this knife is narrower and sharper, suitable for cutting the thin tendons that contain clear, yellowish blood, and this is the image of the scalpel: [image of the scalpel].
This scalpel is suitable for cutting and has various thicknesses and thinness depending on the size of the tendons, narrowing them, and it can be used to determine others, and it is well-known among craftsmen.
And as for the bicipital, which is one of these three tendons, its purpose in cutting it is that it attracts blood from the vessels that are under the neck and chest, and it extends to the chest and abdomen. When cutting it, the cutter should be careful and hold a part of it, as there is a vessel beneath it, so if he makes a mistake and adds more in the incision of the knife, he will cut that vessel.
When bleeding occurs, it is not appropriate to stop the bleeding with a small probe but rather to stop it with a sharp instrument called a nishla. If the bleeding does not stop, it may be necessary to avoid using this method and instead use another method or request some of the patient's blood.
Or, if possible, use a thread from the patient's arm to stop the bleeding, as they said, and then sharpen it with the nishla as we mentioned earlier. If you want to stop it with your own hand, it is necessary to first feel the position until you locate the location of the pulse, then apply pressure on it with the pad of your finger.
Then, tie the arm and sharpen the vein sharp with the nishla as we mentioned earlier, and be careful that the blow is not near the location of the vein. If you feel a puff when tightening the knot in the place where you applied pressure with the pad of your finger, then that puff is the swelling of the vein, so avoid it.
If you see the blood flowing like a young boy's urine and it was thin, red blood, then know that it is from the vein. At that time, immediately place your finger on it for a long time, then remove your finger. If the blood stops flowing, often it will stop flowing when you tighten the arm.
Leave him, and warn the patient of his neglect and let him rest on his back and not move him for several days until he is healed. If the blood does not stop flowing, if it overpowers you, and if no medicine is available to you at that time, the artery may rupture, as its two ends shrink and the blood flows out.
Take a piece of linen cloth and split it into two pieces, and take the half that is thicker and tie it tightly on the wound with knots and stitches for several days. If the blood stops flowing, otherwise treat him as mentioned earlier by placing cauterizing agents to stop the bleeding and cutting his blood vessels, which is not difficult in most cases.
If the wound is small and the stitching in the arm is successful, inform him. As for the older blood, it is beneficial to suck it out from above his head and below his body to a place where it is mixed with basilic vein and saphenous vein as we mentioned earlier.
The sucker should be on his back as there is a nerve underneath him. If he moves too much and hits the nerve, it may cause paralysis and sometimes he may not have healed at all. This nerve is often visible to the touch.
If some people have a thin, unnoticeable vein, it is recommended to make the incision sharp and avoid the nerve. If there is blood between two nerves, cut the blood long. However, if it is a large vein, it is beneficial to squeeze it to stop the bleeding.
It is beneficial to treat this vein, especially if it is small; squeeze it with a warm olive oil or a wide, fragrant compress as it is safe for all the veins as there is no artery or nerve underneath it.
However, you should avoid using the compress on the muscle head and aim for a smooth position. It will not harm him if he does not get hit in the first strike. However, sometimes people may swell if they are not squeezed in the first strike.
However, this swelling does not harm him at all. Regarding the method of squeezing and its symptoms and what should be done to repair it, firstly, you should know that squeezing is either used for preserving health only.
And it is used in diseases and for preserving health and its continuity, and to prevent the occurrence of diseases, the squeezing should be in one of the three veins that are in the armpit, i.e., the jugular, the subclavian, and the brachial, and it should be done in the first spring when signs of engorgement appear.
The incision is made on Sunday or Tuesday after the day has passed for three hours, but if it is for a disease, there is no fixed time for it and it should be done whenever necessary during the night or day.
At every hour and at every time, it is not appropriate for boys to be incised until they reach fourteen years old and for elderly people who have surpassed sixty years, if one decides to make an incision for any reason.
Before making the incision, it is necessary to clean his intestines with a laxative if there is much fecal matter hidden in them so that it does not stick to the intestines during the incision and cause damage to the main organs. It is not appropriate to make an incision for those who are emaciated, diabetic, or obese until that condition has passed from them.
The incision should also be avoided after heavy menstruation, diarrhea, constipation, excessive sexual intercourse, overexertion, exercise, staying up late, fasting, and all physical or mental activities that weaken the body. Then, it is necessary to examine the woman's blood if it is thick beforehand.
With food, drinks, and medication if possible, then he should enter the bath if there is no prohibition or if some exercise is allowed to make his blood thin and to make his incision on the chest as we said and to keep his chest free from all dirty mental disturbances that day.
In the same way as fevers, anger, fear, and all bodily ailments such as exhaustion, excessive rigidity, and others, the physician should prepare a mixture of substances that people commonly use for their health, including fragrant herbs, winds, baths, and other similar things, according to each person's ability.
Then, the patient should sit on a high chair, higher than the chair used by the healthy person, and the surgeon should massage his arm with both hands for two or three times, then tighten the bandage moderately and loosen it twice or three times.
If the tightening is not moderate, it may either cause excessive bleeding or prevent bleeding if it is too loose, then after tightening, both hands of the patient should be massaged together with their fingers interlocked.
Until the veins swell and can be felt, then the surgeon should gently wipe the area with old oil, especially the little finger of his left hand, to prevent the vein from escaping and avoid the blow. For among the veins, there is what you find near the testicles, which flees from the hook when it is placed upon it, and among them are those that are filled with wind, so when the ligature is placed upon it, it sinks beneath the ligature and deceives the hooker, and if the ligature is opened, it only opens narrowly.
Therefore, the hooker should be firm and careful in all of these matters, then the ligature is opened, if the vein from that place is opened, otherwise it will recur again slightly below or above that position with the forceps if the position does not tire.
If it tires or becomes painful, leave it for a day or two and do not tighten the bandage, as it may have brought back heat and inflammation, then if he wishes, he should retry the hooking, if the ligature pierced and the opening was small and the blood flowed thinly.
And I feared that the amount of blood that you want to come out would not come out, so prepare the ligature in the same hole and tie it firmly and increase the opening slightly and do this with the forceps before the position tires, as in many people, the position may tire when the small opening is made.
If you see that it has swollen, do not apply the whole cloth to it, for it will not help you at all. Instead, place something made of linseed oil on it, as it will facilitate the flow of blood and is better than linseed oil itself and other ointments in this situation.
Use linseed oil in all your applications for fractures when there is bleeding, as it can stop the bleeding and dissolve clots if one of them is applied to the area, especially if the blood is thick.
If a large clot forms in the fracture site, it often happens, especially for those who have not been properly treated or had a small opening in the bone, then immediately apply a wet sponge soaked in water and salt mixed with a little honey and tighten it for an hour, as it will dissolve.
It should be done after the blood has completely exited the bone itself or from another bone, as if any remains in the area for several days, it does not harm. If you wish, apply something made of vinegar and honey mixed with water.
Or something made of vodka and honey mixed with water, as often a clot and nodule form when fracturing the jawbone, then apply your hand on it. If you find it, it will soften when you look at it, so that is a bad sign, so be careful not to apply anything from what we mentioned.
If he bleeds from an artery, it is possible that the blood may flow out, but he should press on the wound with what is available to stop the bleeding, then treat the wound with all other treatments until it is clean, and each person should let out as much blood as his strength allows and according to the dominant color of the blood.
If the blood is black, let it out until it turns red, and if you see it thick, send it out until it becomes thin, and if it is sharp, let it out until its sharpness disappears, and it is appropriate for someone who is full of strength and needs to let out the blood in one go.
He should widen the incision and make the drain wide and flat, and if someone is weak, then the opposite of that, and it is appropriate for him to let out the pus in stages and for the hole to be narrow, and the best thing to use for draining is a sharp, pointed, non-porous instrument.
This incision from draining is correct for stopping bleeding and cutting a nerve, and it is Ahmad and Aslim from draining by its width and length, and if someone usually gets sick at the time of draining, it is appropriate to give him something to eat before draining, such as bread soaked in water with raisins or senna.
If he has a fever and the blood came out three times or four, and if his nature is cold, let him take bread soaked in wine or honey-sweetened wine or rosewater before the cupping.
If the gush of blood occurs during cupping and its cause is excessive bleeding, it is appropriate to drink meat broth and rosewater with fine perfume, and use astringent substances, and apply them on his chest, and use all that we mentioned in the section on gush of blood in the chapter on cupping.
Whoever wants to relax his arms and let out some blood again should, if he had cupping frequently and weak strength, let out a little blood gradually according to his strength on consecutive days.
And whoever wants to relax his arms and let out some blood again and had strong body should do it on the seventh or ninth day of the first cupping, and whoever wants to draw blood from his body away from the direction it flowed should go to him on the second or third day.
And whoever has much blood in his body that is hot and thick and causes fever should let out all the blood at once and let out a large amount, and widen the opening until the gush of blood appears after being checked for all the conditions of cupping. When placing your hand on the pulse at the time of bleeding, be careful not to cause death by puncturing the vein. This often happens if the one performing the bleeding is unskilled and negligent, and it is not advisable to attempt to break the arm or stop the bleeding a second time.
If the mouth of the vein is blocked and it is difficult for the blood to flow out, do not press too hard or pull too forcefully, as this could be very harmful. It may be better to leave it for a while and try again later, or use the edge of a needle to scrape off any clotted blood in the mouth of the vein.
Or, you can apply a small amount of salt dissolved in water or a little vinegar or mustard to the mouth of the vein and gently press it until the blood flows out. If the vein is already swollen, leave it alone.
Do not touch it until the swelling subsides, unless there is an urgent need to stop the bleeding again. If so, you can try puncturing it above that spot or in the other arm or vein.
If the tendon of the arm needs to be punctured, it can be done as an alternative to the akhla and basliq if they are not available or hidden, as it is made from them. The method for puncturing it is for the operator to put their hand in hot water until the skin reddens and the vein becomes visible, then tie a tight but not too tight bandage over it.
Then, examine the blood on a small piece of cloth, not too wide or long, and place it above the joint of the hand, just enough to cover it. If the blood does not come out easily, wash the hand in warm water in the container and let the blood flow into the water.
Until you meet your needs, if it is in the days of summer, you can dispense with washing the hand in warm water and more than that which makes the blood flow into the warm water in winter, and this bleeding is sufficient from all the bleeding. Because there is no subcutaneous tissue or nerve under it, and as for the bleeding from the left hand, it is beneficial for the liver and its method of bleeding is to tie a string around the wrist or with your hand after immersing it in warm water until the blood clots.
Because there is no subcutaneous tissue or nerve under it, and as for the bleeding from the left hand, it is beneficial for the liver and its method of bleeding is to tie a string around the wrist or with your hand after immersing it in warm water until the blood clots. And it is clear by touch that it has stopped, then examine it on a small piece of cloth, and if you cut it completely, it will not harm him at all, and do not let your hand become crooked because under it are the nerves of the fingers and the position is exposed to the meat, then put the hand back in warm water.
And leave it to bleed in it because if you do not put it back in warm water, the blood will freeze in the mouth of the wound and avoid letting it bleed further. If you have taken out the required amount of blood from the wound, apply ointment and salt on it so that it does not stick quickly.
And likewise, you should do this for each narrow section, and if the benefit is to remove the pus from the left hand with your right hand, it is beneficial for treating abscesses and so on, and if the pus is in the right hand, you should do the same as you did in the second case. And as for the pus in the throat, its benefit is for diseases at the lower part of the body, such as abscesses in the groin.
And the treatment of gout and kidney diseases, chronic sores on the buttocks and thighs, and other such diseases, and how to drain them is that a man should put his leg in hot water and bear a poultice on it until the tendons are softened then tie it above the knee joint with a bandage and its place is at the back of the foot facing towards the instep.
And if there is a large boil on the face of the leg, then drain it from the widest part of it or at the back of the foot where it is located, for this is better and safer, for if you drain it from the face of the leg, it may damage the nerves that are underneath it on the face of the leg.
And make your drainage with a movement as if you want to remove it and the pus should be loose, for if the blood does not come out easily, then put his leg in hot water and leave the blood to flow until it is all out, for if the one who drains the pus makes a mistake in the first attempt.
The probe should be inserted a little above the bone, as the position is safe and there is no danger of hitting the nerve if care is taken to avoid it, as we mentioned before. Similarly, this should be done with the probe on the other foot. However, for women, the location of their sweat glands is as we mentioned, near the heel on the lateral side.
The benefit of probing for pain in the arch is if it is from before the hot blood, and how to probe is that the assistant applies pressure and stretches the calf from below the arch to above the ankle with four fingers using a thin, long bandage. This will only show if done this way.
If it appears, probe it in any case, either by scraping or cutting, as its position is safe and it is the most hidden in most people, even if you do not find it.
If it does not appear by touch, probe some of its roots, which are the ones that appear in the back of the foot towards the ankle and heel, avoiding the nerves and sending the required amount of blood.
Then apply a cotton pad on the probing site and bandage it, as it will quickly heal.
The sixty-ninth chapter.
On the use of bandages and their application.
Bandages may be made of various materials such as wood, copper, and glass, and there are two types of bandages: one with a drainage tube and the other without.
The bandages without a drainage tube have two faces.
The bandages for the neck are two on both sides of the neck, the bandage for the jaw is under the lower jaw from the mouth, the bandage for the elbows is on the back of the elbows, the bandage for the knees is in the middle of the arms, and the bandage for the ankles is on the back of the ankles.
The bandages only attract the blood from the thin veins in the meat, and for this reason, they should not be used with heat or without heat in one of the diseases that cause swelling until the body is completely drained.
If necessity arises for the use of cups due to an illness or before a custom, we used them at all times, in the beginning of the month, at its end, in its middle, and at any time when it was appropriate.
For some people, when there is an excess of blood in their head, they may need to use cups for its removal. They often experience a heavy feeling and headache in their head, while others may have redness and swelling in their face, neck, and shoulders. Some may also have hiccups in their face and jaw, or darkness and blurred vision in their eyes, and some may have pain in the position of their cups.
And some may have frequent coughing, while others may taste blood in their mouth and feel it dripping from their teeth. Some may also experience increased sleepiness, and some may see blood, redness, and wounds in their dreams. If we ever noticed any of these signs.
Especially if it occurs in the middle of the month, we would use cups after two or three hours past midday. The benefit of using cups for the nose is that it helps to relieve heaviness in the head and water that accumulates in the eyes.
However, it should be done after the body has rested, and these cups can be a substitute for cupping therapy. It is also important to note that those with cold brains or who are prone to fainting should avoid using them, as they may cause severe harm.
Therefore, it is not appropriate for the elderly and those with cold diseases in their heads, and those who are addicted to it give birth to forgetfulness on it.
Therefore, it is necessary to order the barber to lower his hand a little with the razor below, out of fear of giving birth to forgetfulness, and as for the razor of the cauliflower, it is a substitute for the extraction of the tooth and the extraction of the tonsils.
Therefore, it is beneficial for those with cough and shortness of breath, and nasal congestion, and sneezing, and coughing, and stuffiness, and it is necessary to raise the razor of the cauliflower a little because if it is lowered and raised, it causes weakness in the heart and stomach.
And as for the razor of the acupuncturists, it is beneficial for sudden headaches, toothache, jaw pain, lockjaw, and pain in the roots of the teeth, and it is a substitute for the extraction of the tonsils, and it is necessary to order the barber not to deepen his hand with the needle lest he cut a blood vessel and cause bleeding.
And as for the razor under the tongue, it is beneficial for mouth ulcers and bad breath and other diseases in the mouth, and it can replace the extraction of the tonsils, and as for the razor of the armpits, it is beneficial for the hiccups that occur from stuffiness and heat.
The benefits of tying the three main arteries - the basilic, the cephalic, and the medius - are greater than those of tying any other artery. This is because these arteries draw blood from all the small arteries in the flesh and attract the small arteries from other, thicker arteries until they reach the attraction to the three main arteries.
It is necessary to order the tying of the abdominal muscles not to be tied too tightly, as the place is exposed to the flesh and underneath it are nerves and vessels. As for the single ligature tied on the intestines, it is beneficial for the excreted matter and the lower protrusions.
It is necessary to order the ligature to be large and made of copper, as the place requires a strong grip and perhaps the glass ligature has broken and caused a great deal of damage, and as for the ligatures on the legs, they cause a lack of fullness that is evident.
Because they draw blood from the entire body and are beneficial for chronic ailments in the kidneys, bladder, and urethra, and promote virility, and are beneficial for boils and abscesses, and take the place of tying the veins and arteries, except that they cause great bodily harm and cause edema in most people. Ligatures on the veins have a benefit similar to ligatures on the legs.
Method of placing the cups: First, place the cup empty and suck a moderate amount of air into it, but do not prolong this process. Quickly place the cup on the wound and quickly remove it to allow the air to penetrate evenly into the wound. Repeat this process until you see that the wound has become red and opened.
When the blood appears, then you should suck the air again and again, then examine the patient's condition. If any person has loose muscles with wide spaces between them, it is recommended to use one cup only to prevent the wound from becoming inflamed.
The cup should be widened slightly and deepened, and the suction should be adjusted gently and moved softly. If the blood is thick, it is recommended to suck twice. In the first suction, open a path for the thin blood and its liquid, and in the second suction, check for the extraction of thick blood.
If the blood is very thick, repeat the suction three times to reach the goal. In general, if we want to extract a small amount of blood, one cup is sufficient, but if we want to extract a large amount of blood, we need a stronger cup, and if we think the blood is thick.
It is necessary to set a deep condition, and the moderate limit in the condition is the depth of the skin only, what should be used from the ointments at the time of setting the dressings and from the waters and what the wounded person fears. As for him whose skin was thick, hard, dry, and his pores were narrow.
It is necessary to anoint the places of the dressings with open, refined, and penetrating ointments. As for him whose time is in the summer, it is like the oil of the almond or the oil of the jasmine or the oil of the sweet almonds or the oil of the rose.
And as for him whose time is in the winter, it is like the oil of the nutmeg or the oil of the sandalwood or the oil of the ginger or the oil of the clove and so on. If the coldness is thick, then let the oil be the oil of the mace or the oil of the nux vomica or the oil of the bannum or the oil of the black pepper and so on.
If the wounded person has wide pores and the flesh is loose, then it is necessary to avoid the oil and these people should wash their dressings with water of the rose or with cold water or with water of the grapevine or with water of the clove or with water of the legs and so on. As for him whose blood is much moisture.
In washing the teeth, use water or vinegar and salt and similar substances. However, if one's teeth are particularly dirty, use old wine, vinegar of the Marzunjosh, cooked barley or pomegranate and similar substances. It is recommended to warn the teeth in the bath and after the bath.
Indeed, it is recommended to use after leaving the bath for an hour or two. It is not recommended for one to sleep immediately after the teeth-cleaning. The person responsible for the teeth-cleaning and the one who supervises should do so before and after the cleaning.
First, one should check if the person responsible for the teeth-cleaning or the superviser is a Safrai and has a strong and inflamed blood. If so, they should take cooling substances like Roman mint, hindaba, khall, sakunjbin, jalab and similar substances. They should make their foods fraudulent and meat of the zebu, sauces, and similar substances.
If their constitution is cold, they should drink honey drink and mead or sakunjbin of the Bazouri. They should take aromatic wine of medium strength which is between old and new. They should be advised to eat little and make their foods fraudulent, quails, partridges, chickens and similar substances. The drink on the day of teeth-cleaning and fasting should be more than the food.
It is essential to give some people from among the nobles, or the musk drug or the shilthe drug before the hamama and before the fusad or after it, to strengthen the main veins and to purify the blood, but it is not appropriate for the weak ones to drink it.
As for the hamama without any condition, they are the hamama that are placed on the liver and the spleen and the breasts and the abdomen and the sides and the position of the kidneys and the back, because these organs do not tolerate a condition on them, but rather it is intended to attract blood from one organ to another.
We place the hamama on the breasts in the case of the fainting or we use it to remove a cold smell that has entered into the organ, as we place the hamama on the abdomen and the sides, because it breaks the organ and heats it and drives away the pain for the purpose of removing that smell.
And it is placed on the kidneys if there is a stone or a calculus in them, perhaps it opens the stone or removes it from its position, and similarly if it is placed on the liver and the spleen when there is a chill in them, these hamama can be used empty with the medicine only.
You may use fire and you may also use water that is filled with dirty water for the purpose of extracting teeth, because it fills the mouth and becomes large with hot water alone or with water that has been boiled with some herbs that are suitable for that.
Then it is placed on the spot and held tightly, and removed and replaced as needed, several times. This is an image of the tooth extractor that is used with fire:
The size of her mouth is two fingers open, and it is placed at a depth of half a centimeter on the side, with a small hole made from Chinese brass or yellow brass, thick-walled.
It is leveled and smooth, so that it does not harm the organ when placed on it, and there is a bent iron or copper in the middle where the fire is placed. This tooth extractor can be larger or smaller depending on the disease.
If it is used by women, then the tooth extractors for children and women are not the same as those for men and the heavy bodies. And if you want to know how to place this tooth extractor with fire on the organ, it is that you burn a thread of strong cloth or a small piece of cotton from the stem of a reed and place it in the middle of the bent rod that is in the middle of the tooth extractor.
It is essential that the fire be raised above, not below, the level of the probe to prevent burning the patient's flesh. Then, place the probe on the affected area and the finger over the puncture as mentioned earlier. Once the probe is removed, do not remove the finger.
Then, withdraw the probe from that puncture and remove the probe from its place. If necessary, apply a plaster on the wound and reapply it if needed. However, for the probe used in the case of hydrocele, there is no sharp point or puncture.
Only, it is filled with water and placed on the affected area. This is its appearance:
The larger the probe, the more water it can hold, and the better it is.
Chapter 70.
In the case of a fracture.
The probe is only used in cases where it is impossible to place the probes due to the small size of the affected area, such as the lips and throat, or due to the fact that the affected area is devoid of flesh, such as the finger and nose.
How to use it: Take the probe that is in boiled water from the infusions, then leave it in boiled water for a day and night until it becomes soft and nothing remains in its cavity. Then, the body is massaged first with fumigation or with poultices, then the affected organ is wiped.
Until it turns red, then it is applied to the affected area, if it becomes full, it falls off, and if possible, apply a poultice to the site, but if not, wash the site with vinegar then with plenty of water and rub and massage, if it continues, bleeding occurs after falling off the scab, and that was scratching, then apply a cold compress.
Then, it is applied from above until the scab falls off, if there is much blood, apply a powdered or ointment or similar from the poultices until the blood stops or apply a compressed gauze to the site.
Then, it is left until the gauze sticks to the site, as blood stops, and if it is necessary to replace the scab, do not use that scab if possible, but if it does not stick, wipe the site with fresh blood.
Or insert a needle into the site until blood comes out, then apply it to the site if it feels something from the blood, sprinkle some salt or flour or ash on it to make it fall off the site.
Chapter Three
In the Jabr (Surgery of the Head).
This chapter also deals with matters necessary in the field of medicine, namely, the fracture and dislocation of bones.
Know, O my children, that this chapter may be considered as a general one among the physicians and the common people, and for those who have not examined the works of the ancients on it, nor read a single letter from them.
For this reason, this art of medicine has become extinct in our country, and I have not met a skilled practitioner in it. I only benefited from it for as long as I read the works of the ancients and made an effort to understand them, until I extracted knowledge of that from them, then I was obliged to practice and experiment for the rest of my life.
I have depicted for you in this chapter all that I have learned about it. I have tested it after presenting it to you and clarified it from the obscurity of long-windedness, condensed it to the utmost, explained it in detail, and depicted for you in it many images of the instruments used in it.
As for adding to the explanation as I did in the previous two chapters, there is no power or strength except in Allah, the Exalted and Great.
1st Section: On the Treatment of Wounds
In this section and its subsections, we will discuss matters related to the fracture of bones. It is necessary to present them before we begin to mention the broken and displaced limbs one by one. In the beginning of this chapter, we will mention some general statements and sections. Firstly, you must understand them and establish their truth, as you and those who are eager to learn this noble craft will not be different from others.
I say that when a fracture, dislocation, or prolapse, or a fall occurs, it is necessary to hasten first to examine the wound and its cause, or both together. If this is not prevented by something like weakness, or if the one who experienced it was a child, an old person, or the time was very hot or extremely cold.
Then, his diet should be restricted to cold foods, poultry and game, and he should avoid drinks and heavy meats, overeating, and all food that fills the veins with blood until the inflammation has subsided and there is no risk of the matter settling in its place.
Then, the patient should return to his usual diet, and if the broken bone is in the jaw, he should eat foods that are rich, thick, and strong, like grains, rice, and meat, such as beef and mutton. The white of the egg, fresh fish, and thick drink, and similar things, if used in this manner, make the healing of fractures quicker and better. Know that broken bones in strong men and elderly people cannot reunite and fuse naturally.
For their bone cavities and strength, and it may reunite and fuse as bones of young boys, but nature grows from all sides of the broken bone something similar to a callus that hardens and knits it together until parts adhere to each other.
Until it reaches the strength and firmness as originally, so that nothing hinders his actions.
For this reason, the patient's food should consist of foods that are durable, gluey, and thick as we mentioned. Know that fractures vary in type according to the variation of the body parts, for example, a broken leg bone is different from a broken skull bone, and a broken rib bone is different from a broken backbone.
Similarly, all body parts are different from each other, and we will mention each type of fracture in its own chapter with detailed explanations. Also, the type of bone fracture may vary within itself.
Since a fracture may occur without any splinters and may be longitudinal with clean or dirty fragments, it may also be accompanied by a wound and laceration of the skin, and it may be a simple crack.
For each type of fracture, there is a specific method for reduction, which will be detailed in its appropriate place. Some signs of a bone fracture include deformity, swelling, and roughness felt when touching it.
If there is no visible deformity, swelling, or pain when touching the bone and the patient does not complain of much discomfort, then it is not a fracture but could be a sprain, a hairline crack, or a simple crack. In such cases, it is not appropriate to move the bone by traction and palpation alone.
Instead, apply the medications mentioned later that are appropriate for the location, then gently set it. Know that if a bone is shattered and splintered into two pieces without any fragments, it has completely separated from its owner.
You should act promptly to examine and set the fracture before a hot inflammation occurs. If a hot inflammation occurs, leave it for several days until the inflammation subsides, then set it in any way you deem appropriate using skill and technique.
Know that it is easier to fracture and set a bone than one which has already had splinters formed in it. Then, as mentioned later, if the bone has splinters, it is necessary to extend the broken part from both sides, whether it be an arm or a leg.
Either with your hands if the part is small, or with two ropes and a hand, and place the broken part in its natural position until it has fully extended, then use any means necessary to fix the splinters in their places with skill and gentleness.
Be careful not to cause pain or injury with your efforts, and strive to unite the broken bone with its original owner in the best possible condition. At that time, you should gently feel and rub them together with your hands. If you find anything wrong, correct it to the best of your ability.
Be cautious of excessive extension and strong pressure, as many ignorant people often do this and cause harm to the part, such as burns or fractures, which you have often seen from their actions.
Then, after setting and perfecting the bone, ensure its rest and immobility, and warn the patient not to move it at times of wakefulness, sleep, during changes, instability, defecation, and all movements that exceed its capacity, and strive to make the bone a position that relieves pain.
When the patient feels pain or discomfort in the position of the affected limb, it is necessary to move it to a different position where he does not feel pain, while also ensuring that the new position is level and straight.
To prevent the affected limb from becoming dislocated, I will explain how to set a fractured limb as follows: Know that the sizes and positions of the broken bones vary, such as small ones like fingers, toes, and so on.
For fractures with sharp edges and open wounds, such as the thigh, back, and chest, it is necessary to use rigid splints because wide bandages are required to support large bones and set them evenly without causing any dislocation.
Then, after the setting is complete, you should apply the appropriate plaster. Apply a thin, smooth plaster on the fracture site, then wrap three or four layers of bandage over the fracture itself, depending on what is needed for the limb. Gently pull on the bandage to set it, then move it upwards from the fracture site.
Then apply light pressure on the broken area, gradually moving away from the fracture site and slightly relaxing the pressure until you get a healthy piece of tissue at the correct position, then apply another bandage to that area as well.
Then apply the bandage downwards to the lower side of the fracture, ensuring that your pressure and relaxation are as described in the first bandage at the higher level, then place a thin, smooth, or crumpled cloth between the bandages to match the curve of the fracture.
If there is a deformity, do not add anything to it, then apply another bandage on top of that, and adjust these irregular bandages according to the time you have left until they become firm if there is no air or heat in the affected area.
If there is air or heat in the affected area, apply something that can soothe the inflammation and remove the air, then leave it for a few days, then apply firm bandages at that time, and these bandages should be made from halves of date pits carved into shape with wisdom, or they can be made from bamboo sticks.
These should be made from bamboo, palm fronds, cotton, or similar materials that are available, and each bandage should have the same size and shape as shown in this picture.
Unless the splint placed on the fracture is slightly thinner than other splints, and its length is made according to what is appropriate for the broken body, size and smallness.
Then, the splints are tied together with another string according to your first string, then they are fastened from above with strong, tight knots according to what was mentioned about the tension, and it should be more tensioned at the fracture site. The more away from the fracture, the less the tension.
The strings should be medium in tension and smoothness, especially since the strings, if they are tight like what you have seen from the ignorant ones who make their strings from flat strips of cloth, is a great mistake.
Because the tension goes outside of balance, and smooth strings also do not work because you cannot reach with them the tension you want, and it is not appropriate for there to be less than a finger's width between the splints.
If the patient is harmed by the ends of the splints after the tension in the correct places, put under them soft cotton or shredded wool so that nothing harms him from that, and if the fracture is with a wound and a break in the skin occurred, it will be mentioned separately.
Know that not every broken bone should be set immediately with bandages from the first day, because if the bone is large, it should not be set with bandages until after five days or seven days or more, depending on your knowledge of the risk of inflammation.
This is the property of bandages that were used by the ancients to set fractures, dislocations, and luxations, a general short bandage that sets fractures and corrects for the most common deformities, especially in children and women, because it is not affected by heat or cold.
It is to take from the fine flour dust that is found in the sifter's screen when the millstone is moving, and to moisten it with egg yolk without whites, and to make it neither too thick nor too thin, then to apply it.
Another property of bandage that sets franchises, dislocations, and luxations, it is made from wool, linen, silk, cotton, hemp, and flax, ten dirhams per one of each, and five dirhams per five of each, and twenty dirhams of the best quality, and twenty dirhams of Armenian or Roman clay. The entire group is to be dipped into the water of the earth or into the white of an egg, if the patient's condition is weak and emaciated, then this bandage is to be used, for it is excellent in binding broken bones quickly and making them suitable for most people due to its balance.
Another useful bandage for fractures and wounds, ten mithqals of linen, five mithqals of ash-wood, six mithqals of white linen, six mithqals of Armenian earth, twenty mithqals are to be soaked thoroughly and kneaded with water or the white of an egg, then used.
A bandage for dislocated joints and missing bones, to alleviate the pain of these, and prevent bone displacement and fracture, cotton is to be soaked in vinegar and heated oil, then placed on the affected area, this bandage does not have the power of binding.
However, it is beneficial in reducing hot tumors and alleviating ailments, especially, another bandage that binds broken bones, linen cloth and clean cotton are to be soaked together and squeezed out wet, another short bandage is used at birth for fractured bones.
To analyze the remaining tumor, take from the root of the khutmii, the babunjj, and nourar in blue, and flour of carrot from each part, and mix them all equally and grind them with the mortar and pestle. If the organ is not hardened, then grind it with the mortar and pestle. If it is hardened, grind it with water or with the water of kizbarah and use it.
Recipe for a stronger dressing for analysis of this first one is used when a hard tumor occurs at the time of childbirth, taking from the root of khutmii, bzar al-kittan, the herb, the incense of the king, marznjush, nourar in blue, and babunjj from each part.
Grind all of them and grind with the water of khilaf or with sweet water or with the mortar and pestle, all of that according to the heat of the organ and its coolness. And as for abqarat, he did not mention in his book that it should be placed on the broken organ when it is pressed.
Except for the qirutii made from wax and oil, no other one was mentioned in his book, and it was described that it should be medium between thickness and thinness, and as for galenos, he thought that it should be placed on the broken organ when it is pressed, things that have holes with something of heat like myrrh, frankincense, and cheese, and so on as we mentioned.
Remedy for bruises and pain: Take a piece of felt, soak it in vinegar, squeeze out the excess liquid, then grind and knead with human hair, bird feather, salt, and equal parts of flour. Pound them together well, and apply as a poultice. The amount should be sufficient to form a thick paste.
Then, if no improvement occurs after several days, and there is no pain, swelling, or movement of the broken bone from its position, do not apply it again. If pain, severe inflammation, or shortness of breath occurs at the site, stop using it immediately.
Apply it at the right time and do not delay, then remove the poultice and take a clean cloth or sea sponge soaked in fresh seawater. Dip it in vinegar water and wash the affected area until the inflammation subsides and the pain is relieved. Then leave the body to rest for an hour.
Then apply a clean, soaked cloth with vinegar and oil or red thyme paste on it, and tie it overnight to relieve the inflammation and pain, and for the shortness of breath to subside. Then return to the gentle bandage and smaller poultice, but do not use the first strong one.
Press upon it until it is completely freed, for if you see that the tumor, redness, pain, and all symptoms have disappeared from the beginning, and you have relied on the bandage and the ligature, then prepare it as you did initially, regardless of what happens to the organ.
Do not remove it until three, four, five, or seven days have passed, and sometimes it may be left for twenty days, depending on what appears to you about the condition of the organ, as we mentioned, until it becomes necessary to break it and approach the healing of the flesh over it.
Also, at that time, increase the ligature more than your first one, and also increase the tightness of the nourishment of the wound on what was mentioned earlier, if you see that the place of the break has dried and loosened more than necessary, then know that the nourishment is prevented from reaching it.
Lubricate it with thin water at every time you remove it, and let this be done every three days, and slightly loosen the ligature, for by doing so, nourishment reaches the organ quickly and it is freed rapidly. And as for what the ignorant ones among those who force the break do again.
If he does not first operate according to what is appropriate and then operates incorrectly, it is a mistake on their part and a great error. If it were correct, they would have mentioned it in their earliest books and worked with it, but I have not seen any of them do so with such effectiveness. The correct approach is not to perform such an operation.
Chapter Two.
In the case of a fracture in the head.
There are many types of fractures in the head, with various shapes and complex causes. Some fractures result from a sword blow, and may cause the bone to completely separate until it reaches the periosteum beneath the bone. As is done with wood.
For this reason, this type of fracture is called a 'sword cut' and if the sword cuts some of the bone and separates only the face, but does not completely sever it, it is called a 'complete cut'. The wound from these two types of fractures can be either large or small.
Another type of fracture is a 'crush' or 'bruise', caused by a blow from a stone, falling on a stone, or something similar. This fracture can be either 'open', almost reaching the periosteum beneath the bone, or in the face of the bone.
The wound of these two fractures can also be either large or small, and among the fractures is one that is hidden in the bone at the root of the hair and it is a slight displacement.
Therefore, this type of fracture is called hairy, and among them is a fracture that occurs due to falling or stone impact and the like, where a part of the bone enters into the interior and becomes displaced as shown by the amount of copper if it is hit by a blow, allowing a part of it to enter inside.
And the most common of these is in the soft bone of the skull, such as the skulls of children, and all types of fractures have sharp or blunt fragments, and we will mention treatment for all of them in their place, and we will recognize all types of fractures by examining them.
And examining them with probes and removing the rotten meat from them, and as for the hairy type, it is recognized by examining the bone and wiping and painting it with the plaster, then the fracture appears black, and as for the treatment of the fracture, one should first look at the symptoms of the patient.
If you see from his symptoms something that indicates a clear sign of fear, such as nausea and vomiting, loss of consciousness, loss of voice, shock, severe fever, and the like, then do not approach the patient and do not treat him, because death is certain for him with these symptoms in most cases.
If you observe symptoms that are not life-threatening and you hope for their recovery, then in such a case, take on their treatment. This is because if the wound occurs at the first instance of injury and it happened during the winter months.
It is recommended to exert effort in removing the bone before the fourteenth day, regardless of the condition, even during the summer months. It is recommended to hasten in removing the bone before the seventh day, before the rotting of what is beneath the bone, the membrane, which exposes those symptoms that we have mentioned.
If the fracture of the bone has reached the membrane covering the brain and it was accompanied by softening and putrefaction, then it is recommended to cut the part that has been crushed and rotten, as I have described to you, which is to circumcise the head of the injured person.
Reveal the bone in any way that you are able to, depending on the shape of the wound and what is hidden from the injured person. If, when revealing the bone, blood or hot inflammation appears, then treat it as appropriate.
The appropriate treatment is to fill the affected area with a poultice made of soaked rags in drink and red wine, cleanse the wound, and stop the bleeding. Then, proceed with examining the bone and removing it, which can be done in one of two ways.
The translation of the excerpt is: "As for a single face, it is that you cut the bone with a fine, narrow saw, and this is its image:".
Then, you use another saw after this saw, and you file it slightly from it, and this is its image:".
Then, you also use another saw and file it slightly from the second one, and it is necessary for you to have several saws different from each other, some of which are sharper than others and some shorter than others, and they should be at the peak of their sharpness and made of good Indian steel or copper".
And use gentleness in the blow on the saw so that the head does not shake and harm him, if the bone is strong and hard, it is necessary to drill around it before using your saws with non-piercing drills and not piercing drills".
Because they do not exceed the limit of the bone to behind it for the reason that the drill has a straight groove on top of its sharp point, which prevents him from sinking and exceeding the edge of the bone".
And you should take from these drills many, and adjust each one of them to the length of that bone until it prepares for you a drill of its sharp point in length and shortens it according to the length of that bone, and this is the image of three types". From the great, medium, and small incisions:
As for the method of drilling around a fractured bone, it is to place the drill on the bone and guide it with your fingers until you know that the bone has penetrated, then move the drill to another position and place a layer of thick cotton or something similar between each drill.
Then cut between each drilled hole with scissors, doing so to the extent that you can do so with kindness, as we mentioned, until the bone is removed, either by hand or with some other tool that you have prepared for this purpose.
Such as the jaw and the incisors, and you should be very careful not to touch the drill or the scissors with anything sharp, so if the bone has been cleaned of any sharpness and is no longer stuck to it, then it should be removed.
And smooth out any remaining sharpness in the bone with another tool that resembles the scissors, but it should be softer and gentler than all the other scissors, if there are small bones or fragments left, then you can remove them with kindness using whatever tools you have.
Then treat the wound afterwards with plaster and bandages, as mentioned earlier, and as for the other face of the work, it is a simple matter far from any deception, as mentioned by Galen and highly praised by Medina, this is what he said. It is first necessary for you to begin by exposing the part of the bone from the place where the fracture is most severe and prominent, until when you have exposed that part, you should replace it underneath this dental instrument and this is its image:
The dental instrument part of it is blunt and does not cut anything, while the sharp part of it in its sides is long as you see, so that the dental instrument part should be supported by the bone and the face of the sharp part in the bone, then you strike on the instrument from one side.
With a small hammer until you cut all the bone neatly as it turns and you are in a safe place from the fascia so that nothing fearful happens to him, even if the physician is ignorant of people and does not know them, yes, and if he was an experienced one.
If there remains something necessary for the bone from the fascia in some places of the bone, cut it off from it with the tip of the dental instrument itself and remove it from it neatly, then it is removed from him without harm or fear.
But if the fracture of the bone did not reach to the fascia and what was cut from the bone was its face and some sharp pieces remained in him, then it is necessary to remove those sharp pieces and cut those fragments with a smooth file that has been made from them many different measures so that you can use one of them in every place that is suitable for him and fix it according to what guides you to do the work.
The translation of the excerpt is: "Use the same type of bone fragment and its shape first in your grafting, then use a finer one than that, and continue doing so until you reach using the finest and most refined ones.
The translation of the excerpt is: "As for other small fractures and delicate breaks, it is appropriate to use them in each case according to what leads to their healing, which is a matter that is not hidden from anyone in this craft, as we have already mentioned and explained in the large fractures.
The translation of the excerpt is: "If the membrane remains exposed at your fracture site, it is appropriate to take a strip of cloth according to the size of the wound and soak it in red fat and place it on the wound's mouth, then take another strip of cloth that is either doubled or triangular. The translation of the excerpt is: "Then soak it in a drink and red fat and place it on the first strip, making it as thin as you can bear to avoid heaviness, then use a wide bandage from above, but do not tighten it more than what holds the wound.
The translation of the excerpt is: "And treat him with this remedy for a day or two until you ensure that the hot tumor has subsided, then clear it and use afterwards the drugs that have benefit, such as the root of sarsaparilla and powdered cardamom and powdered cinnamon and so on, and make from these drugs a powder.
Apply the ointment to the wound as it is, and in general use a medicine that can penetrate but not stick, and strive diligently during the time of treating the wound to make it clean, free from the harm of oil and filth, and do not leave any pus in it.
Because if the pus accumulates on the brain's membrane, it spoils and contaminates it, which has resulted in great misfortune for some people, especially when the bone separates from it, particularly if they neglected its treatment.
If you notice a black color on its surface, know that the symptoms we mentioned indicate that it is incurable, and if the blackness only occurred due to the medicine placed on it, and the power of that medicine was to cause such blackness.
You should take a part of honey and three parts of wax from bees, grind them well and mix them with a black dye, then apply it to the bone fragment, and treat it with various treatments until it becomes clean.
The third chapter.
If the nose is fractured.
Know that only the upper part of the nose can be fractured, both of them together or one of them, because they are two bones, and the lower part is a cartilage that does not fracture, but rather it becomes crooked, swollen, and protrudes.
If one of the incisors is fractured, it is appropriate to insert a small finger into the hole in the nose and align the fracture from inside using your little finger and thumb from outside until the nose returns to its natural shape. This should be done with gentleness and care to avoid causing pain or discomfort.
If the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and the finger has not reached it, it is appropriate to use a thin, slightly thick rod to align it. If the fracture is on both sides, do the same. However, it is recommended to apply pressure to set the bone as soon as possible after the fracture occurs.
If possible, wait until the seventh or tenth day after the inflammation has subsided, then insert a small piece of broken bone into the hole in the nose. If the fracture is on one side, insert one piece of bone. If the fracture is on both sides, insert two pieces of bone.
The bone pieces should be of a thickness that fills the hole in the nose. Some early authorities recommended rubbing the bone pieces with sesame oil and changing them daily, but I do not see this as necessary. Instead, it is recommended to coat the bone pieces with egg white and flour made from ground rice.
Then, the incision is left until the bone hardens and the tissue becomes rigid. Sometimes, a reed pipe of duck feathers is inserted into the nose after being soaked in oil, to prevent the bone from breaking and obstructing the breathing.
However, if you wish to make this procedure and if you wish to make the incisions, then if there is a large amount of blood in your work on the nose, plug the nose with cotton or cloth soaked in vinegar, salt water, red wine, or any other astringent.
If there is no large amount of blood, it is appropriate to plug it from outside with a thin piece of bread and a thick slice of candied sugar that has been beaten with egg white, then place a soft cloth on it without fastening the nose to anything. If the small bones of the nose break, they will heal quickly.
Or, if it tears, it is appropriate to cut it and remove it with the tool that is suitable for it, then stitch the wound and treat it with what hardens and melts from the astringents appropriate for that. If there is a wound inside the nose, it is appropriate to treat it with incision and use lead pipes. Until it heals completely.
Chapter 4.
In the treatment of the lower jaw fracture, it is necessary to apply a bandage.
If the lower jaw fractures and there is no wound, if the fracture is from outside only and does not break into two and becomes loose inside, then its identification is easy.
If the fracture is in the right cheek, then insert the little finger of the left hand into the mouth of the patient and pull it out gently from inside to outside. If the fracture is in the left cheek, then insert the little finger of the right hand and pull it out gently from inside to outside.
And the other hand from outside the bone, it is used to adjust its position, if the fracture of the jaw has broken into two, then it is necessary to use the force from both sides to maintain its stability until its adjustment is complete, if it has occurred in the teeth, then it is necessary to grind.
Or it may be that the fracture has separated, then take what you can from it to remain as a gold thread or silver or iris, then place the sling on the broken jaw, then place a double-headed nail on the sling and place a large, strong, or leather piece of cloth equal to the length of the jaw on the nail. Then, connect it from above according to what is suitable for you to connect it and make it match its healing until it does not break. Command the patient to rest and eat soft foods. If you suspect that something has changed in its shape, deal with it on the third day.
Then, connect it from above according to what is suitable for you to connect it and make it match its healing until it does not break. Command the patient to rest and eat soft foods. If you suspect that something has changed in its shape, deal with it on the third day. Then, correct what you have covered with talcum powder mixed with egg white or flour after removing the bandage from it and apply a soft cloth on it. As long as it sticks to the bone without changing its shape, leave it.
Do not remove it until it is completely healed and the fracture becomes stronger. Often, this fracture becomes stronger in three weeks. If there is a hot inflammation during that time, use what we mentioned earlier to reduce it until that inflammation disappears.
If the fracture is accompanied by a wound, and if that part has already separated from the bone in fragments, gently remove those fragments with what is suitable for you to remove them from the tool. If the wound is narrow, widen it with a probe according to your needs.
Then, if you have removed those fragments and there is nothing left, suture the wound if it is wide, otherwise, apply one of the suitable bandages for that. Suture the wound until it is healed.
Chapter Five.
If the bandage breaks, replace it.
The bandage is most likely to break from the beginning rather than the end of the wound, and if it breaks, it will either tear in two or not cause any complications. It is easier to re-bandage it.
And sometimes, the break may cause splinters, which is more difficult to re-bandage. Sometimes, the break may occur along with a wound, and if it does, you should prepare two servants. One should hold the muscle that follows the broken bandage, while the other stretches the arm towards the opposite direction.
Then, align the break with your fingers until its shape is as it should be, without any sharp edges or roughness. If you need to extend it further, it is recommended to place a piece of cotton or gauze underneath the skin of the arm.
The muscle should be extended to the extent of your need, and the bandage should be stretched and raised while pressing the cotton or gauze with your hand until the break is aligned as it should be. If you cannot pull the end of the bandage outwards because it has gone too deep, then the arm should lie on its side.
Under the armpit, place a moderately sized cloth in the bone and press the assistant's armpit downwards until the affected bone rises above the surface. At this point, the fracture is corrected and smoothed with your fingers.
If you feel that a fragment of the bone has broken off and is moving, it is necessary to cut into it and extract that fragment with care. If the fragment is embedded in the bone, cut through it using one of the tools prepared for this purpose. After placing the bone under the splint, which is a device that supports the fracture and is made of wood or iron, here is its image:
It resembles a spoon without a scoop and its width depends on the size of the bone, whether it is large or small. As for its length, it also depends on what you can work with, and it should have two ends, one wider and the other narrower.
If the incision made when extracting the bone fragment was wide and you exposed the warm mass, stitch up the wound with sutures. If the fracture was narrow or you were afraid of exposing the warm mass, leave the wound open to the extent of the fracture.
If the tumor is hot, pour cold water or vinegar or drink on it, and if the bone is sharp, it is to apply a bandage made from the ashes of rhubarb mixed with whiteness of egg on it. Then, apply a soft cloth on it, then place a disc under the tooth if necessary, then take a long cloak with a width of an inch or so, then apply a double bandage on the cloth and the bandage, then take a thin slice from a flexible board. Its width and length should be three fingers, then insert it into the crack, then insert that crack with the slice from the flexible board in the position of the cloak that covers the fracture, then tighten the cloak on the fracture as it is wound. And the bandage should be on his neck and under the healthy tooth and under the patient's tooth, and repeat it on all sides, and as you see that the tightening of the fracture is firmly fixed, which is not hidden from you.
And be careful that the slice does not come off from the broken bone. And for this reason, the patient should be examined every day, and as soon as the bandage loosens and you see that the slice has disappeared, repair it and tighten the bandage, then place the patient's back on his back and place a small cushion under his tooth at night.
The arm should be raised to separate it from the body, which may cause a fracture of the clavicle or the arm is tied to the neck, and the tie should not be left if there has not been an incident of a sprain or a tumor for two weeks.
Then, replace the bandage if you see the face for that reason. If the fracture is in the shoulder and leave it until it heals and becomes more severe, and strengthen it more than that for eighteen days. And it may be in some people less than that.
The sixth chapter.
In the treatment of a fractured shoulder, it is said that the shoulder does not break in its entirety from it, but only its letters break from it. Whenever it breaks from it or breaks in the middle of it, it is known by touching it. According to the form of the fracture, it is treated accordingly.
It is set and placed on its natural shape in every way possible, then apply plaster of rice with the whiteness of egg yolk and linseed oil, and place a double splint from a board on top of it.
It is thin on the scale of the shoulder or slightly larger than it, if there is a suppuration in the place of the shoulder, then treat that suppuration with linseed oil until the plaster settles on evenness, then tighten from above with a long bandage.
Firmly and securely tie the bandage from the calf up to the knee, and examine the dressing every day. When the dressing loosens, tighten it and straighten the bandage if it has shifted from its position. This will ensure that the patient's leg is correctly positioned, and the arm should be flexed at an angle of twenty degrees.
If the bandage has been in place for a day or fifty-two days, and you are in a safe location, then it is one of the bones that should not be broken or crushed, as if a piece of bone protrudes from the bone and was decomposing under the skin, then cut it open and remove it. Do as you mentioned in the previous chapter about breaking the bone to relieve the hot tumor if such a thing occurs.
The seventh section.
7. Fractures of the Sternum.
The sternum may fracture in the middle and rarely does it show this, but its ends are more prone to fracture and dislocation. If the middle of the sternum fractures, the patient may lean downward and expose the chest, accompanied by severe pain and difficulty breathing, and coughing.
And sometimes, blood may be discharged from the broken bone, and the fracture becomes visible, which is not hidden by touch. To treat it, the patient should lie on their back with a pillow between their arms, and the limbs should be gently bent and brought together by the hands from both sides, and efforts should be made to align it in any possible way.
And if the bone has returned to its proper shape, then apply a bandage and splint, and place some cotton or lint on top of it from a piece of thin board or cloth, and so forth in the thinness after having moistened it in warm water. Then gently tie it around the broken bone so that it does not slip off, and gradually tighten the bandage towards the back repeatedly until it is tightly secured, then examine the bandage at all times, and as it loosens, tighten it again.
And if the necessity arises to remove it from its position due to pain or swelling, then act promptly and remove the bandage and repair whatever was exposed in order to treat it, then replace the bandage if necessary. And apply pressure to both sides until it is fully released.
Chapter Eight.
In fractures of the fingers, know that the fractures only occur in the convex parts behind and at the ends from above, as they are hollow and this is easily felt by touch with the fingers.
Treat them by aligning the fracture with your fingers on the prominent face until the shape returns to its proper form, then bandage and splint the broken bone if necessary. If the finger fractures are inclined inward, they may expose internal organs and cause severe pain.
The bone that is exposed for examination due to a fracture, as it causes the sinuses and also exposes him to difficult breathing, coughing, and frequent bleeding, which is a difficult treatment, and the early ones had many tricks in it.
Among them, some said that one should make foods that produce wind and wind to inflate the belly and expand and expel the fracture outwards, but we reject this because it may indicate the occurrence of a hot tumor if it has not occurred, or if it has occurred, it increases and confirms it.
Some said to place a compress on the site and then bite it with force, which is similar to measurement except that it fears that the compress will be drawn back to the site due to its weakness, and some said that one should cover the site with cotton soaked in hot oil.
And the treatment is between the ribs until it fills, so the fracture will be level if it is fixed on a splint, then treat the patient with the treatment of the fracture from food and drugs, but if the patient is severely exhausted, it is a difficult matter that one cannot bear. The bone was exposed for examination due to a fracture, and it caused painful exposure of the sinuses, and we were afraid for the patient, so it is necessary to cut on the site and expose the broken rib, then support it with the device that preserves the position, and remove the bone carefully and extract it.
Then, if the wound is large, we suture it with a needle and treat it with cauterization until it heals. If there is any discharge in the meantime and it is hot, we apply warm wax on the affected area and treat the inflamed part with what can soothe the tumor from inside as well.
He should lie on the side that is affected by sleep until it heals.
The ninth section.
For the treatment of hernias in the back and neck.
Regarding the bones of the neck, if they are fractured and there is a possibility that they may heal, then it is likely that they will heal well. Similarly, for hernias in the back, if one wants to know whether they will heal or not, they should observe the following: If you observe that his hands have become relaxed, wrinkled, and lifeless, and he is unable to move them, stretch them, or grasp anything, and if they are pricked or pierced with a needle without feeling any pain or discomfort, then know that he will not heal in most cases, as he is likely to die.
If he is able to move his hands and feels pain when they are pricked or pierced with a needle, then know that the bone has healed and the inflamed part will heal with treatment. If hernias in the back occur in a similar manner and you want to know whether they will heal or not, then:
Look at his legs, if you see that they have relaxed and what happened to the hands has occurred in them, then when he lies on his back, wind and urine come out without his will, and when he lies on his stomach, feces come out without his will. If he lies on his back and wants to urinate but cannot, know that he is dying and do not attempt to treat him, for if nothing of this sort has happened to him, the matter is less severe, and the treatment for what has happened is to calm the hot tumor.
Apply on the inflamed farty (fistula) only red rose oil or with cooked egg yolks, applying it three times a day until the hot tumor settles, then place on the spot a strong, clean cloth and tie it tightly with bandage and order him to rest and be quiet.
He should not sleep on the side that causes him pain until he is relieved, for if something has happened in the bone at the time of the injury, such as a fracture or something that has been removed from it, it is necessary to cut the skin and remove that bone. Then gather the edges of the wound, if it is large, by stitching, then treat with salt-salted bandages until it is relieved, for if the other end of the thigh bone (femur) fractures and it is a broken bone, it is necessary to insert the probe from the left hand into the joint.
The fractured bone is set with the other hand according to what can be achieved and accomplished in setting it, then a bandage and plaster are applied to it if necessary, and then it is sutured if needed.
If you feel a sharp pain in the fractured bone, cut it open and remove it, then treat the wound with the appropriate treatment until it heals.
Chapter 10.
In setting fractures of the wrist.
If the bones of the wrist fracture, only the fragments will separate from each other and lengthen and turn inward, exposing to ulcer and pain at the site and swelling and softening of the leg on the side where the fracture occurred.
To set it, pass your hand over it until you reach the fracture in its shape as it is, if the fracture is in its ends, then set that fracture according to what is available to you for setting it until it resembles its natural shape.
If the fracture is in the middle or has turned inward, lay the ulcer on its belly until it is possible for you to set that fracture, then if you set it, apply a bandage to it and then place plaster of wood or leather on it and suture it tightly.
Do not be afraid of the transfer of fractures or the loss of the bandages, and level the displaced bones with what will fill them until the splint takes its place on equality, and command the patient to sleep on his back or on his healthy side, for if he lies on his affected side, a hot swelling may occur.
Stop pressing and bandaging him until the hot swelling subsides, and carry out what will calm it on what was previously mentioned, then return to bandaging and splinting him as appropriate, for if there are fragments or separation from the ends of the bone, it is not appropriate to remove.
And do not touch it, but level it from outside as we said and leave the splint until it is clean.
Chapter Ten.
In bandaging fractures of the bone.
The bone is what is between the elbow and the head of the arm. If it fractures, bandage it on one of its two faces, one of which should take a splint that is medium in thickness, like this:
And tie ropes at its ends, then hang it from a high place and make the patient sit on a chair, then receive the broken arm on the splint until it becomes stuck in the middle of the bend of the splint, then hang something heavy above it.
Or the servant should lower him and then the surgeon should straighten his broken bones with both hands until the fracture is restored to its proper position, and the other method is for the patient to lie on his back and have his hand tied to a rope from his neck.
Then command two servants, one to control the part above the fracture with his hands and the other to control the part below and extend each of them to his position, and if you want the extension to be stronger, tie a rope under the fracture and above it with a rope and extend each of them to his position.
If the fracture is close to the corner of the mouth, it is appropriate for the rope to be in the middle of the tooth and the other under the fracture towards the cheek, and similarly if the fracture is close to the cheek, it is appropriate for the rope to be on that position and on the cheek itself.
Then the fracture should be straightened gently until it is restored to its proper position and the fracture pieces are well aligned, then it should be tied if there is no hot inflammation, but if there is hot inflammation, leave the tie on for seven days and place a moist bandage on it mixed with wine and ointment of wormwood.
Until the tumor settles, then it is squeezed. The method of squeezing is to place the bandage over the fracture, then place a new piece of cloth over the bandage, and then bring the arm back to its own muscle and place your hand openly on its joint.
And squeeze the fracture and the tumor on the muscle and the arm so that the arm stands in place of the splints, unless something prevents you from doing so or if nothing has changed on you from the broken bone, then use the splints.
And it is that you place on the fracture itself a splint that is wider and stronger than all other splints, and make between each splint the width of a finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the fracture, with an addition of three fingers from each side.
Then squeeze the squeezing that you mentioned in the first chapter.
And it should be that your squeeze is on the place of the fracture stronger.
And as the fracture heals, the squeeze becomes less, so if you see that the splints and the squeeze are as we mentioned in the time of your healing from the bone for an hour, then do it.
And if you fear the hot tumor, leave the squeeze and the splints until the seventh day as we mentioned, then examine the bandage every three days so that nothing happens in the place of excessive squeezing, like inflammation or bloating or food not reaching the bone, and all of this as we mentioned.
If you are confident that nothing of the sort will happen, then do not apply the bandage until after many days have passed, and the patient should lie on his back with his hand on his abdomen and a folded cloth soaked in moderately warm water placed under his arm.
Examine it at all times of the day and night to prevent the broken part of the bone from becoming deformed or the bandage from loosening, and make sure that the patient's food is placed on a raised platform as we previously mentioned, so that the food is soft initially until the bone becomes hard.
His food should be thickened, as it is usual for bones and legs to become hard in forty days, so at that time the bandage should be applied and the patient should use a bath and be treated with splints that are suitable for this, if the fracture is severe and displaced.
Do not apply the bandage for fifty days or two months.
Chapter Twelve.
On the Treatment of Fractures of the Arm.
The arm is composed of two bones, one of which is smaller and follows the elbow, and the other is larger and is located below the smaller one from below. Sometimes only the upper arm bone may fracture alone, or the lower arm bone alone, or both together.
When the small upper jaw fractures, it is easier to set and heals faster, and when the lower jaw fractures, it is difficult to set and heals slowly, and if the bones fracture together, if the fractured bone is the upper jaw, then the small upper jaw fracture.
The doctor should make the setting gentle and careful until it is aligned, if the large jaw is fractured, then the setting should be stronger, and if both jaws are fractured, then the setting should be much stronger.
The position of the hand should be placed at setting, and the setting should be extended on a cushion, and the index finger should be raised higher than all other fingers, and the little finger should be lower than all other fingers, and the thumb should be bent on itself.
The cushion should be at the same height as the hand, so that the thumb does not cause difficulty.
Then the assistant should extend the arm from below, either with his hand or with a strap, and another assistant should extend from above in the same way, then the doctor should set the bone until it is aligned to the best possible shape, if there are fragments, they should be reduced.
Treat each lacerated wound at its site, exert your effort. If a clean laceration appears and eats into the skin without you having any desire to suture it, split it and remove it according to the method we mentioned earlier, as if it were a fracture with a wound, for it has already formed an abscess.
Then, treat that from there. If the exposure in the first suturing and inflammation is hot, apply a poultice made of red onion, white sulfur, and make it moderate between the chest and the neck, and tighten the suture gently until the tumor subsides.
Remove the poultice and place a prepared cloth with flour from camel dung mixed with egg white, then apply the dressing on the fracture itself, making it slightly exposed and stronger, and know that in most cases, the number of dressings for the arm will be more.
If the fracture was in one phalanx or both together, then make your suture at the fracture site stronger and harder, and every time you draw the suture upwards or downwards, make the suture slightly looser as mentioned earlier in the beginning of the chapter.
The fracture that has occurred over a wound should be a soft, not hard, fracture. The thread used to set the bone should be of medium thickness between the slack and the tight, as we have described. Examine the affected area and the wound after several days.
If something happens that needs to be fixed, such as an abscess exposed in the tissue, it is necessary for the tissue to be soaked in warm water until the abscess subsides and the tissue is left undressed for a night until it rests, then the setting can be repeated.
If the setting has loosened and the bone has disappeared or something similar, make all efforts to fix it. Also, if food is refusing to reach the affected area due to excessive setting, it is necessary to temporarily remove it and leave it for several days until the food can reach it, then set it again.
If nothing we mentioned has been exposed to the patient, it should not be done until twenty days or more have passed, then the surgeon's hand should be placed on his neck and his arm should be moderate, he should avoid strenuous movements and make him sleep on his back.
This fracture of the arm heals in thirty days or two and thirty, and sometimes it heals in eighty-four days, all depending on the condition of the patient and the strength.
Chapter Thirteen: On the Treatment of Wounds and Ulcers
In fractures of the hand and fingers.
The palm of the hand and the fingers' pads are exposed to fractures less than other parts, but when they are exposed to fractures or injuries.
The patient should sit with his back supported and a chair in front of him at an equal height.
Then he should place his hand on it, extended, and the assistant should extend the broken bones and the doctor should set them until they are properly aligned. Then, if there is no hot inflammation, a bandage and a splint should be applied, and a cast should be placed from above according to the position.
And I have described it in a simple fracture, if the fracture is downwards towards the palm of the hand, make a circular shape with the splint and instruct the patient to grasp it with his broken hand, then tighten it with a long splint.
And the cast should be made of thin leather to stick to the skin and cover all the hand and tighten it according to what is appropriate, if the fracture is outwards, then the cast should be made from above and another cast from below in the hand so that the hand is open and upright.
Then, he should lift the bandage as the hand is turned and tie it between the fingers with a suture, if the fracture exposes one of the joints of the fingers, then if it is the thumb, it should be tied straight on what is appropriate, then he should bandage it with the palm and if you prefer to make for him a small standing splint to fix the fracture.
If the fracture is in all the fingers, like the middle finger, the ring finger, or the little finger, then it should be tied and tied with the finger that follows it correctly, or tie them all on the side, for it is stronger, or put a small standing splint on it.
As we said in the thumb, and examine at the time of bandage and after it from the hot tumor, he should treat it with what is appropriate, if anything happened from that as it was repeated, he should describe it again.
The fourteenth section.
In the treatment of fractures of the thigh.
The thigh bone often fractures and becomes apparent for touching because it bends forward and backward, its treatment is that he should bandage a suture above the fracture and another suture under the fracture, and the upper one should be lying on his face.
Then, he should extend each stitch of the assistant to its respective place in an even manner. This is if the fracture is in the middle of the bone. However, if it is close to the root of the thigh, it is advisable to use a fine stitch made of silk or similar material.
If the fracture is from the root of the thigh towards the groin, let the plaster fall above and the other stitch below the fracture. Similarly, if the fracture is near the ankle, let the stitch be near the ankle so that the plaster falls below. Then, the surgeon should straighten the bone with both hands until it returns to its natural shape.
Then, the bone should be wrapped well in bandages and stitched if there is no heat or inflammation in the limb. However, if there is heat or inflammation, leave it for some days until the heat subsides, then return to its treatment.
As for the stitch, it should be wrapped twice or thrice around the fracture with a wide, rigid cloth and leave whatever remains. Then, wrap the thigh until the heel is at the root of the thigh and insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg near the ankle from below, and let the ends of the thread come out from both sides.
Then, apply the bandage on the thigh and leg as much as possible from the sock, then place it on the fracture site of the thigh itself, make a splint from it, and place one splint on the thigh bone, then fill the gap between the thigh and the leg with a longitudinal splint to level the tension.
Then, start with the strong cord from the middle on the fracture site, three or four folds, and as you tie it from the fracture site, make your bandage softer, lighter, and looser.
Then, go to the ends of the cord that you inserted between the thigh and the leg, tie it with the remaining splints from above, then pass both ends of the cord down until they reach the ankle, also tie their other ends.
So that the knot does not come off its place, then leave the bandage on it as long as there is no talk of life, heat, redness, and so on, if something like this happens, immediately deal with it and fix everything that happened according to what we mentioned repeatedly.
If there is a crack in the bone, it should be aligned if possible, otherwise cut it and remove it, and treat the wound like what was mentioned earlier until it heals, and this fracture of the thigh may not require adding the leg with splints.
As mentioned in the bone and arm, except that if it is fractured alone without being united with the thigh, it will never be united with its owner permanently.
Know that the hip stiffens in fifty days or more, or less by a little, or more by a little, all of this depending on the difference in the injuries and other cases.
Chapter Fifteen
In Fracture of the Knee.
Indeed, the knee is rarely exposed to fracture, and it may frequently be exposed to dislocation. If it is exposed to fracture, it is either a split or a separation of its parts, which may or may not be accompanied by a wound.
Therefore, it is all done by feeling, and fracture of the knee is set by putting back together its separated parts with fingers until they join and unite according to how well the setting, care, and skill are. Then, a bandage is applied and a movable splint is used if necessary.
Then, a bandage is tightened from above according to that, and all the conditions described in other fractures, such as inflammation and others, are treated with what is appropriate for each case until it heals completely.
10th Chapter.
6th Section: Fractures of the Thigh Bone.
Indeed, the thigh has two bones, one of which is dense and called the thigh bone, and the other is thin and called the tibia. Both are exposed to the same types of fractures as the humerus. Therefore, the treatment of fractures in the thigh bone is similar to that of the humerus, and the method of treatment is the same. If both bones are fractured, the thigh will be dislocated in all directions. If only the thin bone is fractured, the thigh will be dislocated forward. If the dense bone is fractured from below, it is not hidden from you.
Use splints, reduction, and bandaging according to the same principles, except that if the fracture of the thigh is a severe one with many fragments, it is better to use less force in reducing it and to be gentle in your efforts.
In the thigh, there is one additional method compared to the humerus: if you have straightened the fragments and completed all your work, take two splints made from the trunk of a palm tree or from date palm fronds or similar materials.
Choose from them one that has a slight thickness and not too thin, and its length should be equal to the length of the thigh from the knee downwards, then fold each one into two and place one on the thigh and the other on the opposite side.
Then connect the two bandages at three points on each side and the middle, as this will prevent the thigh from tilting to the right or left and will provide good support, and sometimes a splint made of wood of the length of the thigh may be used.
And it is placed in it to protect it from movement and as much as possible should be done, if there is a special wound with the fracture, then the thigh should be examined every day and checked for tumor or inflammation or anything else. And when something like this happens, treat it appropriately until it heals, and the bone of the thigh takes about three weeks to heal or more.
Chapter Seventeen.
On Fractures of the Leg and Fingers.
As for the ankle, it does not usually show fracture of the heel, and as for the bones of the leg, they may show fracture, and the fingers also rarely show fracture, but rather show dislocation in most cases.
If the bone of the leg is fractured and you see that some of those bones have risen above others, then let the patient place his injured foot on the ground in a raised position like a ladder. Then stand and place your foot on the part of the bones that has risen, rub it and smooth it out.
Until it returns to its original position, then lift the bandage and the splint from above and place a small plank underneath the foot, making sure that both ends are flat. Then tighten the foot strongly after breaking the splint and do whatever else is necessary.
If it has been three or four days since the fracture, then remove the bandage. You will find that the bones are level, whether they were broken or dislocated. Do as you see fit. However, if some fingers are broken, force them back into place according to what was explained to you about setting broken fingers of the hand.
Then make a splint for the broken finger that is as long as the finger, but slightly thinner than it. Then place the plank underneath the foot that you were told about and tighten it strongly. If more than two bones are broken, do as follows.
Make a splint for each finger that is as long as the finger, but slightly thinner than it, and place it in a curved position. Then tighten the plank at the bottom of the foot so that each end of the plank is outside the sole of the foot to allow for proper adjustment.
You must not forget to apply all that we have mentioned to you regarding fractures of all the symptoms we have mentioned and treat each symptom appropriately.
The Eighteenth Chapter.
In fracture of the female clitoris and thigh bone, and mentioning the male penis.
When the female clitoris fractures, place it in a raised position and gradually move it towards the back until it is firmly held by the vaginal opening, then insert a cotton swab into it until it is filled and becomes like a ball.
Then shake the woman and gradually raise her backbone a little, as the cotton swab will come out until it reaches the entrance of the vagina like a ball, then return to the fracture of the thigh bone. When she wants to urinate, gently remove the cotton swab.
Then return to her original position and do this for seven days or more, as it will heal. If you want to have sexual intercourse with a sheep, apply olive oil on its mouth and insert the entire penis into her vagina.
Then blow into the tube with force until the penis expands inside the vagina, as the fracture will heal. Then apply cotton and rest for a while on what we have mentioned until it is completely healed. As for when the thigh bone of the man or woman fractures, it is used in massage.
What we described in the bone of the arm, and what is correct about these unusual fractures that may occur and especially for those who have some experience and understand this book well, is indeed true because the fracture itself indicates in most cases.
If you follow the correct method in setting and splinting it, then understand, but if the leg is broken, take a thin piece of wood or something similar, insert the mention into it, then apply a bandage over it, bind it tightly, and leave it for three days or so until it heals.
Chapter Eighteen
In setting fractures of the bones when there is a wound.
It is recommended for those who have been exposed to a fracture with a wound, especially if the bone is large such as the thigh bone or the shoulder bone or similar, to set it immediately if possible, and if you need help with setting conditions as we described.
If the wound is bleeding, it is recommended to cut it immediately and apply a powdered poultice on it if you do not have anything else, then set the fracture in that day itself and do not delay it.
If a hot abscess does not occur, then if a hot abscess occurs, leave the setting for the ninth day until the hot abscess subsides and do not approach it on the third and fourth days, as it may cause serious symptoms.
If the fractured bone is exposed and open on the skin, it should be reduced and aligned with your fingers gently and gradually, if you cannot do so with your fingers, then reduce it with this tool which is made of iron, its length is equivalent to seven or eight fingers. And expose it according to the size of the wound.
And so, the physician should take three or four from it according to the amount needed for treatment in each type of fracture, and they should be slightly sharp so as not to break when looked at during work.
And its tip should be sharp and the top of it should be sharp, while the middle to the bottom should be blunt and curved, and this is its shape:
And it is called by the Greeks a periapts, which is a small forceps, its sharp tip should be placed on the end of the fractured bone and push it with one movement until the bone returns to its place and some of its ends are aligned with each other.
If the fractured end of the bone is thin and the tool did not get a good grip on it, then you should cut the end of that bone until the tool can get a grip on it, if you cannot reduce the bone with the method we described, then cut it with the tools we mentioned.
Or, if you can, remove it from one of the cavities and then extract whatever remains of the sharpness and thin scales from the bone. If, after repositioning the bone, you find that the pain is severe and unbearable, know that the bone has not returned to its natural position.
If you can return it to its natural position, you will greatly benefit the patient. If your work on the bone is completed, soak a cotton swab in strong black vinegar and apply it to the wound, especially if it is summer and do not place any greasy dressing on the wound.
So that putrefaction and corruption do not occur, use the forceps in your free time and leave the wound open, puncturing it with a needle of appropriate size according to the size of the wound.
Be very careful not to close the wound with stitches, as many ignorant physicians have done, causing their patients either death or gangrene or bedsores. Your sutures should be fine and loose, unlike the tight sutures of other fractures.
If the wound is contaminated or a large wound and you were concerned about some of the bad symptoms we mentioned, and he had pain in the area that was concerning, then it is not appropriate to place forceps on him. Instead, make him cotton swabs placed in the position of the forceps and suture him with them.
If it has been a day or two and you see that the wound is starting to produce pus, remove the suture that was placed on it with the drink, then use the falters and raisins that are part of our custom in treating wounds, such as the quadrangular raisin, and so on. It is recommended for you to apply the plaster.
Examine the wound every day in the evening and morning until it starts to discharge and drain, and it is recommended to set the bone in a way that allows the pus to flow out easily from it. If the wound has lasted for many days and the pus has not been able to drain or stop, then know that there are small fragments of bone remaining.
It is recommended to explore the wound with a probe to remove any remaining fragments that are not draining properly. If they are not draining properly and are causing pain and inflammation, then cut and remove them in any way that you can.
If the wound has a sore, a running sore, or any other type of infection and putrefaction, then for each type of appearance, treat it with the remedy that you have described in its section.
One should also keep in mind what I have said, if a large bone breaks and becomes lodged on the bone, such as the thigh bone or the collarbone and other large bones, then do not attempt to extract it. Frequently, death presents itself in such a manner that one should leave it until it has putrefied, which may occur after twenty or thirty days.
Then, when treating the wound, if you see a place suitable for treatment, otherwise leave it.
The twentieth chapter.
In the treatment of the complications that may occur after certain fractures.
Frequently, this complication occurs after the fracture has healed, especially when it is near the joints, which may distort the shape of the organ and sometimes prevent the organ from functioning naturally.
If the complication is severe, use medicines that contract, such as sabzi, laban, marron, anazerot, and others, by taking some or all of them and mixing them with a binding drink, egg white, or milk.
And apply it to the complication in a bandage and press it strongly on it, leaving the pressure for many days, then remove it and repeat with others until the complication disappears, God willing, or apply a strong leaden plaster to it.
For lead has the property of removing everything that is in the organs, so if the complication has hardened and worsened and the necessity for its removal has increased, cut it from above and cut the adjacent flesh or tear it with some sharp instruments until it disappears and treat the wound until it heals.
The Twentieth Chapter.
In the treatment of fractures, if it becomes dislocated and the member remains after that thin and not in its original form.
If the fracture of bones and the member remains after that thin and weak, it is only due to many reasons. One of them is due to excessive tightening of the bandages and tying them in a way that is not appropriate, or due to excessive tension of the bandages until the food is prevented from reaching the member, or due to excessive movement in the wrong time, or due to lack of blood in the body of the sick person and its weakness.
And to treat this, feeding the sick person and massaging his body until the blood increases in him and using the steam bath and applying joy and happiness on him and so on, then apply the poultice on the member so that it attracts a lot of food or it is rubbed with stale water. until the food reaches him and he returns to his natural shape.
The Twenty-Second Chapter.
In the treatment of broken bones that are dislocated and prevented from performing their function as they should.
When a limb has been fractured after healing, and there is deformity or dislocation of the bone, or complexity and deterioration, then the appearance of the limb is affected. However, if the limb still performs its natural function, it is not appropriate to accept the claim of those who say they can break the limb from the head, as many ignorant and forced physicians have done in our country.
This act is extremely reprehensible and leads to great harm, but if the deformity and complexity are inevitable, it is appropriate to apply a decoction made from aromatic herbs such as khatmia leaves, its root, and frankincense, and so on.
And it is to be bandaged with a well-made, aromatic plaster such as diachylon or mixed with the juice of khatmia leaves and applied with chicken fat, shrimp paste, and other medicines known as "annihilators of pain.
And if the complexity persists, use constant, gentle friction with the hands, moving the limb in all directions at all times. If the deformity has progressed and become severe and hardened, and treatment is necessary, use iron.
It is necessary to cut through the upper part and detach the bone connection, cutting away any excess complexity or bone with smooth cuts, using gentleness in that process with great effort and care, then treat the wound as previously mentioned until it is healed.
Chapter 20.
Dislocation is the separation of a joint from its proper position, which hinders movement and deforms the body shape, causing severe pain and discomfort to the affected person. Therefore, when someone has a dislocated joint, it is necessary to act immediately to return it to its original position.
He should not delay in acting, as prolonged displacement can make it difficult to return the joint to its original position. Therefore, he should not delay, move, or extend the affected part during displacement, as this often causes severe pain and discomfort to the affected person.
However, if the joint is dislocated, he should immediately attempt to reduce it, then leave it alone until the swelling subsides slightly, then apply heat and oil to the affected part, then gently return it to its original position and treat each part as mentioned in its respective place.
The chapters of dislocation have also been arranged according to the same order as those mentioned in fracture, from top to bottom of the body.
The Forty-Fourth Section
In the treatment of breaking the lower lip.
The teeth are only broken in the rare cases and their removal should be done on one side of the face, either they will disappear from their places slowly making them relax a little or they will be completely removed entirely making them fully relaxed. Until the chest, so that the saliva of the patient drips and he cannot hold it or bear to apply his teeth and let his tongue speak with words, but if the removal of his teeth is slow, then in many cases he may return to his former self with the least effort.
But if the removal is complete, then it is necessary to hasten his return and not delay him at all, and that a servant should hold the head of the patient and the doctor should insert his single finger into the root of the tooth from inside the mouth if the tooth is from one side.
Or he should insert both fingers if the tooth is from both sides and the rest of his fingers from outside to straighten it and command the patient to bend his teeth and let them go in all directions, and the doctor should straighten the tooth and push it back to its original position.
If it is difficult to bring them back and especially if all the teeth are involved, use cotton with hot water and oil until they become easy to bring back, do not delay bringing them back as we mentioned, then when they return and stand still and fit well and the mouth of the patient closes but they have not relaxed, then at that time place the remedy of the hook made from wax, oil, and red lead on them.
Then tie him loosely with a relaxed belt, and the patient's body should be lying on his back with his head between two pillows to prevent him from moving to the right or left or from choking on food, but rather make his food easy to swallow.
Until the pain subsides and the jaw heals, let him eat what he can, and do not force him to open his mouth for eating, drinking, or spitting until the jaw heals and becomes free.
If the jaws dislocate at any time and do not return to their places, it often happens that the patient suffers from headaches and constant pain, and sometimes the patient's tongue protrudes or becomes paralyzed. If you see this, know that it is a sign of failure.
Many die from the appearance of such a sign within ten days.
The twenty-fifth chapter.
On the treatment of hernia and inguinal rupture.
As for hernia, it does not protrude from the inner side of its attachment to the chest and may protrude outwards, which can be felt by touch, and it should be pushed back by placing the patient on his back and extending his arms.
Then, apply pressure to the area with your hand with strong force so that it returns, then place a bandage and compresses on it and bind it, and as for its end that follows the inguinal canal and is attached to it, it does not protrude unless in rare cases, if it protrudes on any day, it should be pushed back and laid flat as mentioned and whatever is available to you.
Then, place a bandage and compresses and binding on it and order the patient to tighten his abdominal muscles and rest until it is released, with this treatment, the end of the inguinal canal will also return to its original position.
The twenty-sixth chapter.
On the treatment of inguinal hernia.
Know that inguinal hernia protrudes in three directions, one of which is that it protrudes towards the thigh downwards, the second is that it protrudes towards the chest and sometimes above the inguinal canal, which is rare.
The incision should not be made towards the back for the place of the shoulder and should not be made towards the front for the place of the nerve, and especially it should not be made downwards towards the thigh, particularly in those who have little flesh, as it quickly exits and quickly enters.
But for those who have much flesh, it is the opposite, meaning that it exits slowly and enters slowly. Sometimes some people may receive a blow or fall, causing the shoulder to become dislocated and they feel a hot sensation, so one might think that it has been cut, but one should examine this until one determines its condition.
Then, when treating it, the jaw should be examined if it is downwards towards the thigh, and if one compares the dislocated shoulder with the correct shoulder, one will find a clear difference between them, and one will find the tip of the shoulder to be rough and under the thigh when touched, the tip of the shoulder feels like an egg.
The surgeon should not raise his hand to his ear and move it in all movements, and similarly, if the incision is made towards the chest or above, one will find this clearly visible upon touching, not hidden.
This incision may be easily reduced if the surgeon was young or the patient was young, and the reduction is done by raising the assistant's hand above, then placing your fingers under the thigh and lifting the joint with force upwards to its position, and the assistant raises his hand and stretches it upwards.
Then, he should lower it down, as it will return quickly. If it does not return as mentioned and has been swollen for many days, it is recommended to wash the affected area with warm water and use a soft cloth like a sponge to gently clean it.
Then, the patient should lie on his back and place a soft cloth, neither too soft nor too hard, under his feet. The surgeon then places his hand on the cloth behind the patient's feet and gently pulls the patient's foot downwards with his hand.
If the cloth does not work, he should push it with his foot, as it will return to its original position. If you wish, you can repeat this process by having someone taller than the patient hold him from the side and insert a stick under the patient's foot to lift it up until the patient is hanging in the air. Another servant should then pull the patient's hand downwards towards his belly. If the patient is light, something heavier should be attached to him to weigh him down, as the fracture will return to its original position within an hour, and it may also return on another face.
It is recommended to place a long plank of wood on the ground with its head in an even, not too sharp or too blunt, shape. Then, place the patient's foot on top of the plank after placing a soft cloth over the fracture and the patient's foot, and have the patient stand on the length of the plank.
Then extend his hand from the other side and also extend his body from the other side with force, as the joint will return to its original position quickly. If it is difficult to return it, then use this treatment, which is to take a stick of about two arms in length. And display it at a length of four fingers and thicken it at the length of two fingers, so that it has a rounded head to easily insert it into the depth of the bone in this manner:
Then tie a thin slit on the rounded head so that the stick does not damage the bone, then he should place it under the bone and extend his hand and arm completely and firmly on the stick downwards and tie the stick to the muscle and tendon and tip of the hand.
Then place the arm on a pillow. Press downwards and extend the hand downwards, leaving the rest of the body hanging from the other side, as the joint will return to its original position. If it has entered in any way possible, then it is appropriate to place a moderately thick cushion under the bone.
Then carry a prepared cloth with the ash of myrrh mixed with lime and egg white on the affected area entirely, as it is usually applied from above. Then tightly bandage the cushion under the bone firmly and tie the hand to his neck.
The patient's hand should remain still for seven days, and his food should be limited so that the organ strengthens. It heals faster in this way, then after the seven or five days, he is exercised with movement. If it is confirmed that he has recovered without any relaxation, then he has healed.
If the joint often separates due to moisture or another cause, as mentioned in the previous section about the kyphos, then it should be used with three splints. After seven days, if the joint has not been confirmed to have healed, then the stitches should be removed.
If the bandage and sutures were repeatedly applied to him and he did not recover, relaxed and could not be raised above, then know that the nerve in the head of the biceps has been severed or stretched or relaxed. Then know that the joint will never be restored in its place again.
As for the fracture that is near the chest and breast and behind, it should be pushed and moved with both hands until it returns to its place. Then all the sutures and treatments should be used until it heals. If there is a deformity in the organ after healing and it is slower in movement, then it should be massaged.
The alchemist should not use the caustic potash frequently, as it may cause damage to the tissue and return it to its original state.
Chapter Twenty-Seven.
In the treatment of dislocation.
The joint of the dislocation is difficult to relocate and also difficult to return to its original position, and it can dislocate in all directions, especially forward or backward, and its dislocation is not hidden from you in any form.
And if the dislocated joint is correctly reduced, it will be evident to you by the movement of the joint, and he cannot extend his arm or touch his elbow, and it is recommended that you immediately relocate the dislocation before it becomes inflamed.
And if it becomes inflamed, it is difficult to relocate him, and perhaps the joint has not completely healed, especially if the dislocation is backward, as it is more severe than other types of dislocations and causes greater pain and often death accompanies it.
And if it is possible to relocate him, a servant should extend both of his hands and his arms, and the doctor's hands from above and below the elbow, and he should push the joint with both of his hands or with the palm of his hand until it returns to its original position.
If the fracture is in front, it may be that you should thrust your hand once to strike at the base of the knuckle that you approach, if the fracture does not return to the retreat, then use a very powerful and strong force, which is to extend the arm twice.
He should also hold the arm twice to prevent it from slipping during extension, then move the arm in all directions after covering his hands with a folded cloth or a wide bandage, and if the surgeon handles his hands, he should grease them so that the joint can be easily dislocated.
Then he should push the joint forcefully until it returns, and after its return, it is appropriate to apply a bandage that contains a grip and dry with whiteness of egg yolk and tighten strongly and hang the arm from the shoulder of the patient and leave for days.
Then it is fixed if the joint is in its place, then remove the bandage and leave it, and if you see that the joint has not improved much, then prepare the bandage and the bandage again and leave it for days until it improves, then remove it, but if there is pain after the return of the joint and removal, then do not remove it.
If movement is difficult, moistening with the bath and gentle massage should be used until it becomes loose or place a piece of fat meat on the joint, then tie it and leave it on for a day and night, then remove it and put it in the bath, if perspiration occurs, rub the joint gently.
Then, prepare the fat meat again twice or three times with each bath entry until it becomes loose, and if you wish, you can place wet cow dung mixed with fat on it and tie it on, do this repeatedly as it will become loose and return to its original condition.
The Eighteenth Chapter.
In the treatment of dislocating the shoulder.
The shoulder joint often dislocates and its displacement is easy unlike other joints, but it is recommended to hasten its reduction at the time of its displacement before it moves away or becomes exposed and hot.
And its reduction is that you place the shoulder blade on a board and extend the assistant's hand and the doctor places his hand on the top of the joint and pushes it until it returns, unless he should look if the dislocation has moved to behind the hand.
The surgeon should place the tip of his finger on the board at the front and back while making incisions, especially if the knife is prominent to the surface of the hand. If he places his inner hand on the board, the surgeon's hand will be directly over the joint, which is preferable. If he returns from his position, he should firmly press it with a soft cloth to prevent swelling.
Do not return to him if he does not allow it, as it will not bear and you cannot treat it after a certain period has passed unless the joint remains crooked and does not harm the patient except if his hand relaxes and he cannot grasp anything.
Then you know that the nerve has been cut or damaged, there is no remedy except to press it with a cloth. Sometimes it may be beneficial and sometimes not. If the joint is restored, then apply the cloth we mentioned and leave it for five days.
Then it will heal and practice moving the hand if its movement is restricted and there is a hard lump in it, then soak it in warm water and massage it repeatedly until it softens.
Chapter 29.
In the treatment of fractures of the fingers.
The fingers may fracture in all directions, so if a finger fractures to the surface of the hand or inside it, extend the finger and push the fracture with your finger until it returns, then tie the tip of the finger and hang it towards the direction it fractured.
Leave her for two days, then release her and massage her until she stands upright on the following day. If it is at night, tie her up with the same bandage during the day and rub her with oil and exercise her at night, doing this for several days until she becomes strong.
Likewise, do the same to him if his penis bends downwards, tie it towards the same direction, and perform the first treatment until it is healed. Also, do this for him whenever his penis bends towards other directions.
Chapter Thirty.
In the treatment of fractured vertebrae in the back.
When a complete fracture occurs in the vertebrae of the back or neck, or when many fractures displace from their original positions, there is no treatment because death is imminent.
The sign of this is that the urine comes out without control, unable to hold it, and often some of his limbs, either both legs or one arm, become relaxed. If only one fracture displaces from its original position, it often disappears.
If the displacement occurs towards four directions, the one that disappears at the back is called "Hadbah". The treatment for this is to examine it; if it has occurred from birth, there is no treatment and the fracture cannot be healed from it. If it has occurred due to a fall or blow and the like,
The earliest ones mentioned it with various methods of treatment in lengthy speech that does not return more than a little benefit, and they have summarized from it what suffices for a little from much of what they brought from my proximity to the meaning and explanation of it, and I illustrated the machine contrary to what they explained and explained it.
I say that the hump that is mentioned in front of the chest has no remedy and no cure from it, and likewise the one that is on both sides, but only the one that is mentioned in the back specifically with what I am describing, which is to extend the backbone.
On a flat table near the wall and spread underneath it wet straw so that it does not hurt his chest, then place a vertical post in a hole in the ground at the end of the table towards his head and another board towards his legs at the other end of the table.
And a servant holds the board and let it not be firmly placed in the hole and another servant holds the other one in that position then cover the back of the hump with thin, fine silk cloth and under his testicles with a thick, strong silk cloth and extend the end of the cloth to the board near his head and tie him in it.
Then, cut the sutures with a sharp knife over his back and over his knees and at his groin. Then gather all the sutures together and tie them on the other wooden board that is near his feet. Do not remove the wooden boards from their designated positions.
Unless they are not confirmed as we said, then the doctor places his hand on the fracture with force until it returns, or he places a board on it and leans on the board with his legs until it returns. If it does not return by this treatment, then he takes a board of length about three arms.
And he carves in the wall that we said should be near the injured area a place for the end of the board to enter, then places the board in the middle on the fracture and the doctor places his legs on the other end and ties a strong tie until the fracture closes.
And it returns to its place, and if you want to make it with the Lolypop that bends by hand and is to dig in the ground near the injured area at the end of the hospital two boards of length an arm and at his legs also at the end of the hospital two boards.
And let there be between each board a finger and that in each board there is an opening through which the Lolypop passes and secure all the boards in the ground until the plank does not move and insert a drill bit and it is the Lolypop that is wound on the sutures of the two boards.
In one of his sides, a hole has been made in which a rod of one span has been inserted and similarly in the other two sides, then the bandage that was tightened at the chest of the patient was tied around the neck and the bandages that were tightened on his legs were tied around his ankles.
Then, a servant stands at each loop and stretches out his hand with the muffle that is used to tie the loop and the doctor smooths out the dressing on what we have prepared. This is an image of the loop, the muffle, and the patient:.
Then, after the fever has subsided and the position is level, it is necessary to carry a dry cloth with the whiteness of egg yolk, then the medicine, then place it on top of the cloth, a piece of wood that has a width of three fingers or more and a length that is equal to the size of the dressing.
And on some of the correct sutures, then tie with the bandage that is appropriate and use the patient's soft food until he is purified, if there remains some of the pus in the position at the end of purification, it is necessary to use the medicines that are poured and mixed with the use of the wood that we described a long time ago.
And a bronze basin can be used in this, and it may appear that the pus is at the end of the sutures on the back, think that it is an excess bone that has been removed, so do not expose it to this treatment as it may cause death.
The twenty-ninth chapter.
On the treatment of a dislocated wrist.
Know that the wrist joint and the elbow joint are only exposed to dislocation in the direction of the thumb, not like other joints which are exposed to slight protrusion and rotation. The wrist joint is dislocated in four directions.
This is because it can be dislocated inwards, outwards, forwards, and backwards, with the most common direction being inwards. The sign of dislocation inwards is that if you lengthen the healthy leg of the patient, it will become longer.
The foot will be more extended than normal, and the healthy leg cannot be bent at the knee. The position that follows the bending of the knee is well known, as the hip bone has moved to that position.
The sign of dislocation outwards is the opposite of these symptoms. The sign of dislocation forwards is that he straightens his leg completely, except that he cannot bend it without pain in the foot. Even if he tries to walk, he cannot bend it forwards.
His foot will be held and his knee will be flexed. When walking, it will be dragged along the ground. The sign of dislocation backwards is that he cannot straighten his leg and cannot bend it before the knee is bent. His other leg will also be shorter than the other.
The Arabian (cat) is relaxed and the top of the thigh is at the position of the stomach, clear. As for the types of this cut, it is that you look, if the cut is old and has grown with its owner and he did not try to fix it and remained in its state, then there is no treatment for it.
It is not appropriate to expose him, and as for the one who cut him recently and it was of any of the four types of the jaw, then he should quickly lash the joint and extend it both inside and outside and move it to the left and right until it is back in its place.
If it does not return like this, then it is appropriate to prepare a strong servant who will extend his leg from below either with his hands or with a stick that he ties above the ankle and another servant who will extend him from above.
Then he should insert his hands under his tail and then tighten a thin stick on the root of the thigh and hold the end of the stick with another servant who will extend him either from the front to the side of the Arabian or from behind to the side of the back.
And they should all extend him at once until the injured one lifts his body from the ground and remains hanging, for this type of extension is a common type for the four types, but if the cut returns as we mentioned or not, then there is no need for specific treatment for each type that we mentioned.
When the incision is made to the interior, it is appropriate for the patient to lie on their healthy side, then a suture is made at the base of the buttock between the tailbone and the intended location.
Then, the suture is extended above from the side of the tailbone up to the upper body towards the back, then another strong servant grasps the deep location of the injured buttock and extends it outwards greatly, so it returns to its place.
This type is easier than other types of treatment that involve returning this organ, so if it is difficult for you and you are not able to perform this type of treatment, it is appropriate to tie the patient's legs together with a strong bandage on the ankles and knees.
And after each of its owners, it is stretched to the length of four fingers and the injured leg is extended more than the other by two fingers, then the patient is tied to a wooden beam in the house and the other end is on the ground with an arm's length.
Then, order a strong servant to grasp the tailbone and tie another servant to the patient, then the servant holding the tailbone pushes the other servant with force, so the joint returns to its place quickly, while if the incision is made externally, it is appropriate to perform the following treatment.
It is necessary for the patient to lie on the bed according to what we described in the case of the man with the fracture, and the bandage should be tightly wrapped around his injured leg, especially, and on his chest. Then, the wooden plates should be placed at his feet and head, and an additional wooden board should be placed in the middle of the bed, securely fastened.
A wet cloth should be wrapped around her hip to prevent the patient from sliding down towards the bottom of the bed, then each servant should extend their hand to their side and the physician should arrange the bandage with his hands, if he responds to the request to return.
If not, the board should be placed on him and pressed against his body as described in the fracture case, except that the patient should lie on the correct side, and if the removal is from behind, then the injured leg should be extended at a time while following this description on the bed.
The physician should place his right hand on the injured arm and then press it with his left hand, while extending the pressure downwards towards the calf, and if the removal is from behind, then the patient should not extend downwards.
He is elevated on the ground, but it is appropriate for him to be subjected to something solid as it is also appropriate for him to be from inflicting and stretching his hands out to the outside according to what we mentioned about his pressing against the surgeons and he is facing upwards and the bandages are tightened.
As we mentioned, it is also appropriate for him to use the mallet on the board at the position from which the joint escaped, so if the joint of the elbow returns to its proper place and the sign of its return is not hidden from you, it is that you extend your legs.
If you see both of them level and the elbow grasping the leg and straightening it without causing harm, then know that the organ has returned to its proper place, then at that time, equalize your buttocks and hold the bandage and tighten a tight bandage so that the elbow does not move towards any of the directions.
It is necessary for the elbow to rest for three days or four, then remove the bandage and the bandage and massage the other leg, if you see both of them equal in the pot, then know that the jaw has set, then let the elbow walk, and if you see something from relaxation.
Then return and compress it and tighten it according to your first tightening and leave it also for three days, then remove it and slowly walk on it for days until it becomes strong, God willing.
The Second and Third Chapters.
On the treatment of dislocation of the knee.
The knee dislocates in three directions: internally, externally, and downwards, meaning towards the back, but not upwards. The sign of its dislocation is that the affected person leans his leg against his thigh.
If he does not lean it against his thigh, know that the knee is dislocated, and apply force to all directions of its dislocation so that the affected person sits down and extends his legs if he can, and a servant should sit behind him to grasp his waist and pull him backwards slightly, then he should sit on his thighs.
And press your back against his face and place his leg between your legs, then grasp his knee with your hands and interlock them between your fingers on his knee, then pull its sides firmly with your hands and another servant should extend his leg until the knee returns to its position.
And the sign of its return is that the thigh becomes attached to the knee without any force, then compress it and attach the thigh to the knee, then tie them all together with a three-day or four-day bandage, and do not use any walking for several days until it strengthens.
If it is difficult for you to return her with what we have described, then use the strong pressure method with the bandages that I have described in the treatment of the uterus until she returns.
The third chapter thirty.
In the treatment of dislocating the toe.
The toe may dislocate completely or partially, and its dislocation may be either inside or outside. The sign of its dislocation is that you see the toe swollen prominently towards the side where it has dislocated.
If it dislocates completely, it is easy to return it by gently extending your hands and straightening it until it returns. If it dislocates partially, the patient should sit down and a strong servant should hold it from behind their back in the middle of their hand.
Then you hold the foot with your right hand from above and with your left hand from below in the position of the ankle. Then pull the foot with your right hand and then with your left hand twice, then extend it with your left hand and push the front of the foot with your right hand towards the thigh without force.
Do this twice as we have described, then push the front of the foot towards the thigh in the third step while you are pressing with the anklebone. If it returns in one or two steps and you see the foot level, otherwise repeat the treatment on it as it will return.
If the patient refuses to return with what we have described, then place the patient on his back on the ground and insert a sharp, thin instrument between his buttocks, being careful not to injure him, then grasp his testicle and tie it off.
Then another servant extends the leg, either with his hands or by tying it with a rope around the thigh, then each servant extends the leg opposite to the one extended by its owner and the tourniquet is held between the buttocks of the patient, preventing his body from being drawn downwards towards the extension. Then the surgeon opens his hands.
Then another servant holds the healthy leg down, as the fracture will return quickly, if the fracture returns and you see that it has healed, then lift the bandage and splint and tighten it with strong ropes and tie the foot below the ankle bone, being careful not to injure the nerve that is above the ankle from behind.
So that the bandage does not press too hard on him and cause him pain, then leave him for two or three days, if the bandage relaxes, then tighten it again and release him on the third or fourth day, and the patient should avoid walking for forty days.
If the wound has walked before this period, it is not ensured that the incision will dissolve and spoil, and it will not accept treatment afterwards. If it appears with a hot ulcer, it is appropriate to use what we have mentioned in other places of treatment and incision until it disappears.
The fourth chapter and thirty.
In the treatment of cutting fingernails of the foot.
It is appropriate to set what was cut from it with a gentle pressure without force, and this is not difficult but easy. If the incision is in some parts of the sole of the foot, it is appropriate to place the patient's foot on a flat surface of the ground.
Or on a board and he is standing like a walker, then you put your foot on what was cut from those joints, then press it with your foot with force until it returns and see that it has settled and there is no sign in the place.
Then put it under the sole of his foot a board that holds the whole foot, it has two heads, then tighten it firmly for three days, then remove it and keep him from walking for many days until it hardens and it is ensured to return if God wills.
The Fifth and Thirty-Fifth Section
In the types of fractures that occur with a wound or a fracture or both together.
When something like this happens and its treatment and reduction are attempted, it often results in death.
Therefore, one should not attempt treatment for such cases unless the surgeon is skilled in the craft, has long experience, is gentle, sharp, and diligent, and does not have weak joints. In the beginning, he should use medicines that alleviate inflammation only and then leave it to nature.
May God help, except for what you hope for safety from the trouble with the illness and some hope appeared to you in it, then remove his reduction from your hand at first before the inflammation occurs.
If the member returns to its original state as you wished, use the method that alleviates inflammation and treat the wound with suitable dry dressings, if the fracture is accompanied by a break and sharp fragments appear in the bone, remove them. And follow what we mentioned in the simple diseases in their respective sections.
And strive to exert yourself and keep yourself away from deceit, as you were advised, for that is for your benefit and will be revealed to you if God wills.
