The author of this book, when he completed it for you, O my sons, said: "This book which is a part of the science of medicine in surgery, with its completion and reaching its goal in clarity and explanation, I have seen that I should complete it for you with this article which is a part of the work done by hand.
Because the work done by hand is perfected in our country and in our time, to the extent that almost studying its science and severing its trace. Only remained from it simple drawings in the books of the early ones, which were written by hand and drawn by the pen, until its meanings were hidden and its benefits were lost.
So I saw that I should revive it and expand upon it in this article by the way of explanation, clarification, and abbreviation, and bring illustrations of the tools and all instruments of work, since it is an addition to explanation and a means for providing what is needed.
The reason why there is no craftsman perfected by hand in our time is because the science of medicine is long, and its possessor should have studied beforehand in the science of anatomy which was described by Galenus. Until he is established on the benefits of the members and their positions, states, connections, separations, knowledge of the bones, nerves, muscles, number, outlets, tendons, and the positions of their outlets.
Therefore, as Albucasis said, there are many doctors in name but few in deed, especially in the craft of hand surgery, and we have mentioned some of that in this book.
For one who was not knowledgeable about what we mentioned about anatomy would certainly make mistakes that could kill people, as you have seen many who claim to be in this field without knowledge or understanding.
And I saw a ignorant doctor who had incised into a boil on the neck of a woman, and he exposed some blood vessels of the neck, so the woman's blood flowed until she fell dead between his hands.
And I saw another doctor who had advanced in the extraction of a thorn from the foot of a man who had stabbed himself in the sole and the thorn was large, so it twisted and he extracted it with a piece of iron from the manure. And the man died after three days, and I had been called to extract it, so I saw from the bone of the thorn and the state of the patient what I could not imagine.
And I saw another doctor who was bribing some of the leaders in our country about medicine.
And he told a young black man who had a fracture near the buttock with a wound to quickly do it, so the doctor did it in ignorance and tightly bandaged the fracture with the rafaths and thick bandages and did not leave any space for the wound to breathe.
Then release him to his desires, but leave him for a few days and command him not to apply the bandage until his thigh, leg, and foot are swollen and inflamed.
Then he was called and quickly removed the bandage, seeking relief and regaining strength from his pain, except that the decay had already spread to the limb and I could not remove it.
The decay continued to spread throughout the limb until he died.
And I saw another doctor who cut out a cancerous tumor and cauterized it after several days, causing the bone of its owner to rot, because if the cancer is pure black dough, it should not be exposed to iron cauterization.
Unless it is in an organ that might be completely removed.
Therefore, my son, it is important for you to know that the work of the hand is divided into two parts: safe work and work that often involves defects.
And I have warned in every place of this book about the work that involves deceit and fear, so it is important for you to be cautious and reject it.
So that the ignorant do not find a way to speak and accuse, take for yourselves courage and vigilance, and show mercy and perseverance to your patients.
Use the best and safest method that leads to a successful outcome and treat dangerous, difficult-to-cure diseases with care.
Protect yourselves from that which you fear might cause doubt in your religion and worldly affairs, for it remains a source of strength for you and raise yourself up in this world and the hereafter according to your abilities.
Indeed, Galen said in some of his advices, "Do not treat a bad disease and call yourselves doctors.
This chapter has been divided into three sections.
The first section.
In the first section, there is a description of the tools and instruments needed for surgery, arranged from the largest to the smallest, including everything necessary for handwork in surgery.
The second section.
In the second section, there is a description of wounds and injuries, surgery, and extraction of arrows and similar topics, all arranged in order and with illustrations of the tools needed.
The third section.
In the third section, there is a description of fractures and dislocations, treatment of dislocations, and similar topics, all arranged in order from the largest to the smallest and with illustrations of the tools needed.
The first section.
In the knife.
Before mentioning the procedure, it is necessary to mention the method of its benefits and harms, and in what condition it is used.
I say that the talk about the method of its benefits and harms of the cauterization is a long and precise knowledge, and a secret matter that has been discussed by a group of wise men.
They differed in it, and a brief summary of their words was fear of lengthening.
I say that the cauterization benefits in general for all bad conditions when it is with a substance and without a substance, hot fever without a substance and dry fever without a substance.
As for the dry fever with a substance, they differed in it. Some of them said that the cauterization benefits in it, and others said the opposite that the cauterization does not cure in a disease that is from heat and coldness because the nature of fire is heat and coldness.
And it is not appropriate to treat a disease of heat and coldness with a remedy of heat and coldness, and he who said the opposite that the cauterization with fire can benefit from a disease of heat and coldness that occurs in the bodies of people. Because when you add the human body and its moisture to a fever of fire, you get a human body cold.
I say this according to his statement because experience has revealed this to me repeatedly, except that it is not appropriate to imagine about this matter unless one has tasted and practiced in the door of surgery. He stopped at the variation of people's moods and the condition of diseases in themselves, their causes, symptoms, and duration of time.
As for the rest of the moods, there is no fear from them, especially cold and moist diseases, as all doctors have agreed on them and there is no disagreement about their benefit in surgery.
And know, my son, that the benefit of surgery with fire and its superiority over burning drugs is because fire is a pure essence that does not exceed the function of the organ that it affects and does not harm another connected organ except for a slight injury.
And burning drugs may exceed its function to other organs and sometimes cause a disease in the organ that is difficult to treat and sometimes kill it, while fire, due to its nobility and pure essence, does not do this except if it exceeds.
This has been revealed to us through experience for a long time and the service and care of the craft and standing on the truth of the matter.
For this reason, I have avoided lengthy speech, unless it is appropriate for my book. Instead, I will reveal to you in secret and mysterious ways the methods of healing diseases through physical actions and their removal, using philosophical proofs that pierce your understanding.
Know, O my son, that they have differed in the time when the [herb] kay is beneficial, and they have considered the best time to be during spring.
And I say that the kay may be beneficial at all times, because the harm that occurred before the time is absorbed in the benefit that is brought about by the kay. Especially if the kay is for necessary and strong ailments that cannot tolerate delay, as they fear it may lead to a greater disaster than the harm that has already occurred.
And do not be deceived, O my son, by what the common people and ignorant physicians imagine, that the kay that cures a disease that cannot have a return, they make it harmful.
But the matter is not as you imagine, because the kay is like a medicine that changes the humor and dries the moisture that is the cause of the ailments.
However, the knife is preferred over medication due to its speed of success, effectiveness, and intensity of action.
The disease may return at a later time depending on the individual's constitution, strengthening of the disease and what is present in his body from the accumulation of harmful substances due to neglect of himself in acquiring them from food and the like.
But Allah, except that the disease in which the knife is used is a delicate disease and in an organ of little moisture and humidity. Such as the lancet for pain and the like, it may be that there is no return of that pain, which is in the least.
As for the opinion of the common people, that the knife is the last resort of medicine, this is a correct opinion because they believe that there is no remedy that benefits after the knife and the matter is otherwise.
And indeed, the meaning of 'the knife is the last resort of medicine' is that when we use remedies for a disease from among diseases and those remedies did not succeed, then we used the last thing, which is the knife, and it succeeded, then from here it is clear that the knife is the last resort of medicine. Not the meaning that the general public and many ignorant doctors have gone to.
The early ones mentioned that the gold cauterizing iron is better than the iron one, only because of the malleability of gold and its preciousness. They said that it does not cause scarring at the site of cauterization, which is not necessarily true.
Because I have tried it myself and found that it only does so in some cases, not all. The gold cauterizing iron is better and more effective than the iron one, as they said, unless you heat the cauterizing iron made of gold in the fire, then it will not be clear to you when to apply it for the desired redness of gold.
And because it quickly cools and if you add more to it in fever, it melts in the fire and causes the maker of it to be in danger, therefore, the cauterizing iron made of iron is faster and more suitable for use, God willing.
I have arranged this chapter in the cauterizing iron from head to toe, so that it is easier for the student to find what he wants, God willing.
Chapter 1.
In the cauterizing iron of the head, one iron.
This iron is useful for the suppression of moisture and cold on the brain, which are causes of headaches and frequent colds from the forehead to the sides of the eyes and ears, and frequent sleep and toothache and abdominal pain. For every disease that appears due to cold, such as fainting, convulsions, and other similar diseases.
This image is to be ordered first with the easy-to-vomit, head-cleansing drug for three nights or four, depending on the strength of the patient and his condition.
Then, order him to shave his head with a razor, then place him between your hands, lying down, with his hands placed on his chest.
Then, place the tip of your finger on the tip of his nose between his eyes where the middle finger ends, and teach him that position with the mudrā.
Then, apply the olive oil ointment of this type.
If the bone is exposed from the head of the hammer or the size of a kernel of corn, raise your hand and if not, prepare your hand with the same iron or another one if it is cold. Until you see what you told him from the bone, then take something of salt and dissolve it in water and drink a little of it and put it on the position and leave it for three days.
Then, apply a moist cloth on oil and leave it on him until the pus from the fire goes away, then treat him with the four-fingered mudrā until he is cured, God willing.
They said: Whenever a wound remains open, it is best and most beneficial to let the drainage flow out.
Some of them mentioned that the skin should be pulled towards the bone and the sponge held until some part of the bone chars, then the burnt part of the bone is removed afterwards, and then it is treated.
Others said: One should use a strong enough force with the chisel until it makes an impression on the bone, so that some part of the bone falls off like a quail or small fish, and they claimed that from this place, the head sweats and the wound remains open for a long time.
Then it is treated until it rots, and I do not see this type of chisel except in some people and on the path of deception, and if it is left, it is better and safer because the head sweats when the natural connection is broken, as we have seen in all other body parts.
Especially when the head of a weak person is naturally weak and the first type of chisel is suitable and better for him, use it if possible.
Chapter Two.
In the head also.
If there is a persistent headache in the occipital region and it has lasted for a long time, and if you have used the irrigations, counter-irritants, poultices, bandages, and dressings, but none of them have been effective, then look. If the occipital bone is strong in structure and not weak, and he feels intense cold, then apply a different poultice on top of those previously used, but only slightly. Then apply a poultice on each of his temples until the skin becomes hot and the bone is exposed as much as we have described. Apply a poultice at the forehead's prominence in the position known as the "horseshoe" and gently press on this, but do not expose the bone, as the occipital bone feels intense pain unlike the pain from other head poultices. I will mention this poultice in its place.
The poultice that is applied to the temples and forehead should be softer than the one applied in the middle of the head, and this is its image.
Chapter 3.
For the intercostal headache that is not chronic.
If there is a headache in the intercostal region with a headache and the pain extends to the eye, the occipital bone should be treated with decongestant drugs for the head and use all the treatments mentioned in the chapters of diseases. If none of this works, then the poultice in this case has two faces. Either by the sharp knife or by iron.
And if it is the sharp knife for burning, then take one clove of garlic and crush it, cut off its ends from both sides, then make a wide opening in the place of pain from the chest with a wide needle until it becomes a position under the skin where the clove can fit.
Then insert it under the skin until it disappears, then tighten it strongly with a strong stitch and leave it for fifteen hours, then loosen it and remove the garlic and leave the wound for two days or three, then apply.
Then apply a moistened cotton on it until the area is cleaned, then treat it with the mortar until it is clean, God willing, and if you wish, do this with some of the burning drugs that I mentioned in the eighteenth article on burning drugs.
And if it is the sharp knife of iron, then do this method: protect the wound as follows:
And it is called the suture needle because its head is like a needle with some barbs and a small notch in the middle.
Then place it on the painful area and hold your hand while you carefully burn the iron little by little, and the amount of skin that is burned from the edge of the skin should be half of it. Raise your hand to avoid burning the artery that is below, which may cause bleeding. Then soak a cotton in salt water and place it on the affected area, leaving it for three days. Then apply oil to the cotton and treat it with the probe until it is clean, God willing.
If you wish, you can use this needle with a sharp and thin tip from the needle case to avoid cutting the artery in this wound, especially if it is not chronic.
Chapter Four.
In chronic wounds.
If you treated the wound with the advanced treatment and what we mentioned in the chapters of diseases, and the treatment did not work, and you saw that there is no reason for it except what we mentioned about the needle first with medicine or the second with fire. It is necessary to sharpen the needle until it whitens after being drawn on the painful spot with a line of half a finger or more, and then you leave your hand for a moment while you are stitching it until it cuts the artery and reaches the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to avoid connecting the jaw that moves when chewing, as it may burn the muscle or nerve that moves it, which may cause contraction.
Be cautious and careful when dealing with bleeding from a severed artery, for there is danger in its cut end. Especially for those who are unaware of what should be done and have not been practiced, leaving the first attempt.
It will be mentioned later in the book, if God wills, about dealing with bleeding from a severed artery at its place, but if you see something that you do not do, do not follow this method.
If you see the body of the patient possibly fractured in the middle of the head as we described and treated the wound until it heals, if God wills.
If you wish, you can use the method we mentioned in the chapter of stopping bleeding from a severed artery with a compress of cotton and lint, for it is better and more effective than this.
The fifth section.
In the treatment of earaches.
If there is pain in the ear due to a cold and it was treated with the methods of the masseur and other treatments we mentioned in the division, and the pain did not go away, then heat the compress called the 'point' which is its picture.
Then apply it around the ear all of it as it wraps around, or both of them if the pain is in both. The distance from the base of the ear to the cartilage is slight, after determining the position with a probe and the cartilage measures about ten points in each ear or so. Then treat the positions until it is clean, God willing.
Chapter Six.
In the cartilage of the ear.
The cartilage that is treated with the probe is only of the kind that occurs from mucus, as mentioned in the divisions of diseases.
Avoid the kind that occurs from cracks and nerve inflammation.
If this kind of cartilage was treated with pliers, files and graters without success, then it is necessary for the surgeon to use three probes. One at the base of the ear and the second slightly below the tragus and the third at the meeting of the lips.
Make the probe from the healthy side because relaxation only occurs in the side that appears correct.
The shape of the probe is a small one placed under the top of the ear and another in the tragus, with its length being equal to the length of the thumb.
Lower the probe until you burn half a fingerbreadth of skin, and this is the shape of the hook and it is a type of scalpel that has its own image except that it is slightly softer than it as seen. It is necessary that the knife should have a slight sharpness, then treat the position with what was mentioned earlier until it becomes clean, God willing.
Chapter Seven.
On chronic wounds.
If the wound has become chronic and you have treated it as mentioned earlier, but it has not healed and is not due to an evil influence, then give it four leeches. One leech on each temple and two leeches in the middle of the head as mentioned earlier, and one leech on the back of the head according to what was mentioned.
The recipe for Makawi as mentioned earlier, and it may also be applied with a leech on the mouth of the stomach, then treat as mentioned earlier.
Chapter Eight.
On forgetfulness.
That which is from the phlegm should be given first to the evil influence, from the large embrocations and the purified grains for the brain.
Then he should shave his whole head and apply a collodion bandage written about in the article of the dementia, applying it repeatedly, for it is a remedy from the leech.
And do this on the neck with the eye mentioned there, if it becomes clean, otherwise give him three leeches on the back of his head, from the top of his head to the base of his neck.
Between each finger, place a thick piece of cotton and then treat the finger with what has been mentioned earlier. If you wish to increase, and if the patient is prone to such, then remove the middle piece of cotton.
If you wish to increase, then apply it on the earlobes and treat them until they are clean, and the bandage is oil-based as mentioned earlier.
Chapter Nine.
Treatment of the Valves and Relaxation of the Whole Body.
It is recommended to start with the purification of the head using the irrigation and what has been mentioned earlier, then shave the patient's head, then place a piece of cotton in the middle of the head and on each earlobe and at the top of the head.
And three on the back of the neck, if it is necessary for the relaxation of the body and the patient is prone to such and the disease is strong and severe, then place four pieces of cotton on the back of his neck. And apply the cotton until it burns more of the skin and raise your hand then treat him as mentioned earlier until he is clean, may Allah will.
Chapter Ten.
Treatment of Epilepsy
If the epilepsy is caused by the saliva, then the brain should be cleaned first with large enemas and all the treatments mentioned in the previous section, especially if the patient is large and likely to take medication.
But if the patient is a child who does not tolerate medication, then the enema and the brain-cleansing drug should not be used before that for many days, while improving his diet.
Then he should shave his head and apply the clyster in the middle of the head as mentioned before, and another one at the back. And on each horn of his head, a clyster, if the patient is strong and likely to take the clysters mentioned in the book of Al-Razi and relax the body on fumarates of the neck and fumarates of the back, and the enema should be olive oil on the same method mentioned before.
If the patient is a child, then make the enema thin on this shape.
Chapter 10.
Treatment of Meningitis.
If the cause of meningitis is bad humors and thick saliva, then apply the clysters mentioned in the book of Al-Razi.
If the cause of the malposition of the eyeball is due to its inclination towards blackness and the body of the patient is moist, then do not cleanse his brain as previously mentioned in the section on dissection.
Then cut the head of the patient, then make a tight circle from cloth like a wheel, then place it in the middle of his head and the patient is lying down with his head raised, holding from every direction, then take one pound of fresh mutton fat.
Then heat it on the fire at a moderate temperature that can bear the finger, then pour it in the middle of his head in the circle and leave it until it cools down, do this for the patient every week once with all other good arrangements until he is healed, God willing.
And if you want to cleanse his brain, do it with many small needles without holding your hand with the forceps but rather be gentle, because this type of needle moistens the brain evenly.
Then place a wet cotton on it in mutton fat or chicken grease.
The twelfth chapter.
On the needle of water falling in the eye.
If you notice the beginning of water falling in the eye with the signs mentioned in the dissection, then immediately cleanse the patient's head and protect him from all moisture and steam him in the bath on the steam for several days.
Then pass the knife around the head and make a groove in the middle of the head, then make two grooves on the temples if the beginning of the flow of water in both eyes or from one side, if it is in one eye.
Then cut with the knife all the veins and arteries under the skin, and let the grooves in them be long in width of the temples to prevent bleeding of blood.
If you see anything of it, cut it on the spot with any treatment possible, and we will rely on wisdom in stopping the veins and cutting them to prevent bleeding.
And it may make grooves under the bones two deep grooves.
The thirteenth chapter.
In the grooves of chronic bleeding.
If the tears are chronic and constant and come from veins and arteries that are on the surface of the head from outside the head and it is confirmed that this is due to excessive cold, thick, and humid, then make the groove that you described in the beginning of the flow of water. A groove in the middle of the head, two grooves on the temples, and two grooves under the bones, and if it is necessary to increase, make a groove with a small knife on each side of the eyeball.
Chapter Fourteen: The Treatment of Wounds and Ulcers.
Treatment of the Nose.
If treated as mentioned in the previous chapter and the treatment was not successful, then apply a poultice of mustard seeds for three nights, then shave his head and apply the middle part of the mustard seed with olive oil. Then apply the mustard seed poultice twice on the eyelids, under the hair a little, and avoid cutting the vein, this is the image of the mustard seed.
Chapter Fifteen:
Treatment of Styes in the Eye.
If the stye in the eye is due to a disease or moisture, apply a poultice of one mustard seed with this halal oil.
And if you wish, apply twice on the eyelids, two mustard seeds in each direction, and avoid the temples, and the length of each mustard seed should be equal to the length of the eyelid.
And do not apply too much of the mustard seed, but only as much as can burn one third of the skin, and the image of the poultice should be like this.
Chapter Sixteen:
Treatment of Cataract in the Eye.
If her eyelashes have turned inward, then the mustard seed in her eyes is of two types. Either by fire or by a burning drug, but if it is by fire, the surgeon should command him to leave off his healing beforehand, if he is one who can bear it until it lengthens and becomes equal.
If he first applies it to its plant, he should rub his eyes with a cloth lest they move until it grows and becomes equal. Then place the head of the surgeon on your stone, then learn at the edge of the eye with the match of the ink spot, a sign of the shape of the leaf ash.
The beginning of the sign should be near the healing, then place a cotton wet with milk or blue dye under the edge, then cover this shape with it.
Then you should repeat the shape a little at many times until the surface of the skin which is like the shape of the leaf ash completely disappears, especially the sign of the health of your work that you see the edge of the eye has become red and the hair has risen from the flesh of the eye.
Then raise your hand at that time and leave it for three days, then carry a cotton with oil until the furfurace disappears, then treat him with the match until it is clean, may God will. If something of the hair returns after some time and the edge relaxes.
Albucasis, in his 10th century Arabic textbook on surgery, advises that when preparing the area for a procedure, one should follow the same method as initially done. If hair is present at the lower eyebrow, it should be removed to prevent it from being burned and damaging the eyelashes. For the application of cauterizing medication, he suggests instructing the patient to refrain from applying any ointments until the wound has fully healed and stabilized.
Then, make a paper pattern from the cloth. Take soap and unbleached cotton wool from each one, weighing about a dirham or more, and rub them together thoroughly to create a good lather. Do this quickly with the pestle to prevent it from drying out. Then, spread the lather onto the cloth pattern made from the paper pattern of the asafetida. Place it on the affected eyebrow or both, and place a cotton ball soaked in clear, white egg whites underneath the eye. Have the patient hold their head still while you apply the treatment.
Then, place your finger on top of the medication and gently press it down while moving it back and forth as the patient feels the burning sensation of the medication. Continue doing this until the patient no longer feels the burn, then remove the medication and cleanse the eye with water.
If you see the wound has risen as it does when boiling with fire or cutting, and if not, apply the drug to the place where the drug did not affect before and did not succeed until you fulfill your work and burn the eye then put on it cotton with fat until the bandage of burning comes off.
Then treat it with the marshmallow or other until it is clean, and you should when working aim for the goal of caution that nothing from the drug falls into the eye after days and if the wound relaxes something from the hair in the eye.
Then prepare the drug to that place where the wound relaxed especially as you did first then treat it until it is clean, and this is a picture of the asafetida leaf.
And know that the eyes of people differ in size and large, so accordingly should be your burning, and it is not hidden from you the correct way to those who had a craft in this work.
The seventeenth section.
In the case of the eyelid that is exposed in the eye.
If the eyelid is treated with what we mentioned in the divisions of diseases, but it did not succeed in your treatment, then it is appropriate to apply this property.
Command the patient to place his head on your stone and have a servant hold his head between your hands, holding it firmly without moving or shaking it.
Then, place a pad soaked in egg white or bran of madder on his eyes and then bandage the affected area.
It should be shaped like a swan's quill from the one side where the kai is located, and if you wish, it can be tapered on the other end. However, if it were made like a reed, it would not be as good for your work, God willing.
Then, if the bone is open, you should scrape it and remove the matter from it or if it is not open, you should open it and extract its pus. Then, at that time, you should place a strong bandage on it and hold it with your hand until you reach the bone.
And move your hand slightly away from the eye towards the side of the nose so that your hand does not slip or cause the patient to become anxious, as this could cause the bandage to get into the corner of the eye and spoil it. If it reaches the first bone, then do not redo the bandage unless necessary.
Leave him for three days, then apply a poultain of suet and treat it with the dry mercurous until it heals. If it has passed forty days and has not healed, then apply the strong acid until the bone rots and clean it as mentioned in its chapter, God willing.
Another face of the nasal spur that some of the early ones mentioned, he intended to the position of the nasal spur, then he cut it, then he placed in the same cut a thin cauterization.
Then he poured in it a certain amount and weight of melted copper coins, and he held the cauterization firmly with his hand, well mummified and not moving the eyelid so that the melted copper does not flow into his eye. It is recommended to place on the eyelid a cotton pad soaked in milk or water.
If the copper burns the position of the nasal spur and cleanses it wonderfully, then if the nasal spur is cleansed as we mentioned from the incision and treatment, otherwise there is no option but to use a needle puncture in the nose and return the nasal spur to its original position as it was.
Chapter Eighteen.
In the incision of the lip.
Often, a cut in the lip is called a fissure, especially in the lips of young men, as it often occurs. If this cut was treated as we mentioned in the incision, and the treatment did not work, then he applied a small piece of smooth skin on this area.
The excerpt translates to: "Her belly should be on the edge of the knife, then she is turned over by the wheel in the same incision until the spine reaches the depth of the incision, then it is treated with the cautery until it is clean, God willing.
The translation of "Chapter Eighteen" is not applicable as the provided excerpt is from Chapter Eighteen.
The translation of "In the case of a protruded spine in the mouth" is not applicable as the provided excerpt is not related to this topic.
The translation of "If a tumor appears at the base of the teeth, or in the gums, or in the roots of the teeth, and it becomes inflamed and bursts, and then it becomes protruded, then she was treated but did not recover, it is necessary to apply a bandage on the protrusion as much as it can hold" is not applicable as the provided excerpt is not related to this topic.
The translation of "Then she is inserted with the wheel in the hole of the protrusion and you hold your hand until the iron is safely reached at both ends, and then you do this once or twice, then she is treated afterwards with what we mentioned about the treatment until it is clean, God willing" is not applicable as the provided excerpt is not related to this topic.
The translation of "If the material has been removed and it is clean, otherwise, it is necessary to examine the place and remove the rotten bone according to what will be mentioned in its chapter, God willing" is not applicable as the provided excerpt is not related to this topic.
Chapter Twenty: On the Treatment of Wounds and Ulcers
On the Treatment of Fractures and Dislocations
If the dislocation has been reduced before the onset of inflammation and the fracture has been treated with medications but has not healed, place a bandage over the affected area, then apply a poultice made from the following ingredients: after this, place a splint on the fracture.
Then, insert the bandage into the affected area, using a cloth soaked in oil to protect your hand. Gently apply pressure until the fracture feels the heat of the fire. Then, remove your hand and repeat the process as needed. Finally, fill the fracture with saltwater.
Then, hold the bandage in place and pour water on it. If the fracture is mobile, it will stabilize, and if the dislocation has loosened, it will tighten and the infected fluids will dry up.
Chapter Twenty-Two: On the Treatment of Burns and Scalds
On the Pain of Fractures
If the pain of the fracture is due to cold or there are worms in it and the treatment with medications has not been effective, then there are two options: either treat it with oil or treat it with fire.
The treatment with oil involves taking fresh goat fat and heating it in an iron chamber or on sand, then soaking a cloth in the hot fat and placing it on the affected area. Then, apply pressure with a cloth until it cools.
Then, repeatedly apply it until the strength of the fire reaches the root of the tooth. If you wish, you can soak a piece of cloth or cotton in cold oil and place it on the tooth pain, and then cover it with an iron plate protected by something until the fire reaches the bottom of the tooth.
As for how to apply it with fire, it is to approach a copper or iron pipe and there is some thickness in it so that the heat of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient, then heat the mold in the shape of it and place it on the same tooth and hold your hand until the mold cools down, do this repeatedly.
If the pain goes away within a day or on another day, then it is appropriate after that to fill the patient's mouth with good oil and hold it for an hour and then pour it out, this is the shape of the mold.
You can apply it in any way you want, depending on what is possible, and this is the shape of the pipe.
Chapter 22.
In extracting teeth.
If the teeth are from the jawbone and not infected with cold liquids and you want a quick drying, then heat the mold that is hollow at both ends, like this.
When the smoke exits from the other side, place it protected over the same tumor twice or thrice if necessary until it reaches the depth of the tumor. If the tumor is small, make the bandage equal to the size of the tumor.
Then leave it for three days and apply a moistened cotton soaked in oil until what was burned by the fire disappears, then treat it with the probe and scissors until it is cleared, God willing.
Chapter 22.
In the throat from loud voice and narrow breathing.
If humidity has overcome the lung and especially if it is accompanied by cold weather, it is necessary for the patient to first sweat with easy medications, then apply a bandage on the throat in the hollow of the neck at the root of the tongue in the low position.
Be careful that the bandage does not reach the throat and do not burn from the skin except half, then apply another bandage at the shoulder joint in the last fold with a narrow bandage as previously mentioned.
Then treat it with what was mentioned earlier until it is cleared, God willing.
Chapter Twenty-Four
In diseases of the lungs and cough.
If the cough and lung disease are due to cold moisture and there is no fever or heat, and the disease is chronic, then apply two compresses above the ribs in the lower, flat, empty parts of the chest, and another compress in the middle of the chest between the breasts.
The compresses should be made of a muslin cloth in the form that was described, and if you wish, they can be stitched with a stitching compress called 'Naqata' and its image was described in treating earache, and the Naqata is thirty to forty stitches.
Then treat him with what was mentioned until he is cured, and a compress with three tails in this form can be made and the Kii can use it to make three compresses at once, and this is the image of the compress.
Chapter Twenty-Five
In case of abscess.
If the head of the muscle is broken due to moist heat or if it was not secured in time until it becomes a habit for him, usually it will recur at the lowest movement as we saw, it is recommended that the jaw be closed first. Then the patient lies on his back or on the correct side, then the skin that is inside the hoof is raised above with your left hand's fingers if the joint has been dislocated inside.
Then the wound that has the two seams is dressed with this appearance.
Then the skin is sewn onto it until it reaches the other side, and it forms the shape of a box with four sides, and it can be sewn with a bandage that has three seams, forming the shape of a box with six sides at that time, and the seams are on the smooth surface of the wound.
This is the appearance of the bandage with three seams.
And one can add to this number, making the sides eight, then place crushed salt on the cakes, then bind the patient with the bandage and do not move the limb for a time until it becomes strong, and if it has been dislocated upwards, rarely is that the case.
Then place a well-made sugar-coated cake or many cakes on top of the hoof if the joint becomes strong and the moisture disappears and the patient is relieved.
The sixteenth chapter.
In the belly.
If there is a lot of cold and moisture in the stomach, to the extent that it expels them from its natural state and increases the discharges towards it, and treatments have not been effective, then it is appropriate for the patient to lie on his back and extend his legs and arms. Then, he should be wrapped in three blankets. A blanket should be placed under the chest at the length of a finger, with a quilted covering and a marshy one. Two blankets should be placed below each side of the first blanket until they form a triangular shape, with a distance between them so that they do not touch if they are folded and the depth of the blanket is one-third of the thickness of the skin, and the shape of the blankets.
On this picture and on this basin without any additional (items).
If you wish, a single large blanket in the middle of the stomach on this picture.
The quilted covering that is placed on this single blanket should be in the shape of a circle on this picture.
The stomach may be pricked with a needle from this blanket, and it is recommended to prick the stomach with a needle on the basin that you desire to drain, then wrap it with a pointed quilted covering, and then treat it with the treatment that was mentioned until it becomes clear.
Chapter 27: On the Treatment of Wounds and Ulcers
In cases of cold abdomen
If there is pain from the abdomen due to cold and dampness or due to a chill that has caused her to deviate from her natural condition, and treatment with what we mentioned in the section on fractures did not help, then It is necessary for the patient to lie on his back and apply three cloths in this manner, with this amount exactly over the abdomen below the ribs where the human liver ends.
And after each cloth and cloth, it should be folded to the thickness of a finger, and the cloth should be long enough to extend along the body straightly, without being folded.
And the amount of heat applied to the skin should be half of that, and the patient should stand on his feet if he is able, but if he is not able to stand, then he should lie down with his legs extended and his arms raised, and this is the shape of the cloth.
And you can also wrap these cloths with a thin, sharp cloth if you have it and are skilled in the craft, to avoid burning the skin completely, which could cause the abdomen to be burned and reach the intestines, as the skin there is thin, so be aware of that.
Chapter Eighteen: The Treatment of Fractures
In the treatment of fractures of the liver with a splint.
If a fracture appears in the liver and you wish to know whether this tumor is in the flesh of the liver or in its sinews, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, it will cause heaviness and pain without a specific cause.
And if it is in the sinews of the liver, it will cause severe pain and you noticed that doctors have not treated it, then it is recommended that the patient lie on his back and then learn the position of the fracture with a splint.
Then heat the splint in the fire, this is the splint that resembles a spoon and this is its shape. And shape it into one spoon until the skin is burned completely and the splint reaches the sinews until all the splinters come out, then treat it with the treatment of fractures until it is healed.
This type of splint should not be used unless he has learned the craft of medicine and this disease has occurred to him many times, then he can perform this work and leave it to someone better.
Chapter Nineteen: The Treatment of Dislocations
In the treatment of fractures, it is necessary to set the bones in their proper position and immobilize them until they heal.
The ancients mentioned the origin of the burning agent for fractures, which is to take a long, thin, dry piece of cotton from the cotton plant and make it as thick as a finger. Then, they would soak it in oil and burn it. Then, a bandage is applied between the shoulder blades and two small splints without the adhesive slightly inclined towards the side under the armpit, and two large splints above the chest in the space between the third and fourth ribs.
Also, two splints in the space between the fifth and sixth ribs slightly inclined towards the back, and another bandage in the middle of the chest, one above the stomach, and three bandages from behind one in the space between the arms and two on the sides of the rib cage below the splint that is in the space between the fingers.
Your hand should not be pressed deeply into the bandage but rather on the surface of the skin, and some of the ancients mentioned that some people used a wire splint almost like a needle to protect it and insert it between the ribs until it reaches the same level as the fracture.
The tumor exits as mentioned in the liver, and in this case, it is difficult to remove from the kidney. It may cause the patient's death within an hour or leave him exposed at the site with no cure.
Chapter Thirty.
In the thigh bone.
If you treated the thigh bone disease as mentioned in the section on treatment, but it did not heal, there are three possible causes: one is that you did not cover it with three or four flat pieces of cloth along the length of the thigh bone.
In the shape of liver pieces that have a flat shape and there is a distance between each piece equal to the thickness of a finger or slightly less, and the property of the cloth is as mentioned in the liver piece, neither too thick nor too thin, and the appearance of the patient is lying on his back.
The other method is to apply the bandage at the groin and lift the skin over the thigh bone where the bandage ends, then lift the skin over the thigh bone where the bandage ends on the left side, and your lifting of the skin should be along the length of the body so that the pieces lie along the length of the body.
Then insert the probes very carefully until they pierce the skin from the other side, then remove the bandage, and the pieces will be four, and if you wish, you can cover them with the other three flat probes.
Then, after leaving the cicatrix of the wound to extend for a long time, it is more beneficial than all other treatments.
Chapter 20.
In the cicatrix of the wound.
The cicatrix is only beneficial in the case of a wound that has been treated with the specific remedies mentioned in the section on incisions, especially if your treatment did not work. In such cases, it is recommended to apply four cicatrices around the wound and one on the belly.
Another cicatrix on the liver, one on the spleen, two behind his back between the ribs, one facing his chest and another facing his belly. The depth of the cicatrix should be close to the thickness of the skin. Then, leave the cicatrix open for a long time.
And do not delay the application of treatment after the cicatrix by what is appropriate for him to gather the necessary ingredients, as the shape of the bandage that covers his back should be like a sling, as described earlier, and the one that covers his belly should be like an olive leaf.
Chapter 20.
In the cicatrix of the feet and legs.
If you have a tumor in the instep and it is filled with yellow water, it is appropriate to incise it on the back of the foot between the ankle and the tarsal bones.
Place your finger with the probe and do not wiggle it, then lift your finger and do not return it to the same place, for it sucks up the yellow water and the probe is in this shape.
Then incise on both thighs, two cuts on each thigh, one at the bent part of the probe and the other along the length of the thigh, one under the knee and the other towards the middle of the thigh, and on both buttocks, two cuts on each.
Leave the cut open for a long time without treatment, so that it sucks up the water, then treat it with all that we have mentioned.
Chapter 30.
In the cut of diarrhea.
If the diarrhea is due to cold and moisture until the strength of the digestive organs in the stomach and intestines is weakened, and it was treated with doses of treatment and did not improve, and you saw that the patient might have the cut, if the strength is strong, incise a large cut on his stomach. Upon what was previously mentioned about the method of covering the wound with a round bandage and four fingers around the wound, gently rubbing the fine silk needle and a bandage on the cotton above the large or two fingers.
If you see that the discharge is abundant and the wound may become infected, then apply a bandage on the nostrils and a bandage on each side, and perhaps add two small bandages on the wound near the large one, for this treatment is successful and does not fail if God wills.
The fourth chapter and the thirtieth.
In the method of bandaging the wounds.
If there are many persistent sores or one sore that is mixed with thick, cold, or wet and putrid discharge and was treated as mentioned in the division, but the treatment did not succeed, then apply three bandages under the lower backbone slightly like a triangle.
And a bandage under the wound like two fingers, and if you think that his wound has healed and his food does not digest and his face is swollen, then apply a large bandage on the wound as mentioned before and a bandage on his liver. And another on the tooth with a marsharnic (a type of dental instrument) and leave the key open for some time then treat it until it becomes clean, God willing.
Chapter Five and Thirty.
In the tooth of the third molar.
After cutting it, if the third molar is cut, grind the dental instrument that resembles a file then insert it hammer-like into the same cut third molar and push your finger until the dental instrument reaches the neck from which blood vessels emerge, do this once or twice.
If the third molars are many, do each one as we described above then treat them with whatever matches them from marshmallows until they become clean, and if its root is also large on the cotton, it was more beneficial.
Chapter Six and Thirty.
In the tooth of the wisdom tooth that is in the jaw and its surroundings.
If the tooth does not reach to the cheek and the work we described in its place, then it is likely that it has become clean from the tooth, if one of the wisdom teeth became decayed and its moisture was rotten, first you should measure it with a fine file.
Then, you must know the size of the gap by the probe. Then, insert the spatula that resembles a melon into the hearth. Place it horizontally on top of the oven's opening and the probe's size. Prepare the iron on it until all the decayed bodies are burnt, one time or twice or three times according to your need.
And preserve from burning the nerve if it is present or a large vein, and if the oven discharges to the vessel of micturition or to the vessel of excretion.
Save from these positions all of them, but you only do this if the oven is in a fleshy position and you have determined that it is not protruding, then treat the position until it is clean, if the position is covered and the materials are cut off and remained so for some time, then know that it has been cleaned perfectly.
And if the materials are not cut off from it, then know that it is protruding or in a gap with a decayed bone or something similar to what is mentioned in its position.
The seventh and thirty-third chapter.
In the iron of the kidney.
If a pain occurs in the kidney due to cold or dense wind and lack of moisture, then it is appropriate to apply the iron on both sides of the same kidney with a spatula that resembles a melon and was mentioned before, and perhaps a third one in the same dish, so that three irons are obtained, which will be more beneficial.
The Eighth Chapter and the Thirty-Second Section.
In the treatment of wounds.
If a wound occurs in the throat, it should be treated with rest and moisture until the patient can swallow without pain. Then, apply a bandage at the bottom of the wound, where the hair begins to grow, and another bandage on the right side of the wound, and another on the left side.
And after the bandage, on each side, it should be at the level of the eyebrow and another bandage at the bottom of the back or two if necessary, and the dressing should be moist.
The Ninth Chapter and the Thirty-Third Section.
In the treatment of wounds on the chest.
If a wound occurs on the chest due to cold and moisture, it should be treated with rest and moisture, and avoid applying heat or hot water, as it may cause further damage or pain. Then, apply three bandages around the wound as mentioned in the treatment of throat wounds. And a bandage on the chest below the back or two bandages, and the dressing should be moist.
The Fortieth Chapter.
In the treatment of removing a splinter from the ear.
If moisture has entered the ear, it may cause the splinter to move from its position and a symptom is that the ear will be longer on one side if part of it is pushed inwards and there is an empty space where the splinter is located, then the patient should apply a circular bandage around the ear.
After learning about the center in geometry, so that the center falls exactly in the middle of the circle and the image of this center is drawn in the middle of the plate, if you do not have this center, take three large olive-sized dough balls.
Cook the dough in a pan to the depth of a frying pan, then treat it until it is clean, God willing.
Chapter 40.
In the plate of women's urine.
If pain occurs in the back and the cause is cold and moisture, and the treatment of the affected part with what was mentioned in the division did not work, it is recommended that the affected person smear the thick paste of honey or date syrup and the like.
Then make it and face the plate with two stripes, either a plate with burning medicines or a plate with fire, and the plate with fire should be on many faces, one of which is to be made on the back itself, three triangular dough balls like this.
It should have a suitable depth and after each dough ball, there should be a gap of the thickness of a finger, and the dough should be olive-sized, and one dough ball in the middle on the back itself can be four, if you want, make a circle dough to remove the backbone.
If the circle encompasses all the anus and burns the entire skin, this is a sign of the kiyya in women's urine if the pain is specific to the anus itself and does not extend to the buttocks and thighs.
If it extends to the buttocks and thighs, then it is two kiyyas on the buttock at the spot where the pain is indicated by the cause, and a kiyya above the urethra by four fingers towards the rear side slightly, and the stool is soft and the depth of the kiyya is equal to the thickness of the skin only.
If it indicates that the pain extends to the fingers of the foot, then it is three or four or more stools at the spot where the cause indicated, and if it indicates the pain under the ankle towards the thigh, then there is one soft kiyya there.
It is important to avoid letting any kiyya reach the point where it burns a large nerve or vessel, as this would indicate a serious disease or injury on the cause.
I have seen two cases of people who had kiyyas above the urethra and stool in the kiyya, resulting in the thigh being completely paralyzed until it reached the foot, and the whole body was punctured and all the leg rotted, then diagnosis and death followed. If the pain is in both places simultaneously, their kiyyas are of this kind.
Some scholars among the wise have mentioned that the characteristic of the gourd is that it makes a cup-like shape from iron, with its diameter being half a span and its mouth being slightly narrower than the hardness of dates or slightly less. Inside this gourd, there is another gourd and a third one.
And there is a distance of one knot between each two gourds and the gourds are open from both sides, with their height being around one or two knots. They have a handle made of iron that has been well-made for the gourds. This is its shape.
Then, it is coated with fire until it becomes red and the impurities are removed. Then, it is placed on top of the gourd and the healthy side is positioned correctly. It is then beaten into three smooth strips in one stroke and then left for three days. After that, it is dipped in grease and the wound is left open for days.
Then, it is treated with mercurous chloride until it becomes clean. The author of this book said that this type of gourd is rarely used due to its harshness and the complexity of its appearance, and because there is little of it in the market. However, it is a good gourd for those who can endure it and have the appropriate position for it.
The preparation of the incision burning agents is as follows: make two nearly circular bowl-shaped containers from brass or iron.
Their height should be about two fingers or so, and the space between them should be the thickness of a thumb. They are open at the bottom and open at the top, and they are held together in this way.
Then place them on the back and the flank, with the patient lying on their correct side, and hold your hand over it. Pour water that is boiling hot between the two circles, which has been heated by fire for a long time. Let the patient endure the pain for an hour, and if he does not feel any pain, then it is as hot as fire.
Until the pain subsides, then raise your hand with a tool and wipe the boiling water off the back completely with cool water. Then leave it for three days, and apply grease to it until the blackness of the burn goes away, and leave it for more days until the pus comes out from it, because that is more beneficial.
Then treat it with the mirahema until it is healed, if the pain extends to the buttock or thigh, make a vessel for him as you did for the back, depending on how much water is needed, and this is the property of boiling water, which has been proven in an article called "The Restoration of Drugs".
Take from the salt of the eye and from the gum, unquenched from each one a part, and grind them together and place them in a new pot with a small hole at the bottom to allow the liquid to drain and place another pot underneath to collect the liquid.
Then pour water that is sweet over the eye and gum, enough to cover them with a finger after grinding them well with your hand and leave the pot until the sharp water falls at the bottom of the straining pot, then collect all that water and pour it over another gum and eye again.
Then it will be very sharp and effective in many medical works and for all the body parts because it does the work of fire on its own, and among the remedies is what softens the wormwood such as thafesia and honey of balm and gum with soap mixed together.
It is said that Galenos told a story about a man from the ancients who cured the pain of wormwood and the itching of women and emphasized its great importance greatly and claimed that it does not need any other treatment and that it purifies in one time.
Until it was even said that he might have put the person in the bath and came out purified and that he should take from the fresh green shitaji if not available then take the dry modern one and grind it with something like soap and apply it on the wormwood where the pain is or in the leg or in the buttocks.
The patient is to be scalded for three hours or until the patient feels the heat of the burn, then the attendant should pour water over him. If the pain disappears and he is purified, by God's will, if not, after ten days, repeat the process again.
It is purified, if God wills, and know that one should not use this remedy unless the body has been rested, as Diocletian mentioned that the urine of a she-goat, if cooked with its milk, is beneficial.
The remedy should be made in this way, taking dried sophora leaves and boiling them in old oil, then applying it to the deepest place between the fingers and the thumb, which is closest to the thumb. Then take a dry she-goat's urine.
Then heat it until it becomes a thick paste, then apply it to the sophora leaves and leave it until it boils. Then take another one and continue doing so until the feeling reaches the shoulder and the pain disappears, if God wills, and this remedy is called the "burnt remedy".
Chapter 2 and Chapter 40.
In remedy for back pain.
The pain in the back may be due to many causes, such as a fall, a blow, or excessive strain, and so on. It may also be caused by an accumulation of cold, wet matter, which is unique to this type alone.
After excessive strain, the person should be placed on their back with their head slightly raised, where the pain is located, on a table of the same size as the mattress, with three layers of cloth. In each layer, there should be five or more pieces of cotton, according to the likelihood and severity of the strain.
The cotton pieces should be of a medium-sized needle, three or four in number, as shown in the diagram.
Chapter 3 and the following sections.
In the first layer of cotton.
This affliction often affects small children, and its onset is marked by shortness of breath when they stand or move, with a rash appearing at the back of their neck that spreads to other parts of their body.
If you see this and wish to prevent it, apply a circular bandage as shown in the diagram. Take the needle on all sides of the fistula with equal pressure and if you wish, tie it around the fistula with two or three knots, and let the points be close to each other, then treat the position until it heals as mentioned.
And beware of using the needle in the fistula that is caused by the inflammation of the nerve.
Chapter 40.
In the needle for the gout and joint pains.
If the joint pains are due to cold moisture that settles in any part of the body, and if the pains occur in both legs, it is common for physicians to call this gout.
If the cold gout is treated with the remedies mentioned in the division and the pains do not disappear, then the needle should be used and it is to tie many needles around both knees, and the knots should be made with olive oil of medium consistency.
And if it is necessary to tie on the face of the leg, then use the knot with oil, and if the pains rise to the ankles or other joints, often this is done by tying three or four needles on each foot with this olive oil.
If you need more than this, do not deepen your probe with the knife but rather keep it close to the skin's surface, only. If the pain has reached the back or the spine, then use what we mentioned in the chapter regarding the knife.
If the pain is only in your hands, then prick around the wrists as they would rotate in pairs. If the pain remains in your fingers, then prick each finger on every knuckle and on the palm of your hand. If the pain has spread to your elbows or your knees after several days.
Prick them from all sides and do not neglect the treatment and taking of medicine, for if you improve your diet and cough up phlegm, then hopefully this knife will be healed by God.
Chapter 45
In the knife of the fetus.
If a fetus's foreskin appears to be too tight and some of the mucous membrane and thorax have descended to the genitals, and this has just started, then it is appropriate for the mother to be advised to stop eating that day and to use some of the molds that will help excrete feces from her vagina.
Then he should lie on his back between your hands and be advised to hold himself until the thorax or mucous membrane protrudes, then push it back with your finger. Then teach him to massage under the foreskin on the penis bone, a sign that resembles half a circle at the top of the body.
Then, cover this wound with its image.
Until a white cloth is thrown to remove the dirt, then the knife or the saw is inserted into its wound, then a servant places his hand on the spot to prevent the knife from protruding and has already been removed between the thighs of the patient and placed underneath him a mattress and another servant ties his legs.
And another servant holds his hands, then the bandage is lowered to the same spot and he rubs it with the bandage and stands upright and holds it until it reaches the bone or is placed again if it does not reach the bone in the first attempt.
And save your effort from the knife protruding at that moment, for if it does, it may cause death or great harm to the patient, and know that if you do not reach the bone with the bandage, your work has not been successful, and the bandage for boys should be delicate according to their ages and for adults according to their ages.
Then, treat the wound position with olive oil for three days until the burning of the fire goes away, then treat it with all the ointments until it heals and let the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound is closed.
It is necessary to make his food duration of treatment, which facilitates the stomach so that the intestines do not protrude during defecation and evacuation. Then, if he wants to stand after forty days, use a strong bandage and hold it for another forty days, reducing the fatigue and fullness from food and drink and loud crying.
If he uses this method, he will be completely free from paralysis, God willing, and I will mention the treatment of foot drop in its place, God willing. However, if the foot drop occurs in other parts of the body and is recent, you should prevent it from increasing by keeping it elevated on a level surface. If the burned part of the skin is less than one third, then treat it as mentioned earlier, God willing, and some ancients mentioned that the foot drop should be elevated on a triangular bandage like this.
After learning about the foot drop and drawing a line from the top of the foot drop to the bottom, place your hand in the middle with a single, thin bandage, and the first one is easier and better, God willing.
The sixth and fortieth chapter.
In the case of a fractured bone, if the fragments are displaced, reduce them by bringing them back into their proper position.
If a fracture or injury causes severe pain that lasts for a long time and does not respond to medication, it is recommended to apply a poultice at the affected point, depending on the size, age, strength, and weakness of each organ.
If the pain and fracture are relieved, and if the first poultice was removed, it is recommended to repeat the application of the poultice until the affected area is fully healed.
Chapter 74.
In the case of a dislocation.
Those who suffer from dislocations can greatly benefit from the application of a poultice, especially in the case of a dislocation that is caused by the buildup of phlegm and black bile.
If you want to apply a poultice, if the dislocation is recent and has been treated as described in the previous chapter and has not worsened or recurred, it is recommended to apply five poultices on the head. The first poultice should be applied in the middle of the forehead, the second one below it, near the hairline at the back of the head, and two poultices on each ear, and one poultice behind the earlobe, gently rubbing the poultice into the bone until it has a gentle effect.
The excerpt translates to: "It is important that the skin be lifted from it to facilitate the expulsion of thick steam from it and to seal the incision also on the same liver as previously mentioned, but if the abscess has persisted on the lobe and a clear sign appears, it is necessary to seal these incisions that we mentioned in the head. The excerpt translates to: "And an incision on the tip of the nose and two incisions on the cheeks and two incisions on the neck and six on the back and one large incision on the nape of the neck when the sin is unable to bear it and another above it in the same plate and two on the shoulders on each side. The excerpt translates to: "And two on the knees and one on each knee and two on the elbows and two on the hips and two on the ribs and seal on each joint of the fingers and toes of his hands and feet.
The excerpt translates to: "And preserve from the nerve that is on the front of the knees lest they burn them, and it may be sealed an incision on the thigh bone and another on the mouth of the stomach and another on the liver, and know that every time you add an incision it is more beneficial and more successful.
Know that the limbs of a crippled person do not feel pain as much as those of a healthy person because their bodies have been damaged, and the bandages should be applied according to the size of the body parts and joints, as previously mentioned regarding the characteristics of dressings.
Then, the crippled person should be treated with great care using the honey and other treatments until he is cured, if God wills.
Chapter 84.
When a limb has been fractured and treated with drugs, bandages, and dressings, but it did not heal, then the same limb should be set in a splint according to its size and weight, and it should be slightly elevated above the skin.
Then, it should be treated with traction until it heals. For some fractures that are exposed to the hand and foot in the lumbar region at the exit of the nerve that moves that limb, the fracture disappears.
Only someone who is knowledgeable about the anatomy of the body parts and the exit points of the nerves that move the body should do this.
Chapter 94.
In fracture of the bone.
If the fracture has been reduced but did not heal, then apply a bandage with slight depth above the skin until the whiteness disappears and its color changes.
Then, he treats it with precise lens mixed with rosewater, or lemon juice, and the tongue of a donkey, or the blood of a pig, or a goat, or a sheep, from each part, and mixes them all together, and applies it on the wound, and secures the position until it is healed.
Chapter Fifty.
Treatment of Cancer.
If the cancer is in its early stage and you want to stop it, apply a bandage around it as it rotates, and some wise people mentioned that it should be applied with a firm clay in the middle of it, but I do not see that as effective because I expect it to ulcerate and I have seen that many times.
The correct thing is to apply a bandage around it as we mentioned, or with many clays.
Chapter Fifty-Two.
Treatment of Diphtheria.
If a diphtheria occurs and has slowed down in maturation, it is either due to the cause of its action beforehand, or due to age, if it is an elderly person with little blood, or due to time, and you want to speed up the maturation of the diphtheria, apply many small clays around it, tightly.
Then, leave it as it will speed up maturation, but if you want to soften it, apply clay of this shape.
Place it in the middle of the abscess until it reaches the skin and let the knife be from what follows below to facilitate the outflow of pus, then treat it with what is appropriate until it is clean.
Chapter 25.
In the eating ulcer.
The eating ulcer is nothing but a decay that seeks the tissue and eats it like fire eating dry wood. If you see an eating ulcer in a place that may require incision, apply many small and large needles according to what is appropriate for that place where the eating ulcer is.
Then squeeze it from all sides until all the decay is removed and nothing remains of it, then leave it for three days and apply borax powder mixed with oil to all the infected areas until all the pus is removed and all the decay.
Then treat it with cauterizing agents for flesh, as if after three days you see that the flesh grows a healthy plant with no decay, otherwise repeat the incision on what remains of the infected areas. The eating ulcer has been treated with harsh medication.
As it stands, it is more beneficial to use fire immediately and you mentioned treating it with harsh medication in the section on incision, so take it from there when needed.
Chapter 35: Treatment of Hernia
In the cases of hernias that are reducible and irreducible.
Often, this ailment occurs at the soles of the feet and it is a hard lump that twists the leg, and there are two kinds of hernias: either the hernia by fire or the hernia by harsh water.
As for the hernia by fire, it is to cover the ragged, feather-like tissue that resembles a peacock's tail made of iron around the opening from all sides and be thin on the edges, then apply heat on the opening, then use your hand with the covering to wrap around the opening until the covering reaches the depth of the opening.
Leave it for three days, massage it with cold water, then wrap it with clean, fine flour mixed with salt and leave the cloth on it overnight. If the hernias are not reducible, apply the marchamum paste made of bear's fat to the wound until it heals.
Often, this ailment occurs on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, it is necessary to take a tube made of brass, iron, or peacock's tail and apply it on the opening or the sinus then pour harsh water into the tube in small amounts.
Hold your hand firmly and gently press it with a slight glimpse of your finger to feel the tip of the catheter at the root of the tooth, then find the sharp water pathway to the root of the tooth and wait patiently for a few minutes on the sharp water.
Then leave it, as the tooth will dislodge at its roots. Do this one by one until you reach all of it in the body, then treat its positions after it has dislodged with what grows flesh from the cavities.
Chapter 45.
In the Nafs (self).
If a person with a cold in the nerve or from fever or other diseases, it is appropriate to apply four or five tefillin on the back between each fold, and one on the chest. And on his stomach, apply one with olive oil, as the patient will rest and recover from the cold disease quickly.
Chapter 55.
In the broken bones in the body.
Broken bones may appear in the body with foul thorns that are made of cold, thick, and rotten materials. It is appropriate to apply a small, soft tefillin at the beginning of each broken bone, or a long thin needle, or olive oil.
The Damascenes were the first to excel in this skill, and its virtue does not increase nor decay until it is expelled by the surgeon's probe.
Chapter 65.
In the case of severe bleeding that occurs during the cutting of an artery.
Often, bleeding from a severed artery occurs when cutting from outside or when removing a tumor or other body part and similar cases, which makes it difficult to cut.
If this happens to one of them, quickly place your finger on the artery's mouth and press it firmly until the blood is contained under your finger and nothing comes out from it. Then, place a small and large number of cotton balls soaked in olive oil on top of it and blow on them until they become very hot.
Then, take one, either small or large, depending on the wound and the place where the artery was cut, and lower the cotton ball onto the same spot after removing your finger quickly and holding the cotton ball until the bleeding stops.
If the blood rushes out when you remove your finger from the artery's mouth and blows away the cotton ball, quickly take another cotton ball from the prepared hot cotton balls in the fire and continue doing so one after another until the bleeding stops.
Save the nerve from being burned, for if it is burned, another remedy must be used, and know that if the artery bleeds from it, it cannot be cut off or especially if the artery is large, except by one of four ways: either by ligation as we have said, or by traction if it has not already been tracted. If it has been tracted, its tip will shrink and the blood will stop, or it can be tied with strong ligature and or medicines placed on it that stop the blood and tie it tightly with forceps.
And if someone tries to cut it with a thread or by traction or by placing burnt things and so on, it will not be stopped except in an emergency, for if one of these and a doctor or medicine is not available, he should apply the vinegar cloth as we have described.
He should tie it very tightly until the blood stops flowing from above the wound and the artery and the finger, do not remove it with cold water always until the blood freezes and thickens and stops. And during this time, look for what is needed of ligature or medicine.
Chapter Two.
In the treatment of wounds, fractures, and other surgical procedures and their like.
He said, 'After mentioning in the first chapter all diseases that are treated by cauterization with fire and the burning drugs used for them, their indications, causes, instruments, and images of cautery irons, we have made this a section from the beginning to the end.'
And I follow this path in this chapter so that it is easy for the student to find what he needs.
Before I begin with that, you should know, O my sons, that this chapter contains some things that are not mentioned in the first chapter on cauterization.
Therefore, the warning should be stronger in this chapter because the work in this chapter is very great and many mistakes can occur when opening a wound, cutting into a tumor, fracture, or ulcer, or treating a surgical procedure, or removing an arrow or cutting into a cyst, and so on, all of which involve danger and fear, and death is more common in most of them.
And I advise you against falling into what is uncertain, for there may be people in this profession who are of different types and deceitful, some of whom have become desperate due to their illness and died.
Due to the severity of his pain, length of his illness, and the nature of his disease, it is important to determine what indicates death. Among them are those who spend their wealth to benefit you and heal you in hopes of recovery, but their disease is contagious, so it is not appropriate for you to be helped by those who have this characteristic.
And be more cautious than your desires and efforts, and do not proceed with anything of that until you have certain knowledge about what will eventually happen to the beloved one. Use advancements in knowledge and warning in all treatments for your patients.
For in that, you have assistance in acquiring praise, honor, memory, and thanks. May Allah guide you, my son, and grant you righteousness and correct guidance, for it is in His hands, there is no god but Him.
I have arranged this chapter into sections based on what was mentioned in the previous book regarding the crown to the toe, so that you may find what you desire from it, God willing.
The first section.
In the treatment of water that accumulates in the heads of children.
This disease is often seen in children at birth if the midwife presses the child's head harshly and without mercy, and it may also occur due to a hidden cause that is not known.
I have not seen this sign in other boys and all of whom I have seen, death came to them faster. Therefore, I saw it as a sign to leave the work and indeed, I have seen a boy whose head was filled with water and the head is more important in every day. The boy was unable to sit up due to the weight of his head and the moisture increased until he died.
And this moisture either gathered between the skin and bone or gathered under the bone on the skull, and in such a case, if the moisture was between the skin and bone and the tumor was small, it is appropriate to make a single cut in the middle of the head and the length of the cut should be about two fingers until the moisture drains and this is the appearance of a cyst.
If the moisture increased and the tumor was larger, make two intersecting cuts in this manner:
If the moisture was under the bone and the sign was that you could see the hair of the head open from all sides and when squeezed with your hand, water came out, not hidden from you, then it is appropriate to make three cuts in the middle of the head in this manner:
After the cut, all the moisture comes out then close the cuts with stitches and apply ointment and oil until the fifth day then apply a bandage and treat the wound with plaster and sutures without leaving the head bound tightly and feed the patient with dry food low in moisture.
Until the member is strong and healed, another method is to approach from the side where the tumor bone appears and the water accumulates, as it may be more prevalent at the front of the head or the forehead, or on the right or left side, or in the north.
By incising from the side where the tumor appeared and water accumulated, you should incise as much as possible without cutting a blood vessel that may cause bleeding leading to death due to loss of fluid.
Chapter 2.
Cutting the two arteries behind the ears known as the auriculars.
When a severe infection occurs in the eyes or chest and medication does not work, then seek treatment by cutting these two arteries.
If you want to cut them, it is recommended to shave the patient's head with a sharp knife to make the artery visible, then cover the patient's neck with a cloth and examine where the pulse is and the two hidden places behind the ears that are not visible in some people.
Then learn about them with a probe and cut them with a sharp knife to the bone, which can be done by exposing the head and if you wish, insert the probe from under the artery and pull it upwards with the cut, and the length of the cut should be two finger widths.
If the blood stops flowing, it will come out in a pulsating manner, like a drumbeat, and in a continuous stream, if the artery has not been felt by touch. In such a case, it is recommended to measure from the ear, after the width of three fingers, then cut along the line and proceed to the bone, which should be carefully cut through.
If the blood is sent out in a steady stream or more or less, depending on what appears to you of the strength of the artery and its fullness, then look at the wound. If it remains on the bone, cut it off.
Lest a hot tumor be exposed, then suture the wound with a thread of silk, then treat it with ointment until it heals.
The third section.
Regarding the two arteries in the neck.
If a person has a chronic cough or severe attacks of coughing, fever in the neck muscles, persistent and severe headache, and other similar symptoms that have been treated with medical treatment but have not been cured, we have tried cutting the arteries in the neck or cauterizing them as described.
The work in this case is that the barber should shave the hair that is on the forehead and aim at the visible artery in the forehead, for it will reveal to you its pulse, and what is hidden from others will be revealed to you alone.
When there is severe cold, if it is hidden from you, then let the barber press his neck with a fold of his cloak, and then you can determine the location by palpation or make the location moist with hot water until the artery becomes visible and clear. Then take the stethoscope that has this shape. Then scrape the skin gently until you reach the artery, then insert a hook into it and pull it upwards until it exits from the skin and remove all the blood clots that are underneath it from all sides, if the artery is thin, then tie it with the end of the hook. Then cut a part of it according to the distance between its ends and compress it, but do not cause bleeding, for if it has not rotted and has not been cut, the blood has not clotted at all, then remove the blood from six to three.
If the artery is large, it is recommended to tie it in two places with a strong double-stranded thread, and let the thread be either of silk or of catgut strings so that the rot does not reach it before the wound heals, causing bleeding.
Then, cut the ligament between the two tendons and do this at that time or later, if you wish to attach it to the bone using a thin, sharp knife until its ends grow together in its proper place or better, as we have mentioned.
However, if the bone is inflamed or has a fistula due to the discharge of fluids, it will be better to use a thick, soft bandage and apply firm compresses after the veins have been stopped up, then treat with dry medicines that promote healing and massage until it is completely healed, God willing.
If bleeding occurs during your work from the vein, immediately cut it off either with a knife or fill the place with powder and press firmly until the blood stops, if you cannot do this, then put your finger on it to stop the blood from flowing.
Then soak the place with very cold water until the inflammation subsides and apply the bandage as appropriate, and among the easiest and most suitable ways to stop the vein is to attach this bandage made of thin, sharp knives after learning the positions of the veins.
Then lower the heat until it reaches the bone and the blood stops flowing in two places so that they do not stick together, as this bandage will not prevent them from sticking. This is the appearance of the bandage.
The blades of the scalpels should resemble the small chisels, except that they are smaller in size. This is because if they were as sharp as the scalpel, the cold would reach them quickly and the flesh would not be cut at a fast pace. Therefore, if there are some obstructions in them, hold onto the hot embers.
Then cut the flesh quickly, and this work is better than all works, faster, easier, and lighter. And there should be a distance between the scalpels equal to the thickness of a finger.
Chapter 4.
In the treatment of constant hot tears flowing to the eyes.
If the tears are constant and the flow of them is from the hair on the back of the head from outside, and nothing in it benefited from any treatment by medicine, and you saw that the face of the patient became red. And he felt in his face a worm-like creature and his eyes were swollen, wet, and eaten by their fur and soaked by the sharpness of the tears, so the early ones in treating it resorted to this work, which they called the treatment by the sword, which is that the patient is ordered to shave the hair on his face.
Then cut three parallel incisions on the face, with a length equal to two fingers, one incision parallel to the length of the nose in the middle of the face, and the second slightly away from the movement of the muscle under the chest, and the third from the other side.
It is crucial to preserve the two arteries on either side and keep your hand away from connecting the jaws, ensuring a distance of three fingertips thick in every step. Have ready a prepared sponge or a large number of cotton pads to absorb blood.
Then insert the sharp, pointed instrument, which is its image. From the groove following the sternum to the middle groove, scrape off all the skin between the two grooves along with the periosteum on the bone, then do the same from the middle groove to the third groove, then extract this sharp instrument. Also insert a second instrument, called a sharp-blunt lancet, with a sharp edge on one side and a blunt edge on the other. This is its image:
Its sharp side should go above towards the flesh adhered to the skin, and its blunt side towards the bone, pushing it until it reaches the middle groove, cutting all vessels coming from the head to the eyes without the cut reaching the surface of the skin.
Then do the same in the middle groove to the third groove, after blood has flowed moderately, suck out the clotted blood from the wounds, then apply a cotton swab soaked in vinegar and oil or wine and oil on each groove.
It is important to treat a hot abscess as follows: on the third day, perform incision and use frequent irrigation with dirty water, then apply a poultice made of basilicon mixed with red wine and other ingredients used for treating wounds until it heals, if God wills.
Chapter Five.
In the treatment of tears and nasal discharge from under the skull.
When a person experiences frequent, severe, chronic nasal discharge with small, swollen eyes and weakened vision, and inflamed eyelids and scales falling off from them. When there is severe, painful headache and persistent bad breath deep in the skull, these symptoms indicate that the discharge and nasal congestion come from numerous deep veins, and the best treatment for this is to order the patient to cut a slit in his forehead, then make a single incision in the middle of the forehead.
When there is severe, painful headache and persistent bad breath deep in the skull, these symptoms indicate that the discharge and nasal congestion come from numerous deep veins, and the best treatment for this is to order the patient to cut a slit in his forehead, then make a single incision in the middle of the forehead. Or raise slightly the forehead and start the incision from the right shoulder to the left, the incision goes to the bone and keep your hand away from the moving muscles of the shoulders until the bone is exposed and all the blood is squeezed out with gauze.
He distinguished between the two sides of the jaw by using either cotton or a piece of cloth, then sutured it from above with sutures and applied the sutures with olive oil and ointment to prevent heat and inflammation, and when they dissolved, if you saw that the hot tumor had broken, it is necessary to remove the bone until it begins to grow in it.
Then he treated it with a drying agent that promotes tissue growth, such as taking from wheat flour four pieces and arranging them in layers and using it in the growth of the bone in such surgeries.
Chapter Six.
In the treatment of what falls into the ear.
All that falls into the ear is one of four types: either a metal stone or a stone-like substance such as iron and glass, or a plant material such as lentils and beans, and so on, or something liquid like water and vinegar, and so on.
Or an animal, so when a thorn or the type of thorn that does not grow in the ear fell into the ear, receive it with the ear facing the sun, if you see the thorn, crush it with something like camphor or serge and then try to remove it by moving the head or by irrigation with a syringe. Stuff the nostrils with cotton or soft material and place a ring around the ear, extending the ear upwards. If this treatment does not work, then try to remove it gently using a fine hook.
If it does not come out with the hook, then try using a fine, blindfold-like hook with minimal sharpness. If it still does not come out, then make a brass tube and insert its tip into the ear's hole.
Seal around the tube with greased cotton to prevent the wind from taking an alternative route other than the tube, then pull it out strongly and repeatedly. If it still does not come out as described, then use a hook or a curved, prepared hook that birds use to catch small things, and place it at the end of the rod.
After sealing it with a firm cotton plug, then insert it into the ear's hole gently after the ear has dried from moisture. If it still does not come out as described, then proceed to cutting before any heat or inflammation occurs.
Cutting procedure: first, apply the hook in the ear canal and draw out blood according to its strength. Then place the hook between your fingers and turn the ear upwards, then make a small cut at the base of the ear near the cartilage in the lowest part of it.
The incision should be made in a crescent shape until it reaches the bone, then remove it with the tools you have available, then quickly suture the incision from that point and treat it until it is clean.
If the object is lodged in the ear from one of the grains that grows and expands, try to remove it as mentioned earlier, but if it does not come out, then take a thin, smooth, fine needle of this shape.
Try to cut that type of grain that is lodged in the ear with it, but only do so if you are certain that that grain has softened due to the steam from the ear until it becomes small pieces many times, then remove it with a blind needle or a fine suction cup or a spoon.
As mentioned earlier, it is easier to remove it, and as for the water inside the ear, it should be used with an eyedropper or first and if his ear has been filled with cotton that has been placed on that ear where the water is, then it will come out with it.
Or if not, then take many thin, smooth, fine needles of the length of your fingers and heat them slightly with fire and insert one of them into a hole in his ear and press it on that side of his leg and hit another rock against the rock in his ear.
He continues to do this with a probe until all the water comes out, and the water may come out by taking it from the earwax or from a single feather and inserting its tip into the ear and heating the other end with fire until most of it burns, then he repeats with another feather.
He does this repeatedly until all the water comes out or attracts it with a tube as mentioned in the probe, and as for extracting the animal inside it, look, if it is a small creature like a frog and the like, treat it as mentioned in the dissection.
If his body is large and visible to the touch, try to extract it with forceps and scissors, and if it is easier than all that emerges from the ear, and as for extracting the worm born in the ear, if you treated it as mentioned in the dissection of snakes and it did not heal, then...
You should look at the ear in the sun, if something from the worm appears to you, extract it with forceps or smooth scissors, and if nothing appears to you from it, take a tube of this shape.
Narrow at the bottom and wide at the top, and insert the thin end into the ear to the extent that the eardrum allows, then suck strongly with a strong mouthpiece, do this repeatedly until all the worms come out, if it does not let you extract it, seal around the tube with fire as mentioned in the probe.
If the above method does not work, use the catgut sutures that we mentioned and which have been tried by the early ones in killing the wounds. You can find this in the article on catgut sutures. Apply the ointment and medicines through this instrument and here is its image:
As you see, it is made of silver or copper, narrow at the bottom with a small hole and wide at the top. If you wish, the piston inside the tube can be made of firm copper. Alternatively, you can take a rod and wrap it tightly with lint.
Then, you pour the ointment or medicine that you want from these drugs into the tube and it is in the ear. Then, insert the rod with the lint from above and rub gently until the ointment penetrates into the ear canal and he feels it.
Inside the ear, make sure that what is poured into the ear has been slightly heated in fire and be careful not to put anything too cold or too hot as the ear does not tolerate that.
The seventh chapter.
In the treatment of a blocked ear.
Some children may be born from their mother's wombs and with unpierced ears.
Also, some people may show a plug in the ear canal due to an injury or tumor growing in it, and this plug may be deep within the ear hole, beyond the reach of vision.
Some may show a little outside the hole and be visible to the eye, but what shows deep within the ear and is not visible requires more difficult removal, and what can be seen should be placed in sunlight. Look at it, and if you see the plug visible, then open it with a fine needle.
Its tip should be a little visible, limited on one side and the rest of the needle smooth on both sides to avoid damaging the ear, if it is a plug of tumor growing in the ear canal, then grasp it with a fine forceps and cut it with great force until all the tissue is removed.
If it is deep within the ear, take a fine, smooth needle and heat it slightly in fire then insert it into the ear canal, if you feel the plug with what the ear feels as weight of hearing, then gently remove it.
Guard against damaging the auditory nerve and then insert a thread into the ear hole, as long as the size of the hole, and let it soak in water with some fine, powdered salt.
Use them if you see the ear swollen and hot, it is necessary to extract the splinter and replace it with another that has been soaked in rose oil until the heat of the inflammation subsides, then treat it until it heals.
If bleeding occurs, soak a sponge or rag in cold water and place it on the ear, then use the rest of the treatment mentioned in the article on hemostasis.
Chapter 8.
In the treatment of warts that appear in the ears.
These warts that appear in the eyelids may be moist and dry, it is necessary to hold them with a glove or with a pincer and cut them from their roots then apply a poultice of burnt alum on the spot.
If bleeding occurs, apply a fine cauterizing iron and press well after cutting, often if any root remains, it will grow back. If burned with fire, the roots are destroyed and do not return.
Chapter 9.
In the treatment of conjunctivitis in the eyelids.
Often, something similar to conjunctivitis in severity and hardness appears in the eyelids.
Therefore, it is called 'bradycardia' which is the accumulation of thick humidity in the upper and lower sinuses, and the work in it is to look at it, if the bradycardia is prominent on the surface of the sinus, it moves towards all directions, so he makes it easy by making a wide incision.
Then, remove it from all directions with gentle force until it is completely eliminated, then attach it with the needle and cut it. If you cannot cut it unless after the sinus has been punctured, it will not harm anyone. If the incision is large, sew it up and treat it until it heals.
If it is small, there is no harm in it, but the fear (of infection) may force and inflame it. If the bradycardia is inclined towards the inside of the sinus towards the inner surface, turn the sinus and attach the bradycardia with a needle without needing to make an incision and remove it from all directions.
If the sinus has been punctured, it will not harm anyone, then wash the eye with salted water after cutting the bradycardia and treat the place with what inflames until it heals.
Chapter 10.
In the treatment of the cataract that appears in the pupil of the eye.
Cataract is a substance that occurs in the layers of the pupil's upper part and is more likely to affect boys, which weighs down their eyes and exposes them to blindness in the night and they cannot see the light of the sun. Because tears rush to them.
And therefore they always lean on their faces and sleep on them, and their eyelids are wet under the eyebrows with breath and when the cataract becomes visible to the eyes, as soon as you place your fingers between them, you will feel the cataract, and the work is that the patient places his head on your stone.
Then take a thin needle and prepare a thread from it, and make a circle on a pan as much as it covers the cataract from all sides, then place it on him and press with your fingers from all sides to gather the cataract in the middle of the circle.
Then cut in the middle of that moisture with a sharp needle, a cut as wide as the one in the eyelid, and if it is deep, it is necessary to cut the whole skin until you reach the cataract.
In most cases, the best method for removing a splinter from the skin is by using a needle shaped like a piece of white wax, which you should hold between your fingers and pull it out carefully, while managing your right hand to guide it from the north and south until it comes out completely, being cautious not to push the splinter further into the skin with the needle, as it may cause injury.
If the splinter does not appear at first, you should slightly increase the pressure in the incision until the splinter emerges, then remove it as previously mentioned, and clean the needle with soap and water, place it on the affected area, and gently press it down. Some people use salt to disinfect the wound.
He places it in the incision to dissolve any remaining moisture, then treats the wound until it is clean. If a hot spot remains, treat it with a cool compress until it heals completely.
Chapter 10.
In the removal of foreign bodies from the eye.
If there are excessive eyelashes growing under the natural eyelashes, it can cause damage to the eye and lead to various diseases such as chronic tearing, inflammation of the eyelids, and eyelid thickening, which may eventually lead to blindness.
1. Treatment of the eye in four ways: either with cauterization by fire or with a severe drug as mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, or with suturing and stitching, or with a cucumber as I previously mentioned.
1. It is recommended to place the tip of the needle on a stone and then rotate the eyelid with your left hand. If it turns, do not insert a needle into it. Instead, insert a thin thread from below the eyelid and pull the needle upwards with the thread, keeping it close to the hair itself and pulling the thread upwards over the eyelid.
1. Then rub it with a comb and carefully insert the toothpick from the larger to the smaller cavity beneath the eyelid, then pull out the thread and place a small piece of cotton or wool under the eyelid, and finally apply ointment on the eyelid.
1. Like the shape of a leaf, but it should be according to the extent you want to raise the eyelid, as it may vary among people. Some may need to cut a portion of the eyelid according to how much it relaxes.
1. Some may need to cut a smaller portion, all depending on the extent of relaxation of the eyelid. Then insert the toothpick along the two lines you marked and start from the larger cavity towards the smaller one, and the incision should be close to the natural hair with a thickness similar to that of the comb.
Then, the surgeon enters one of the skin flaps and scrapes it all, then gathers the lips with a needle and silk thread fine and wipes the blood and attaches the remaining threads on the eyelids to some remaining things.
You wish to do that or not, it does not matter, then the stitching and threads remain for about three days or four, then treat it, if you wish to leave the wound without stitching and treat it with what dries and absorbs, because the swelling rises at the end of the stitching and its union and stitching is better.
This face of the suture is mentioned by the first ones, except that it has a loop on the needle and it is good for work and there is no danger in it, another face in the suture is also to learn the shape of the eyelid like the shape of a leaf as we described. Then raise the eyelid with three needles that are separated or gathered on this image:
Then cut the remaining eyelid with a small scissors on this image, cuts evenly:
If you cannot hold the needles and have not stood up, then take a needle with thread in it and insert it in the middle of the shape and insert another thread near the larger hole and a third thread near the smaller hole and gather the threads between your fingers evenly, then raise your hand with a moderate lift.
Remove the skin that has been taught on it, as we have described, then gather both sides of the wound with sutures and treat it until it is healed. If a hot lump appears at the place where you cut or tore it, soothe that lump with cauterization and other methods from the methods of cauterization.
It may also expose the lower jaw, in which case it is necessary to use what we have mentioned about cutting and sutures and cauterization with fire and strong medicine or cauterization with fire or strong medicine, inform and apply it gently on the patient from cutting and sutures and cutting and sutures in them, do both.
Cauterization with honey is of this nature, that you turn the wound and tear the part that is inside as we have described, then make two or three thin planks of honey or wood of the same length as the jaw and less width than a finger.
And it has been reported that at the ends of their sutures from both sides where the sutures stick out, then gather them gently on what is preferred from the edge of the eye and tighten the planks from both sides strongly and leave them for days, because the stitched skin dies and rots and putsrefies.
Until it falls off by itself, if it becomes too slow, then prop it up with a splint and then treat it until it is clean. If it closes, the pus rises and does not spread the wounds of the eye, and this is the shape of the bell-shaped dressing made on this form and this measure in length and width by the eye.
Chapter Twelve.
In raising the eyelid with a needle.
If it is one or two hairs, then take a fine needle and insert a thread of fine silk into it, then gather the ends together and tie them with a delicate small knot, and let the length of the thread be about an inch.
Then place another fine thread in the eyelid and tie its ends, if you wish, then let the patient place his head on the stone and let it be near the sun so that he can see the work, for it is a delicate operation. Then insert the needle into the excess eyelid.
Then push it through the pus with a probe until it comes out above the natural eyelashes, then pull the thread up to the eyelid and insert the needle into that eyelash if it is one or two or three or more.
Then, draw your finger with it until the hair comes out along with its roots in the fold of the skin and with the natural hair at the root. If the roots come out but the hair does not, then draw the roots downwards with the thread that you had previously tied in it until the roots come out from the highest pore.
Then, replace the hair in it and draw them together, doing this until they rise up in the highest pore and appear to the eye. When this happens, then squeeze out the roots and the thread and remove them, close the eye and leave it closed for two or three days until the hair settles in its place and flesh grows on it.
If the hair is short, then either add a long natural hair to it so that it rises up with it, or leave it until it grows longer after some time, and then raise it.
Chapter Thirteen
In the treatment of a hair that occurs in the highest eyelid.
This hair, which is exposed to this hair, is called "arnabiya" and this hair is either natural or acquired. The acquired one is from the breaking of a wound or shaving or kiyy and so on.
The method of treatment for this acquired one is to break that broken part and separate its lips and put a thread between them so that it becomes free, and it is not appropriate to use in its treatment things that dry and contract.
If you perform this, the wound will return with greater severity than before, and it will be used for things that swell like barley and soaking in water that has been heated with honey, balsam, linen rags, and diachylon, which has dissolved with something from adhesive plaster, and it will be smeared with fat and treated with it.
And the way to treat it is to try every possible means to avoid adhering to the original form that it was in first, and this work that we mentioned is only a part of repairing the wound, not that the original form of the place should return as it was before.
The fourteenth chapter.
In the treatment of wounds that are in the lower jaw.
This wound that is from the bottom is called a "truth" wound and it is natural and it is superficial, and superficial wounds are from cuts or tears or cracks and so on.
The way to treat it is to take a needle in it with a double-threaded thread and to insert it into the flesh and to push it out from the left side to the right side until the thread comes out at both ends of the flesh, then to stretch the flesh upwards with the needle and to cut it with a wide scalpel.
If the shape of the wound returns to its proper form, and if not, then take a probe and place it on the deep side of the wound, and rotate it to open the wound in two places on the inner side of the wound, and make the edges of these two places at the angles of the cut you made until they meet, forming an angle. Until it becomes similar to this shape:
And it is the Greek letter "lam", then remove that flesh by the amount that the side of the wound is below what follows the wound, then gather the separated parts with two stitches, and sew them with a thread of silk, then treat it with the remedies we mentioned for relaxing and expanding until it heals.
And if the incision was made from a cut or stitch or suture, it is recommended to open a simple cut without hair of the eyebrows as well, on what was mentioned before, then separate the lips with expansion as mentioned.
And the general statement in the treatment of wounds is that if it is from above or below, then perform the procedure according to what is available to you from the shape of the wound, as there may be many differences in its appearance, and the skilled craftsman manages the situation in any way possible.
Until the shape is restored to its natural form or approximated, and the same disease indicates what is suitable for him from the work and instruments in most cases.
The fifteenth chapter.
In touching the corner of the eye with the lint or the horn.
This touching may expose many people to the idea of applying the upper corner of the eye with the whiteness of the eye to prevent it from easy movement and hinder its natural actions, so it is recommended to introduce a rod under the corner.
And raise it up or extend it with a thin rod, then cut the touching with a thin, delicate needle that is not sharp enough to cut the needle but rather like a thread, so that the patient does not feel pain when working, the needle does not tear the eye due to its sharpness, and your cut was to separate that touching.
And expect until if the corner returned to its natural form and the touching was completely released, then pour saltwater into the eye or dissolve some zinc in water, then separate the corner and the eye with a silk thread.
And place a poultice made of egg yolk on top of the eye, and after the third day use worn-out cotton until it is released.
Chapter Sixteen: Treatment of Wounds and Ulcers.
In the case of cuts to the finger and the meat of the cheek.
The finger is made up of two parts, either it is nerveless and resembles a hard, thin tendon, or it is not nerveless and resembles moist, white flesh if touched by iron or cut with a hammer, it will be severed.
And if a hammer was not used, both types will start from the largest part of the wound and gradually grow until they cover the eyeball and prevent light and movement of the eye. The work in cutting them is to place the hammerhead on your stone.
Then open his eyes and lift the eyelid with your hand, then take a small hammer and extend the finger over it, then take a needle and insert a hair from a horse or cow's tail and strong thread and twist the tip of the needle slightly and insert it into the middle of the finger.
Then push it with the needle and tie the finger with the thread, extend it over and scrape the side of the finger that follows the eyebrow as if you are spreading it with the hair to the other end, then cut the rest at the base of the wound with a fine saw or small knife and let the natural flesh of the wound remain.
To prevent the constant flow of tears, the eyelid is extended using only the needle or thread as we mentioned earlier, then the tip of the needle or thread is heated and its shape is shown.
To prevent the needle from touching the cornea, it is necessary to cut carefully and then apply a powdered salt or zanjabil (a sweet syrup) to the eye, leaving it for another day before treating it appropriately.
If the eyelid is not nervous and cannot be punctured or stitched, it is often treated with medication to heal as described in the previous section, and if you wish to cut it, open the eye of the patient.
Take a thin, blunt needle with a weak tip and place it on this shape: Gently pull the eyelid from above with a gentle tug, if you see that it is swelling and tearing, and the tugging has affected it, apply a powdered salt, red wine vinegar, or a sweet syrup to the eye for another day.
Then, perform the procedure again until all of it is gone, unless a hot, soft tumor appears in the eye, leave it and treat the hot tumor until it heals, then perform the procedure again with tugging until it heals.
If the stye is causing pain to the eye, it is painful indeed, then place that stye with the surgical needle and cut off a part of it, but do not overdo the cutting so as not to cause bleeding of the tears. Then pour the juice of red onions or garlic into the eyelids until it is cleansed.
The Seventeenth Chapter
On the removal of the eyelashes and what grows from the excess meat in the eye.
Some people have grown red meat in their eyes, thick enough to cover the viewer or approach or drip on the eyelids, and sometimes the eyelids turned outwards and resembled the cabbage of the cabbage tree.
The method is that the patient places his head on your stone and then opens his eyes and extracts all of that red meat with the surgical needles corresponding to that.
Or he grasps it with a cloth or a toothpick, then cuts the first piece of meat until it is all cut and saved from the eye so as not to hurt it during the operation, and your cutting for him is either with the hook we described in the removal of the stye or with a small knife. Like the one that is used to extract thorns according to its appearance in the chapter that follows this chapter.
If your incision has closed and all the wounds have healed, fill the eye with finely ground salt or apply a reddish powder and other alkaline drugs to it. Place a white egg yolk on the outside of the eye to protect the hot mass.
If there remains any of the wounds and blood dominates you, fearing that the hot mass will spread, leave the eye and treat it with what soothes the hot mass. Then return to it with the procedure until it is clean, and do the same with the excess flesh that appears in the eye from this kind.
However, it is advisable for you to avoid treating every weak eye by impression or exposure with ironwork and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that that organ is likely for that work.
The Eighteenth Chapter.
In the extraction of foreign bodies from the eye.
Foreign bodies are red threads that entangle in the eye, preventing vision and weakening the eye over time. Therefore, it is advisable for you to first examine it. If the eye with the foreign body is strong and there is no other disease besides the foreign body.
Then, when you extract it, command the patient to put his head on your stone and then tie those threads with one or two needles according to your discretion. The needles should be thin and sharp for this procedure:
And if there are two carpenters doubled up in one body, as shown in this image.
Then, using a fine needle, carefully draw out those sinews with gentleness and wipe the blood away bit by bit until you see the eye clear of them, and let the blood flow, and save the eye from being harmed by the needle's tips, and let your work be done in half a day under the sun.
And be very careful in your work lest you cut other than those sinews, so when you have finished, rub the green or red onion juice into the eye to let its strength eat away what remains of the splinters, for if you cannot remove all of it at that time, then dampen the eye with whatever soothes the pain of the eye.
And leave it for days until the pain subsides and the hot callus forms, then prepare again on it this work with your eye until that image of the needle is no longer painful to it.
And leave it [and the tip of the needle in a disciple's stone, and another to drain the tears and to remove the cataract from the front and back of the eye and you] the original in the work is to open the eye with fixed or triangular forceps that hold it gently.
And look and the tip of the needle in a disciple's stone, and another to drain the tears and to remove the cataract from the front and back of the eye and you [in the choice] begin by taking out from above the eye or from below it, and the first is to drain two needles in the upper eyelid, one at the end of the eyelash and the other at the beginning.
Then grasp it between the tongs and the forceps, then attach the snares from underneath their handles, then grasp it between the hook and the director and cut with a light, sharp knife until you see all the threads have risen, whether cut with a small or large needle.
Then pull the thread over the needle and remove all the threads until it rises above the suture, do not cut the drainage tube as the blood and pus will flow out on you.
Then cut with the needle any excess above and below until there is none left except in the ears, if possible, lift it from the ears with the forceps as it is best and may cause inflammation in some people.
If it has been cut, it will hurt for a few days, then apply heat and massage to relieve the pain, then repeat the operation on it.
Chapter 13
On the extraction of a tooth from the nose.
The physicians call the tooth in the nose a "nasur," if it has been treated with kaolin or harsh medication as previously described and has not healed, then there is no remedy except to cut into the tumor when it is ripe and extract all the moisture or pus from it.
Until the bone is exposed, if the bone is exposed and you see decay or discoloration in it, then cleanse it with this tool of its shape:
This is called the 'rough head' and it is made of Indian iron, with a rounded end like a needle. It has an engraving of the cold or the scalpel, engraved finely. Place it on the affected area of the bone, then rub it between your fingers until you feel that the decay has been removed.
Do this repeatedly, then apply the dry, holding medications to the area if it becomes closed and flesh grows in it and the bone is cut off and the time period has passed and it remained for forty days without any recurrence or damage or incident.
Know that it has been cleansed, otherwise there is no remedy except to return the drill to the nostril on this condition and it is that it exposes the bone again with iron or a sharp medication. If the bone is exposed, take a probe of this shape:
The tip of the iron is triangular and its base is curved towards the tip as you see, then place it on the bone itself and this is near the mouth and away from your eye a little, then move your hand with the probe until the bone pierces and you feel it through the eyelid.
If the wind blows and his hand is on his nose, at that moment he forces the position with dry retracting medicaments as you have been taught. If the flesh swells and the place hardens, then the material that was fixed outside returns to the nose, making it easier for the patient, God willing.
The Twentieth Chapter
In the treatment of the eye
If the eye is dislocated but there is no injury to the sight or defect, then it is appropriate for the patient to relax, then massage it in the temple, then place a warm compress on the eyelid without any condition and gently apply a soft ointment.
Then, she places a mixture of egg whites, saffron, milk, and zedoary on the eyelid with many benefits. The recipe for the benefits is to take a large amount of lime juice, then sieve each part of it through four cloths made from it in large quantities.
Then, she places one on top of the other on a container as much as the eye needs, then tightens it with a strong, stiff cloth and replaces the compress with the ointment without any condition. Then, she removes the compress and leaves the eye closed during the day and night.
If the suture relaxes during this period, it is recommended to tighten the sutures again after a day and night as we mentioned before. If the eye has returned to its normal position, then apply the ointment, compresses, and other necessary treatments until it returns to its normal state.
Chapter Twenty-Two.
In the removal of cataracts.
If a cataract appears in the lens and then disappears, causing the eye to become cloudy and distorting the person's appearance, and you wish to remove it, proceed as follows:
then insert a needle from below to above in the lens, and then insert another needle with a doubled thread from the side of the cornea, and withdraw it, leaving the first needle in place.
Then cut the position of the doubled thread and tie it around the needle with some lens, then tighten it, and withdraw the needle and apply a piece of clean cotton soaked in egg white to the eye until the threads and lens fall off, then treat the eye as necessary.
until the wound is healed, and the lens has been tightened from all sides with a circle of sutures until the eye becomes normal again, then gently remove a thin needle that reaches the corner of the eye to allow the clear fluid to flow out, and the eye will open and drain onto the ground, then tighten it until it is healed.
Chapter 22.
In the treatment of cataracts.
This disease, which is called cataracts, is nothing but a substance that gathers in the eye and resembles falling water, but there is none of it. The treatment for this involves placing the patient on a raised chair, then grasping their head from both sides.
Then move their head until you see the substance moving downwards in your eye, then stop and do not let it go, allowing light to pass through and the patient will be able to see things as they did before. If it does not move downwards, we know that it is water, but if it has not been prepared for descent as mentioned earlier.
Otherwise, place the patient between your hands, then take a thin needle and insert it slightly above the corneal sac, where the lens connects to the corneal sac in the eyelid until the substance is expelled.
Then rinse the eye with hot water mixed with honey or water boiled with marjoram and honey, then treat as usual until it is healed.
Chapter 23.
We mentioned the types of water in the section and which one is suitable for removal by clear, detailed explanation, so you should take it from there on the basis of health. Then, the patient should sit between your hands, facing the light, near the sun.
Correct the eyelid and close it tightly, then raise the inner corner of the eyelid with your left hand if it is the eye with water or with your right hand if it is the right eye.
Then place the tip of the needle near the eyelid with a sharpness equal to the whiteness of the eye from the smaller corner, then push the needle with force while you guide it with your hand until it reaches the whiteness of the eye and you feel that the needle has reached an empty space.
The depth that the needle should go into the eye should be equal to the distance from the edge of the eyelid to the black pupil, as the copper is seen in the same viewer as the clarity of the cornea, then the needle should be withdrawn above to the position where there is water.
Then press it down gently, if the water flows out of its place, the eyelid will see what has opened in front of it from its place and the needle is in the eye, then let it rest a little, if the water rises again, then lower it again without letting the needle come out.
If it has settled and the water has not risen, then gently remove the needle with your hand little by little, then dissolve a small amount of pure Andiran salt in water and wash the eye from inside, then apply all of it outside the eye, whether it is cotton or soft cloth.
We take red wool and white egg whites and tie it with a healthy eye, but as for us and our contemporaries, we place a finely grated common onion mixed with egg white on it, because if the hardness of the eye does not allow the entry of the onion, then it is not suitable for use. It is appropriate to take the balm that is called the "Brid" which has this image:
Then pierce it with the same needle, but do not overdo the piercing and it is only to place the applicator gently at a suitable place, then the applicator enters as mentioned, and when your work is complete, prepare for the one who will use it, a firm bed in a dark room.
And avoid all movements and from coughing, and make his food as soft as possible without moving his head to the left or right, and the bandage should remain on him until the third day, then remove it in that dark room and test his sight.
Then show him things, then remove the bandage on the seventh day and it is not appropriate to do this during treatment or after your meal but rather avoid it before the water rises quickly due to intense gaze.
If the tumor is hot, it is necessary to cauterize the eye before the seventh day and to treat it with what will soothe the tumor until it is soothed. Then, when it is soothed, you should cover his face with a turban that directs his eyes away from the dark place.
He should gradually leave the house and act in accordance with his reasons. Know that the cupping instrument is not dispensed with by the learner from observation, so when he performs the operation, I have heard that some Iraqis say that he makes a wide cupping instrument that absorbs water.
I have not seen anyone in our country make that, nor have I read about it in any of the early books, and it may be a recent innovation. This is an image of various types of cupping instruments that he can stand on due to his ignorance of them.
It is made of copper, especially, and its tip is sharp like a triangular point.
Chapter 24.
In the treatment of a foreign body in the nose.
Various types of meat may have become lodged in the nose, including something that resembles a tarantula with many legs, and some that are cancerous and tumorous, and some that are smooth and not tumorous.
The translation of the excerpt is: "If any part of this meat is lean and not tumorous, it is advisable to place it between your hands facing the sun, open its belly, and let the smith's hammer strike that part of the meat. Then, draw it out and cut off what you have reached with a sharp, thin knife from one side.
The translation of the excerpt is: "Until you know that all the meat has gone, if anything remains that you could not cut off, scrape it with a soft, sharp tool until nothing remains. If blood or a hot tumor overcomes you.
The translation of the excerpt is: "If it was suitable or from a tumorous source, quickly cut it off until the blood stops and all the meat is removed. Then, put your finger into the nose after cutting, with water or drink, if the nose opens and the moisture goes to the throat.
The translation of the excerpt is: "Know that it has been cleared, but if the moisture does not reach as expected, know that there is meat remaining in the uppermost bones that were not reached by the cutting tool. In that case, it is advisable to take a thread from a cloth with some thickness.
The translation of the excerpt is: "And make many knots in it and place a finger's worth or less between each knot, and the smith will insert the tip of the thread into his nose with a hook or whatever is available after making it like a needle, and draw its breath until it reaches the nostrils.
The thread is pulled out through the mouth and often young men do this action in books, it is a matter that is easy for whoever wants to do it, then both ends of the thread are gathered, one end which came out through the mouth and the other end which remained in the nose.
Then the meat is stitched with the knot in the thread, she does this until she knows that the meat has been cut by the knot of the thread then the thread is extracted and it remains in the nose after wiping the blood, a cloth which she drank from it in the Muslim country, she does this for three days or more.
Until the Muslim eats all that remains of the meat then the last thing in the nose is a bullet for days until it is removed, if he needs treatment she used that.
This is an image of the nasal speculum which is squeezed in the nose and the medicines.
He places from silver or brass resembling the small quill with its point open and its channel like that.
If you want to make the bullet closed like a gourd and smooth the point of the nasal speculum.
It has a handle at the end as you see he holds it with when heated fat or whatever you want from the essences or the slippery things.
Chapter Twenty-Five: Treatment of Wounds and Fractures
In the nasal septum at the tip of the nose.
Often, a polyp grows at the tip of the nose, becoming larger and worsening in appearance over time.
Therefore, it should be cut at its first appearance and all of it removed. Then, either a caustic substance or a burning medication that replaces the cauterizing effect should be applied to the site. If it is not cut early enough, it will grow larger and have less sensation.
Do not expose it to iron, as it is a cancerous tumor and I have seen many cases where cutting this tumor resulted in great benefit for its owner. However, if the tumor is smooth and has no change in color, I have seen that complete removal is possible. Thoroughly clean the area and cut it without hesitation or delay, then treat the site with something that dries and coagulates until it is completely healed.
Chapter Twenty-Six:
In suturing of the nose, mouth, and ear. If the connection of these parts is torn away from a wound or something similar, know that when such tearing occurs in any of these areas, the only work that can be done is in some people.
When presenting one of these cases, if the wound is sharp and bleeds profusely, it is recommended to gather the edges of the wound by suturing and then treat it until it heals completely. However, if the connection has been severed and each side has become separate, it is recommended to clean each side with a heated iron until it cauterizes.
Then, gather the edges of the wound by suturing and stitch them together, and apply a mixture of sulfur and salt on top of it, or any other type of spice mixed with salt. Leave it stitched for two or three days, then clean it.
Then, change the medication and leave it until the sutures dissolve on their own, then treat it with the spice until it heals completely. The method of suturing is to gather the separated parts either by needle as described in stitching the abdomen or by thread as you were explained here.
Chapter 22
In the extraction of the sutures that are present in the wounds.
Many people may have small hard lumps inside their cheeks that resemble the shape of a bean, some are smaller and some are larger. It is recommended to turn the cheek and cut each suture, then remove it with the forceps.
Cut it from all sides, then stuff the wound with a paste made of powdered honey after cutting, to stop the bleeding, and then soak it in water and salt, and treat the wounds with what is suitable until the incisions heal.
Chapter Eighteen.
On Cutting Excess Flesh in the Throat.
Often, excess flesh grows on the throat, which is called 'abulus'. It should be held with a snares or a cloth and cut at its root, leaving the wound to bleed or stop bleeding, then a paste made of powdered honey should be applied to the wound.
Or one of the dry gauzes, if that flesh returns after treatment, often it should be cut again and cauterized, for it does not return after that.
Chapter Nineteen.
On Extracting Teeth with Iron.
Hard, rough, and foul substances may gather on the surfaces of the teeth from inside and outside, and between the teeth, which may spread, become yellow, and turn green until it reaches decay in the gums and causes tooth loss for that reason.
The patient should sit between your legs, with his head on your stone, and remove the forceps and the tooth that appeared to you with the roughness and the substance similar to sand until nothing remains of it, and do the same with black, green, yellow, and other colors until you clean it.
If what is in it of the first wound dressing has gone, then repeat the dressing on another day and the second and the third until you reach your goal in what you desire, knowing that pressure requires various shapes of bandages according to the forms available for your work.
Because the bandage that is used to dress the wound from inside is different from the bandage that is used to dress the wound from outside and the bandage that is used to dress the wound between the ribs in another form, and these are several forms of bandages that you have prepared:
Chapter 30
In extracting teeth.
It is necessary to treat the wound from its pain with every possible means and avoid extracting it unless it is absolutely necessary, as it is a precious jewel until it is absolutely necessary to extract it.
If the patient insists on extracting it, then it is necessary to prepare until the wound is ready for extraction. Often, the patient is deceived by the pain and thinks that it is in the correct tooth, so he extracts it, but then the pain does not go away until the sick tooth is extracted, as we have seen this happening many times by dentists.
If the wound is ready for extraction by itself, then it is necessary to place a strong forceps around the tooth until it loosens from all sides, then move it with your fingers or with the gentle pliers little by little until it becomes loose.
Then, when he was able to stand with the help of the large dogs, his head between your thighs had already settled and was not moving. Then, apply pressure on stability to prevent it from breaking, if it does not come out, then take one of those tools and insert it underneath him from all sides gently and firmly as you did previously.
If the pressure is broken or decayed, it is appropriate to fill that break with a cauter and seal it with a good stopper made of a thin, flexible material so that it does not leak in the meantime, while you apply pressure on it with the pliers and it is appropriate to examine around the neck from all sides carefully.
Be careful not to break him completely so that some of him remains and returns to the injured part, which is better than the initial pain. And you should not do what ignorant surgeons do in their operations and rush into using instruments without following our instructions.
Many times, they cause great harm to people by breaking the pressure and all of its roots remain or some of them. And sometimes, they remove some of the jaw bones as we have seen many times, then they rinse it with water or saliva and salt, if there is bleeding from the site, often this happens, then suck out some of the blood and apply a piece of cotton to the site.
If the zajj does not benefit you, then use the claw-like instruments that move with the forceps. First, they should be long in length and short in the handle, thick so that they do not slip when gripping the forceps. This is the shape of the large claw-like instruments:
They should be thick in the handle so that they do not slip when gripping, short in length, made of good quality steel or iron with rough edges that fit into each other, forming a strong and tight grip.
The ends can also be made in the shape of a mold, which will also make them strong and well-controlled.
Chapter 23.
On the principles of the claws and extracting broken facial bones.
If the claw has broken, it is necessary to place a compress of smear on the area for a day or two until the area relaxes, then insert the pliers or claws. This is similar to the shape of its ends, like the beak of a bird called the pelican, and this is the shape of the claws:
They can be made like a mold or a screw. If they do not fit, it is necessary to carve the bone and remove all the flesh with a sharp instrument, then insert the small saw-like tool:
Short Stump is slightly thick and should not be carved to avoid breaking, as the original bone will break if carved in that way. Otherwise, use these other tools whose images are shown, the first one being a triangular shape with some thickness.
Another nice triangular image:
We can also use this tool with two pegs whose image is also shown:
And other tools and instruments mentioned in the book of bones, and we can also use this tool that resembles a large chisel whose image is shown:
A triangular shape with some thickness in the tip, so it does not carve and is not carved, and know that there are many tools for bones and also other tools that cannot be counted, and the skilled craftsman who knows his craft may invent tools according to what the work and diseases themselves indicate.
Because some diseases have not been mentioned for their tools due to the diversity of their types, if a bone from the jaw or one of the jaw bones rots, examine it in its place with whatever is suitable from these tools and files that were mentioned in extracting the originals.
We seek assistance from this drawing.
There should be some pressure applied to the bone to prevent it from slipping out until the bone is extracted, and we fix its position with appropriate medications. If the bone has pus that is flowing, remove it from its pus and dirt until it is clean, then treat it until it is healed.
Chapter 22.
In the transplantation of rooted teeth onto others.
If the teeth have grown on other than their natural root, this drawing is flawed, especially if it occurs in women and the weak, one should examine if the tooth has grown from behind another tooth.
And if it has not been successfully transplanted or if it has become loose, remove it, even if it is attached to another tooth, cut it off with this tool whose image is shown here.
And it resembles a small chisel and should be made of hard Indian steel with sharp edges, and you should cut it in many days for the strength of the tooth and to prevent damaging other teeth. If it is strong enough to be removed, remove it with a heat from an Indian furnace whose image is shown here.
All of it should be made of Indian metal with a sharp edge like a surgical needle, the tooth is cooled slightly in many days with care to prevent damaging the tooth so that it does not fall out, then it is softened and removed with some medications.
If a tooth has broken off from it, causing pain to the tongue upon speaking, it is advisable to cool it as well until the sharpness of that fracture disappears and it becomes level and smooth, without causing pain to the tongue or distorting speech.
The third chapter.
In the movable joints of the jaw with silver threads or gold threads.
If the upper teeth appear to be loose and move out of place due to a blow or fall, and the patient is unable to bite on anything without them falling out, and they were treated with constrictive medications but did not respond to treatment.
The solution in this case is to use a gold or silver thread, and gold is better because silver tarnishes and rots after some time, while gold remains unchanged forever, not exposing it to such things. The thread should be medium in thickness and tight enough to fit between the teeth.
The method of binding is to insert the thread through the correct teeth, then tie the ends of the thread between the movable teeth, one at a time or more, until the stitch reaches the correct tooth from the other side.
Then, re-stitch from the side you started from, gently and wisely, so that the tooth does not move, and tighten the thread at the roots of the teeth to prevent it from slipping. Then cut the ends of the silver thread with scissors, gather them together, twist them with pliers, and hide them between the correct tooth and the movable tooth.
If the tongue is not sutured, it should be left tied as it is, but if it has been dislocated or broken, stitch it with another thread and let it heal like this for a long time. This is the appearance of the tonsils and the arrangement of the plication in two stable teeth and two movable teeth as you see.
One or both of the teeth may fall out and be plicated as described, and remain in place. However, this is only done by a skilled craftsman who can shape a bone from a cow's shoulder into the form of a tooth and place it in the position where the tooth was originally located. And it is stitched as we mentioned, and it heals like this.
Chapter 40.
On the removal of the lingual frenulum that prevents speech.
This lingual frenulum may be natural, born with the human being, or it may be acquired due to a scar that has healed.
The procedure is to open the mouth and head of the patient on your stone, raise his tongue, then cut the nerve frenulum with a sharp instrument until the tongue is released from its hold. If there is some stiffness and complexity due to a healed scar, use a saw and cut it with a sharp instrument until the frenulum is separated and the plication is broken.
Be cautious if the wound is deep into the flesh, as it may cut a blood vessel there, causing bleeding. Then, clean the wound with rose water or diluted milk and cold water. Afterwards, place a piece of cloth soaked in vinegar under the tongue every night.
To prevent the wound from closing again, if there is bleeding, apply powdered charcoal to the area. If blood dominates the place, remove it with a clean, well-suited eyedropper. Then treat it with all other treatments until it is healed.
The fifth and thirty-third chapter.
In extracting the tooth that has grown under the tongue.
Under the tongue, a small tumor may grow that resembles a tooth and prevents the tongue from performing its natural function, or it may be bone until it fills the mouth. The treatment is to open the mouth of the patient facing the sun and examine the tumor.
If you see it like a white or black hard lump that the patient cannot feel, do not expose him to it, as it is cancer. If it is slightly white and has moisture, cut it with a sharp knife and remove it from all sides.
If blood overpowers you during your operation, apply a soft, powdered clay to it until the blood stops flowing, then resume your operation until you complete it, and then cleanse it with water and salt.
Then treat it with all appropriate remedies until it is cleansed.
Chapter Six and Thirty.
In the treatment of lupus vulgaris.
And what grows in the throat from all the tumors that may expose inside the throat glands similar to the glands that are exposed from outside, called lupus vulgaris, if treated with what was mentioned in the division, it did not cleanse.
If the tumor is hard and has little sensation, do not expose it to iron if it is red in color and its root is thick, also do not expose it to iron out of fear of bleeding, but leave it until it matures; either you remove it or it bursts from itself.
And if it is white and matted, and its root is thin, this is what should be cut, and the operation is to examine before the operation if it has completely healed or some of it has not healed.
Then, the patient should sit with his back to the sun and his head on your stone, and open his mouth and have a servant between your hands to press his tongue down with this tool: its picture is like this:
Create it from silver or copper, making it thin like a blade. If you place your tongue on it and the tumor becomes visible to your sight, take a needle holder and insert it into the loop, drawing it out so that it does not remove any of the surrounding tissue, except perhaps some of the swellings.
Then cut it with this tool, whose shape resembles a scissors, except that the tips of both are sharp and tightly fitted into each other's sockets, made from Indian iron or Damascus steel.
If you do not have this tool, then cut it with a pair of scissors, whose shape resembles this.
Sharp on one side and not sharp on the other, so after cutting one loop, cut the other in this manner, then after cutting, rub the wound with cold water or vinegar and water.
If there is bleeding, rub the wound with water that has been mixed with herbs such as Roman chamomile or asafetida or similar astringents until the bleeding stops, then treat it until it heals. Also, if there are other tumors in the throat besides the loops, cut them off as mentioned for cutting the loops.
A woman had a tumor that had grown inside her throat, causing difficulty in swallowing and almost blocking her throat. She was unable to eat or drink.
She was on the verge of death in a day or two, and the tumor had grown so large that it protruded from her nostrils. She immediately acted, using forceps to remove one of them, then carefully extracted a piece.
Then she cut it where she could reach through the nostril opening, and then repeated the process with the other nostril. She opened her mouth and pressed her tongue down, then used the forceps to remove more of the tumor, but only blood flowed out.
The woman's throat then improved, allowing her to drink water and eat again. They repeatedly removed pieces of the tumor over a long period of time until it was completely gone from both of them.
The tumor had grown inside her throat, but it stopped growing and eventually disappeared. She then left the place and I do not know what happened to her afterwards.
Chapter 73
In the Excision of Liver Abscess.
The one called 'grape' if a drop falls into the liver and becomes inflamed and was white and elongated, it is called 'column'. If it is thick at the bottom and twisted, it is called 'grape'. If treated with what we mentioned in the incision, it does not heal.
If you saw the inflamed mass has settled from it and was thin, it should be cut off. If there was none of it twisted and had no length and was dark in color or black or had no sensation, it should be avoided being cut.
In this case, there is a risk to the patient, so if you see it in the form of its whiteness and length, the patient should sit with his face towards the sun and have his tongue held by the instrument that was mentioned, then the surgeon should insert into the grape.
And it should be drawn down and cut with one of the two instruments mentioned in cutting the plums, and it should not be cut from it except what exceeds the natural state without addition, because if you cut more from it, it will cause more harm to the voice and speech.
Then after the cut, what we mentioned in cutting the plums is used and it is treated until it is clean. If the patient refuses to have it cut, then the trick should be used in its place without fear or concern, and the trick is only by the strong medicine which is to put the head of the patient on the stone.
Then, the tongue is grasped with the instrument mentioned earlier. Then, harsh water is taken from the type of water mentioned in the chapter on Kayy and it is mixed with it, not diluted, to make it neither too thick nor too thin. This mixture is then used to fill the mold of this instrument.
The tip of this instrument, where the medicine is placed, should have a size similar to that of a tablespoon. The instrument is then placed on the tongue itself, and the assistant holds the patient's head on the side to prevent saliva from entering the throat, which could cause harm.
Then, hold the medicine in your hand and grind it on the tongue for half an hour until it turns black and the sting of the medicine subsides. If you wish, you can crush cotton with a tablespoon and mix it with the medicine.
Then, insert the tablespoon with the cotton into a tube from above until the cotton sticks to the tongue. Repeat this process until you achieve the desired consistency of the grape. After three or four days, it will dissolve and disappear. If needed, you can prepare the medicine again.
After the grape, wipe around it with a cotton swab moistened in oil and remove any remaining medicine. Then, rinse with cold water and treat from outside with tapping and from inside with the use of a probe until it is clean. This type of treatment is safer and less frightening than surgery.
The prophet (PBUH) also treated leprosy with a method that is gentler than cauterization and cutting, which is done by boiling certain herbs such as frankincense, zaffran, safflower, saffron, shih, babuna, qaysum, and others in water.
Then, the pot is covered with a layer of clay and a hole is made in the middle of it. The silver or copper instrument is placed on this hole.
The part with the leprosy is then placed in the mouth of the patient until the steam rises to the leprosy through the tube. The leprosy is then boiled repeatedly until it disappears. Do not perform this treatment when the tumor first appears.
However, it is often the case that the tumor increases in size and it is only appropriate to perform this treatment when the tumor has softened and is hot. If you do not have this instrument, take a spoon and place a layer of egg white on its edge to prevent the patient's mouth from burning.
Because the layer of egg white prevents the steam from burning the mouth, which is a good treatment with safety.
Chapter 83
On the extraction of thorns and other foreign bodies from the mouth.
Often, a bone or thorn, large or small, or other foreign body, is found in the mouth. It should be removed if it is visible to the eye after the tongue has been grasped with an instrument under the sun.
To determine what is in the mouth and what has not been seen but has hidden in the mouth, it is recommended to rinse the mouth with water before eating so that the food does not enter the stomach, for perhaps the thorn or the person may swallow a piece of cloth or a sharp object.
Or he may swallow a piece of hard bread or take a piece of soft seaweed and wrap it around a thread, then swallow it. When it reaches the place of the thorn, quickly pull the thread out several times.
Often, the thorn or bone stuck in it and comes out. If it does not come out as mentioned above, use an instrument made of copper in this shape:
It should be thin at the tip and have a curve that the person can insert into their mouth by gently pushing it in while raising their head slightly to avoid causing coughing and pushing out the bone or thorn, or the doctor can insert it with their hand.
The introduction of the curved instrument is better for his knowledge of the position of the bleeding thing, and he pushes it downwards or pulls it up with the tool to above all that according to what is available to him until it comes out.
Chapter 93.
Removing the bleeding thing from the throat.
If you have treated the bleeding thing with what we mentioned in the division of treatment with drugs and it did not succeed, then look at the throat of the patient under the sun after you have pressed his tongue with the tool that was described to you.
If your sight falls on the bleeding thing, then pull it with a small forceps or with a sharp and firm hook if you cannot do so, then take a hollow iron rod and insert it into the throat of the patient near the bleeding thing, then insert an iron heated by fire into the hollow of the rod.
You do this repeatedly and the patient should abstain from water all day, then he takes a cold-filled gargling mouthful of water and opens his mouth with it and gargles with it without swallowing any of it and moves the water back and forth with his hand.
If the bleeding thing falls off on the spot if he feels the water, then if it does not come out as described, then the throat is bled with urine and with a solution of lime using the tool that was described in the book of the harem, do this repeatedly until it comes out.
The work of making incense involves taking a pot with a hole in the middle, covering it with a cloth, and placing the incense tool through the hole. The incense is then poured into the pot, and the mouth of the pot is sealed to prevent the incense from escaping until it is known that the incense has reached the desired level.
If the incense does not fall onto the altar, it is necessary to repeat the process and for the perfumer to endure thirst and eat salt and onions without drinking water until this arrangement causes the incense to be drawn from the throat when it falls upon it.
It resembles the kaliyap, as you see, except for this purification that enters the throat and its tip is like the beak of a bird with roughness from being cooled when it touches something without leaving it.
Another tool is used to hold the tongue, which is a wide iron ring that can cover the mouth. It is placed in the mouth standing on one side, and the mouth remains open without the perfumer's will or ability to remove it until it is lowered.
The method of the tool that opens the mouth according to this measurement with an eye.
Chapter Forty: On the Treatment of Wounds
In this chapter, we will discuss the treatment of wounds and their healing process.
There are many types of wounds, each with its own unique characteristics depending on the type of injury and the amount of moisture present.
The second type of wounds depends on the location of the body where the injury occurred, as each type of wound requires a different treatment method.
Some wounds should not be closed until they have fully healed and matured, while others can be closed even if they are still immature, such as those close to joints.
If a wound occurs near a joint and takes a long time to heal, it may damage tendons or nerves, causing damage to the joint itself or nearby important organs.
If you delay closing the wound until it has fully healed, you may damage the nearby important organs or cause infection to spread into the joint itself, causing severe damage.
When the tumor reaches a certain degree, it should not be left untreated. You must learn the time when the tumor has fully matured and is at its peak, along with the symptoms such as pain, fever, loss of color, bruising, and swelling of the tumor and other signs.
It is recommended to expect the tumor to erupt from a lower or less dense part of the body, if possible, to facilitate its drainage downwards. The eruption should be towards the length of the body if the tumors are near the hands and feet.
The locations of muscles, tendons, nerves, and vessels should be considered in all horizontal positions without any obstruction. If the tumor is in fleshy areas, it is better to leave the eruption.
Until its maturity, as we mentioned earlier, if you erupt it before that, the drainage of the pus from it will be prolonged and cause much harm and discomfort, and sometimes it may harden and scar. Some tumors may need to be erupted on the surface of the body or according to what is needed by the affected organ.
For small tumors, a single incision should be made, and for larger tumors, a wide or multiple incisions should be made according to the size of the tumor. Some tumors may need to be cauterized if they have become like an ulcer.
The excerpt reads: "It has been found in some cases that the condition is similar to what is shown in many of the diagrams and secrets, including those with a narrow path with three turns, and those that are cut in the shape of a paper fan, like the Arabic script.
The excerpt reads: "And among them are those that use the straight path and the crescent-shaped path, and others like them from the paths, and if it does not have a head like flat smooth tumors, it is recommended to cut a simple incision only, and if the tumor is large and has collected for a long time and its base has become wide, it is recommended not to rush to remove it all at that time.
The excerpt reads: "But rather, remove some of it and then tighten the tumor for another day, then remove some more of the pus, doing this repeatedly until all of it is removed.
The excerpt reads: "Especially if the patient is weak or a pregnant woman or a small child or an elderly person, the vital spirit often disperses with the removal of the pus in large amounts, and sometimes the patient dies while you are not aware, so be very careful of this door.
The excerpt reads: "After cutting these tumors, it is recommended to clean the wound and look at it, if the incision of the tumor is small or the path was simple, use the felt from cotton or camel hair, and if the tumor is large and there were many paths.
It is necessary to insert a thread into every section until they meet each other, even if the tumor has been cut from the skin or made raw. It is necessary to stuff it with balm cotton or dry cotton wool and bandage it on the third day.
Then, it is removed and treated with the appropriate remedies until it is completely cleaned, if there is a sign of bleeding during your work, use cold water and vinegar after drinking them, and carry a piece of cotton wool on the bleeding spot repeatedly.
If the bleeding continues, it is necessary to use the methods and treatments and remedies that we have mentioned in many places of this book and in the chapters, if you are in the winter season and the tumor is in a place rich in nerves, it is necessary to warm the remedies with hot drink and oil.
And place them on the spot, and if you are in the summer and the spots are fatty, it is necessary to carry the remedies with cold water or drink and oil or drink and oil, all of this cold until the third day as we mentioned, then it is necessary to remove the tumor and wipe it.
And use what is suitable for its treatment until it is completely cleaned, this is what you need to know about the treatment of tumors in general, and as for the detailed method, we have mentioned how to treat each tumor briefly.
Chapter 40.
On the treatment of tumors appearing on the scalp.
Tumors appearing on the scalp can be small and are of various types, some of which are like chicken fat and have different moisture levels, some being dry and others resembling honey.
And some have a moisture level like porridge and soup, and so on, and some are hardened and all of them pose no risk when cutting and removing them unless a blood vessel obstructs.
The work in cutting them is to first cleanse them with the tool that resembles its shape, after which the tool called 'Madas' is used until you know what it contains. If it contains moisture, then cut it lengthwise and simply along this shape:
Start cutting from the line ~b~ to the line ~j~. If the moisture is released, remove the bag that contained that moisture and cut it all, leaving nothing behind. Often, if something remains, it will return.
Then soak a cotton swab in the pure camphor, if available, or in salt water and fill the wound with it and leave it for another day as it eats what remains of the bag. Then prepare it again with camphor twice or three times if necessary.
Until it is certain that nothing remains of the sac, at which point the wound was treated with cauterization until it healed, and if the tumor contained a silk cloth, it was cut open according to this image.
Then he pushed the probe into the wound's lips and removed it from all sides, exerting effort to extract the splinter that contains it, if a vein obstructs you, then do as you were told, and likewise, do the same in the tumor if it is sharp-edged from the probe.
The treatment is as mentioned, and cutting into the sharp-edged tumor is easier because it has little blood and moisture, and some of these head tumors have no moisture with them at all, and this is because I cut into a tumor in...
the head of an old woman, and the tumor was like a hard, smooth, white stone that could not be broken even if someone hit it with something, and none of the other head tumors were like this except those found in the heads of young boys.
And at the roots of the ears, he cut it all with a simple cut, and removed its bottom to make it easier for the material to flow downwards, then he treated it with whatever treatment was appropriate for it.
The Second and Forty Chapter.
In the section on cutting open abscesses that appear in the neck, it often appears that these tumors appear in the neck and under the armpits and in the arms and may also appear in other parts of the body. The one that appears in the neck is usually one and many, and some grow from others.
Each abscess has its own specific cavity inside it, just like the ones in the body and head tumors as we described, and there are many types of these abscesses, some of which are calcified, some of which contain fluids, and some of which are foul and do not respond to treatment.
Whatever I have seen of its appearance was good, and it moved in all directions, and it was not adhered to the neck nerve or the plexus or vein or artery, and it was not gangrenous. It is appropriate to cut it open from above downwards on the body in this way, from line ~j~ to line ~b~.
And to clean it from all sides and extend the skin flaps with a spear or two spears or many sponges, as we said in head tumors, and extract it little by little, and let it be on the neck so that it does not cut a nerve or a tendon, and let the drainage not be too sharp.
Do not increase your hand in cutting or strain the patient, so if you have to cut something that is not necessary to cut, it will cause damage such as cutting an artery or vein and preventing you from working, then place in the wound a soft, moist cloth or some antiseptic powder that stops bleeding.
Press the wound and leave it until the tumor's sharpness subsides and the wound relaxes and is protected from putrefaction, as blood stops flowing at that time, then return to your work until you finish, then examine with your little finger if there is any remaining, then cut and clean other smaller pieces.
If there is a large artery in the offal, it is not advisable to cut those offal from their origin but rather it is advisable to tie them with a strong double thread and leave them until they drop from themselves without harm, then pack the wound with cotton soaked in the Egyptian mummia and treat it.
If you have cut all the offal, it is advisable to gather the edges of the wound and suture them immediately after knowing that there is no remaining piece of the bone.
It is advisable to cut for its origin and flatten it and use sutures as mentioned, and what we have said about the offal that contains moisture should be dried with a simple cloth where you can see the position of its dryness and place the cloth below as we have said.
Then, after using the falcate knife, you use the Egyptian probe and similar instruments to remove any remaining decay until you see that the wound is clean, then treat it with probes made of heated iron until it becomes clean.
The thirty-third chapter.
In the region of the hypochondriac, for a tumor that occurs inside the throat.
They mentioned this region in the hypochondriac, and I have not seen anyone in our country who has done it, and this is their tradition. As for the butchers, it is appropriate for them to avoid this region because they do not benefit from it.
Because all the orifices and lungs are inflamed, and those who have a hot tumor in the mouth, throat, or lungs, if there is no obstacle in the gallbladder, it is necessary to use the region of the hypochondriac to avoid the obstruction that can cause choking.
If we want to do this, it is appropriate to incise the hypochondriac under three circles from the gallbladder circles or four small incisions in between two circles, as much as the incision in the pericardium and not in the bursa, and this position is appropriate for the incision.
Because it is devoid of flesh and blood vessels are far from it, if the surgeon is careful, he should extend the skin of the neck with a hook and then incise the skin until he reaches the gallbladder, avoiding any blood vessels if he sees anything from them.
Then, he makes an incision in the area we described, and he locates the opening of the salivary gland from which it emerges along with what was torn and the cause of the interrupted sound and leaves the wound open for a certain period of time. If the time passes and there is no fear of suffocation, then he gathers both sides of the wound together from the skin.
Then, he makes an incision by himself without the use of a probe, and then he uses medications that cause the flesh to grow back until it becomes clean, said the author of this book, interpreting the meaning of this statement: if they saw that the patient had closed the opening with one of these tumors that were mentioned.
The patient died and they thought that he had suffocated, so they went to the opening of the diaphragm for the patient to breathe in a small amount of air and to escape death. However, they only ordered to leave the wound open until the illness was cured and it took three days or more.
Then, they ordered to sew the wound and treat it until it becomes clean, which I have seen myself: a servant took a needle and stitched her lung, cutting off some of the rib. Then, she was treated for her illness and found that the wound was healing as if it were a slaughtered animal.
Found blood flowing from the wound easily, I concluded that it was not a vein or an artery, as the wind was coming out of the wound. I cleaned and dressed the wound until it healed completely, with no further complications.
After several days, she returned to her best condition, from which we can conclude that there is no danger in piercing the diaphragm.
Chapter 40.
Regarding the incision into the tumor that appears in the liver from outside and is called the "tumor of the liver.
This tumor called "tumor of the liver" is a large mass on the body and is common in women, occurring in two types.
The natural one has no treatment, while the external one occurs in two forms: one resembling a skin lesion and the other resembling a tumor caused by blood vessel complications, with danger in its incision. Therefore, it is not appropriate to incise it with a sharp instrument unless it is small and has been squeezed and examined with a probe, in which case it resembles a skin lesion and is not connected to any veins, so it can be incised like the lesion. She is extracted with what is contained within her pouch if she is in a pouch, otherwise all of her is inspected, then the affected area is treated with appropriate treatment.
Chapter 45.
In the section on types of goods.
There are many types of goods and all types have been mentioned in the classification. It is necessary to inform here about the difference between a commodity and a crop, as it is confusing. I say that a crop comes with heat, sweat, and severe pain until the praiseworthy boiling calms down. And then the corruption completes, so fever and hardness settle in, while a commodity does not have heat, sweat, or pain, and it is contained in a bag of silk, which has its own covering and is of the color of the body, starting as a bean and becoming like a lentil, larger and smaller.
She is of two types, either shriveled or moist, and the colors of moisture are many as mentioned in the classification. If you come to treat a commodity, it should be cleaned and inspected first with the tool called the maddas on how it appears in the chapter that follows this one.
Measure the size of the tumor, then extract the pus and observe what comes out in its wake. If moisture of any color emerges, split it into simple layers as mentioned for other tumors. But if no moisture comes out after extracting the pus, know that it is a scab.
Split it into simple, firm layers as mentioned in the image, and tie it with silk threads. Peel off the skin from all sides gently and preserve it in a jar if possible to remove it intact with the tumor.
If the jar breaks during work and you cannot remove it intact, often it is shown that way. Then cut it into pieces until nothing remains of it. For if anything remains, it will either be small or numerous, as the tumor usually returns to its former state.
If it overwhelms you and a small part remains, clean the wound with sharp emetics when you have free time and tighten the wound by placing something that can accommodate the hot tumor on top of it. Then treat it with all other treatments until it is cured. If the tumor is large, cut its sides and treat it with what melts.
If a harmful or non-harmful splinter appears and shows bleeding, first clean the wound with fine powder and leave it tightened for two or three days until the wound becomes suppurated and the blood coagulates, then return to cutting off what remains of the tumor.
Chapter 64.
In the depictions of instruments.
The ones that work in the head and neck are depictions of cautery irons, which are three kinds of them: large, medium, and small.
Depiction of a large cautery iron.
Depiction of a medium cautery iron.
Depiction of a small cautery iron.
They are made of iron with square ends to quickly enter the tumors, these are depictions of forceps and are called the pincers, which are also three kinds: large, medium, and small. Depiction of a large forcep.
Depiction of a medium forcep.
Depiction of a small forcep.
They are used to probe tumors and surgeries and sinuses and cavities for what is inside them of bones and other things, they are made of a needle with a silk thread that is smooth like a needle from Chinese silver or spadroon or copper or iron or silver, and the best of them is what is made from silver.
They are also made of lead and used to probe sinuses that have inflammation in them to bend it to straighten it, and this straightening is also three kinds: long, medium, and short.
The size of the probe should be according to the capacity and narrowness of the nasal cavity, like a hook made from large lead.
A medium-sized hook made from lead.
A small hook made from lead.
There are many types of nasal specula due to their simplicity or complexity. Simple ones have one hook and are classified into three types: large, medium, and small. Complex ones include blind nasal specula, which are classified into three types, and nasal specula with multiple hooks. And there are three types with three hooks, and all of these need to be used in their respective places. A simple large nasal speculum is shown. A medium-sized simple nasal speculum. A small simple nasal speculum.
A large blind nasal speculum. A medium-sized blind nasal speculum.
A small blind nasal speculum.
A large nasal speculum with hooks. A medium-sized nasal speculum with hooks. A small nasal speculum with hooks.
Picture of a large carpenter with three saws.
Picture of a carpenter in the middle with three saws. Picture of a small carpenter with three saws.
These are the three types of scalpels used to cut and scrape wounds and tumors, namely large, medium-sized, and small. Picture of a large scalpel.
Picture of a medium-sized scalpel.
Picture of a small scalpel.
The edges of the scalpels are limited, while the other ends are not. This is done so that they can be used to scrape wounds without fear of cutting skin or nerves. They provide some relief from the burning sensation felt during the scraping of tumors.
These are the three types of forceps, namely large, medium-sized, and small. Picture of a large forceps.
They are made of brass that is partially covered in a thin layer of silver. At one end, there is a wide, two-tiered spoon with a hidden serrated edge resembling the beak of a bird, which can be extended into and out of the instrument as needed.
Translation of the excerpt: "Images of calluses that grow between the fingers, at the base of tumors, which the patient does not feel, and there are three types for it, large, medium, and small, a large callus image:
Translation of the excerpt: "Images of bandages that are used to stop bleeding, and there are three types for it, large, medium, and small, a large bandage image:
Translation of the excerpt: "They are made of copper or porcelain, lengthened slightly as you see, and they are smooth, it is appropriate for you to have these types of bandages, large and small, to stop bleeding quickly when necessary, and when there is no medication available.
Translation of the excerpt: "However, they should not be used to stop bleeding in every part of the body, but rather only in fleshy areas such as the thigh muscles, buttocks, arm muscles, chest, abdomen, and other wet fleshy organs.
Translation of the excerpt: "And they can be made into other small tools that resemble the scales of a date palm on these images:
Cut the artery if it bleeds from the site of the incision or when cutting a muscle or vein. It can be used to make a ligature as shown in this image.
Chapter 74.
In the treatment of male breasts.
Some people's chests may swell and resemble female breasts due to certain conditions, which can become unsightly. If one dislikes this, it is recommended to incise the chest with a crescent-shaped incision in this manner.
From line ~b~ to line ~g~. Then remove all the pus, then fill the wound with the salted mummia, then suture both sides of the wound and treat it until it heals. If the chest moves downwards and relaxes towards the bone as it does in women.
It is recommended to incise its upper sides with two crescent-shaped incisions that resemble a crescent moon, connecting each one to the other at their ends so that the larger incision encircles the smaller one as shown in this image. Then remove the skin between the two incisions, remove the pus, and use the suturing and drainage methods as mentioned earlier until it heals.
If you do not understand what needs to be cut, cut it because of the patient's anxiety or before bleeding occurs, it is appropriate to stuff the wound with cotton soaked in the strongest vinegar and leave it until it consumes the remaining skin tissue, then treat it until it heals.
The Eighth and Fortieth Chapter
In the tumors that appear under the armpit
These tumors that appear under the armpit are of the hard type, which contain a bag and some of which contain fluids, so if it did not contain fluids, it is appropriate to make a crescent-shaped incision in this shape.
From the ~b~ line to the ~j~ line, if all the contents of the tumor have been removed, stuff it with cotton and leave it until another day, then remove the cotton.
And treat it with the appropriate vinegar until it heals, if the tumor is of the type of knots, cut it as we mentioned in the cutting of knots, whether it extends to the extent that the wound reaches the flesh, use the kiy on what we mentioned earlier.
The Ninth and Fortieth Chapter
In the cut of the tumor that appears before the artery or vein and is called aneurysm
If the artery and the vein are cut and the skin above them is torn greatly, much of that which is exposed may show a wound and also a tumor, and likewise it may show exposure to the vein that it may show inflammation and a tumor.
The signs by which one knows if the tumor and inflammation are from before the artery or from before the vein, the tumor if it is from before the artery, it is rectangular and united in depth of the body, and if you push the tumor with your finger, it feels like it has a ridge.
And that which is from before the vein, the tumor is spread on the surface of the body, and cutting into these tumors is dangerous, especially if it is in the thigh and the calf and the neck and in many places of the body and they are very large, it is appropriate to avoid treating them with iron.
And that which is also in the limbs or in the head, it is appropriate to avoid, and if it is from inflammation of the artery, cut a deep cut in the skin lengthwise then open the cut with needles then remove the artery and clean it from impurities.
Until it is opened then enter a needle underneath it and let it out to the other side and close the artery with a double-stranded thread in two places as you were taught about the two arteries in the section of the arteries that are in the girdle then scrape the position between the stitches until all the blood comes out.
The tumor is removed, then the treatment that produces milk is used until the scales fall off, then it is treated with appropriate cowhides until it is cleansed.
If the tumor has previously split the vein, it is appropriate to hold as much of the tumor and skin as possible with your hand, then insert a needle from the position you held and drain it, and in it there is a double-threaded thread until it exits from the other side. Then tie the tumor firmly as you were told for tying the grape from both sides with the end of the thread, if you are afraid that the threads will slip, then insert another needle with another thread under the whole tumor at the intersection of the first needle.
Then tighten the threads in four places, then cut the tumor in the middle until what comes out comes out, cut the skin flap and leave what was attached to it, then apply a poultice that has been soaked in a drink and oil. Then use the treatment that is with the plaster and appropriate cowhides until it is cleansed.
The fiftieth section.
In the tumor that is exposed from the spinal cord.
As the tumor is exposed in the vein and artery, so the tumor is exposed in the nerve if it occurs in it with a blow or if it occurs due to extreme fatigue or similar, and it is more of that in the positions of the temples and the back.
In every location where the joints move and it is a suppurating mass resembling the color of the rest of the body, and in most cases without pain, but when pressed heavily, the patient feels a sensation similar to a fever, and the tumor is not concentrated deep within the body.
Rather, it is beneath the skin and moves in all directions, not towards the front or back, so if it is in the joints, it is not appropriate to expose it with iron, as it may have caused a wound at some time, and if it is in the head or forehead.
If the skin is cut with a lancet, if the tumor is small, grasp it with forceps and cut it from its source, and if it is large, tie it with a ligature and incise it, then remove it and suture the wound by stitching and treat it until it heals.
Chapter 50.
On the incision of the spleen that is exposed in the abdomen.
It may have been exposed many times to some people in their abdomens and in other bodies, called the fetid spleen due to its resemblance to mushrooms, its origin is thin and its head is thick, it has transformed into many small ones and there are also large ones.
The excerpt describes a case where a man had two cysts in his abdomen that resembled mushrooms, with white, thin walls that had become thick and cracked, and constant moisture leaking from them. The cysts were then cut off and weighed, with one being around 18 ounces and the other around 60 ounces.
The operation to remove them involves examining first, if the walls are moist and the color of the cysts is white and wet with a thin original texture, then cut it with a wide-bladed knife and place it in a bowl of hot water, as often blood gushes out when cutting.
If blood overwhelms you, squeeze it, if the walls are loose and flimsy and you see the cysts are thin and fragile and fear cutting with iron, take a strong copper wire and tie the cyst, leaving it for two days then add more tightening to the wire so it continues to tighten.
The more you press on the cysts until they rupture and fall off by themselves without delay, if the cysts are thick in texture, then cutting them may cause some fear and anxiety, especially if they were in the abdomen, but it may be possible to cut half of it or part of it.
Then, bandage it so that it does not recur, then treat it until the wound is healed, and be careful not to expose it to a cut of Thallous, which is like the color of the skin, has little sensation, and is ugly in appearance. Indeed, it is a cancerous tumor, and we will mention the cancer after this.
The second chapter and fifty-five.
In the treatment of the cancerous tumor.
Cancerous tumors can occur from many causes, either from the rupture of a pus-filled abscess on the abdomen that exits through it, or from blood that emerges from a vein or artery, or from wind that enters it.
If it is before the rupture of the abscess and the exit of the pus, then the tumor's color will be similar to the skin's color, and it will have little pain, and it will appear in different conditions. And if it is before the exit of the pus, its condition will be more varied than what we described. If you press it with your fingers, it will disappear and then return, and sometimes it has a rough texture and becomes very large at the time of entering the bath and severe fatigue, but if it is before the moisture, then it will have little pain.
When you have cauterized it with your hand and it does not increase nor decrease, if it was before blood, then it will appear as a dark tumor, but if it was before flesh that had grown, then the tumor will be hard and solid, and it will stick to one surface.
If it was before the wind, then its touch was smooth, and the treatment for that is to look at it, but if it was from blood of an artery or vein or wind, then it is better to avoid treating it, as there is fear and harm in that, as I have mentioned to you in the chapter where I spoke about tumors that occur from arteries and veins.
If it was from the mesentery or the omentum, then it is better to command the patient to hold himself and stand still, then learn about the mesentery around the tumor completely. Then command him to lie down on his back with you behind him, then apply a wide bandage around the tumor at the place where you learned about the mesentery, then extend the middle of the tumor above with a large needle, then tie the place of the bandage with a strong silk thread or linen thread tightly.
The knot of the tie should be loose, then open the middle of the extended tumor above the tie and insert your index finger into it, and look for the mesentery, if you find that it has been taken by the tie, then loosen the knot and push the mesentery inside the abdomen, and if it is the omentum, then extend it with a bandage.
Cut off its ligament, if it resists you with a vein or an artery, seize it firmly and return to your work, then take two needles and insert them into the hemostats you made around the tumor, making two loops, and then tie the tumor in four places with the needles.
If you wish, remove the needles and leave the position until the wounded flesh rots and falls off from itself or cut it if it swells and rotten, then treat it with whatever is appropriate from the sutures until it heals, for if it is a wound that has become infected with rotting flesh.
or from moisture, it is appropriate to compress the tumor as we said and extract the blood or moisture that you find in it, then treat it with whatever sutures fit the position.
The third and fiftieth chapter.
In the treatment of cancer.
We mentioned in the previous section that we have discussed types of cancer and how to treat them with drugs and warned against treating it with iron so as not to cause inflammation, and we mentioned cancer that develops in the uterus and warned against treating it.
The ancients said that if the cancer was in a place where it could be removed entirely, such as cancer that is in the breast or thigh and so on from the organs that can be removed by extracting it all at once, especially if it was small and new, but if it had spread and was large, then it is not appropriate to approach it.
Indeed, I have not been able to remove it from anyone and have not seen anyone else who has achieved this, and if one is skilled in this work as we have mentioned, it is recommended to advance the sutures from the black thread to the yellow thread, then to reduce them if they are found in the artery filled with blood.
Then, the sutures are set in a way that allows work to be done in them, then they receive the sponge-like tissue that is suitable for him, then they are sealed from all sides with the skin, on examination until nothing of its roots remains and do not cut it quickly.
But, press the sites and suck all the thick blood with your hand or with whatever tools you have, for if it obstructs you in the work, there will be a great flow of blood from cutting an artery or vein until the blood is stopped, then treat him with all other treatments until he is removed.
Chapter 45.
In the treatment of tumors.
We have informed you in the division of types of eschar and how to combine the water and signs of each type and treatment with drugs, which is only treated by iron alone, not approaching the type of tuberculosis and not the type of fleshy.
If it is a fracture, if you have treated this type of bone break with medications and it has not responded to your treatment, then look because if the cause is that the bone has reached its weakness or there is another disease like it.
If it is cough or diarrhea and the like, then do not treat him with iron, for it is harmful. If you see that the cause is that the bone is very strong and there is no other disease except the bone break alone and he is not a child nor an old man, then direct the work in him that you make the cause stand upright between your hands. And a servant behind him is rubbing his belly with his hands and pushing the water down towards the side of the pain, then you take a sharp knife on this shape:
limited in two directions long and defined at the tip like a knife, but it has some rust little so that it does not pass through to the intestines during work and cause him harm, then look if he is producing the bone from the side of the intestines.
It is appropriate that you remove it from the side of the ribs three fingers down from its heel over the pain, if he is producing the bone before the liver disease, then your cut should be from the side of the ribs three fingers, if he is producing it before the spleen disease, then your cut should be on the right side three fingers.
It is also important that the cut should not be on the side where the patient intends to lie, lest the folly lead to that weak spot, then pierce all the skin with the instrument, then insert the instrument into that crack and raise your hand.
Between the skin and the bone, as if you are scraping it, and the amount you scrape is the size of a thorn or similar, then pierce the bone until the scraped area reaches an empty spot, which is the water spot, then extract it and insert the instrument, whose image is shown.
It is similar to a tube made of thin silver, which is made of copper or silver or asbestos, smooth and polished, with a small hole at the bottom and three holes on the sides, two from one side and one from the other, as you see.
He may place its tip on a flat surface like the back of a pen in this image.
At its upper tip, there is a ring. If the instrument reaches the water, he will pour from his cup onto the instrument, then it will sway in the water at a moderate rate because if you swayed more than necessary in the time, it might cause the patient to die due to animal instinct.
The patient is shown a deception that is close to death, but he is stirred from it according to his strength and what indicates to him the state of the sick person from the force of his pulse and from the beauty of his complexion, then the instrument is withdrawn and the water is stopped and this is because it is retained from its time.
Due to the skin that holds the puncture that is on the needle that you informed me to remove it from that position, then the instrument is reinserted another day if the sick person seems likely for that.
Also, it is withdrawn from the water in a small amount and do this for several days while you are on watch and retain from the waste until there remains only a small amount of water, if the sick person becomes lighter and left a large amount of water, then treat him by burying in hot sand.
And the excessive sweating in the bath and the sun, and endure him from thirst and treat him with dry medicines until he is cleansed, and he should be fed on the stomach, liver and spleen after the water is extracted as you mentioned in what preceded.
Chapter 55.
In the treatment of children who are born and positions of urine from them not pierced or the puncture is narrow or in a wrong position.
Some boys may exit from their mother's womb and abdomen without any injury, it is recommended to make the first incision as soon as they are born.
With a very sharp knife on this image:
Then, insert a thin copper wire into the incision and secure it with a knot, leave it for three or four days. When you want to urinate, retract it, and if you do not use copper, it is possible that the urine passing over the area may block it.
And as for the one who has a narrow incision, it should be treated with copper for many days until it widens. Those who have the incision in the wrong place, such as those who are born and the incision is at the end of the abdomen, cannot urinate downwards.
Until he raises the intestine with his hand above and does not urinate before the menstruation reaches the womb, which is a very bad situation, and the solution for this is to lie on his back.
Then, extend his abdomen with your left hand a great distance and clean the intestine's head with a comb or a very sharp knife like you are drawing a line, so that the incision falls in the middle, like a groove.
When performing surgery, if you encounter a lot of bleeding, treat it by using something that stops the blood flow and then dress the wound until it is completely healed.
Chapter 56
In the part that is exposed in the gum, the crown, the neck, and the root decay and the touch of the gum to the crown.
This part is often exposed in the mouth and it is a soft tissue that can be either harmful or not harmful. If it is not harmful, it should be tied with a fine thread.
Then cut it completely to clean it all, then apply a cotton ball soaked in Egyptian mummia on it, then treat it afterwards with the Naphta oil until it is completely healed. If the part is harmful and has a yellowish color, it should be treated with Kii after cutting and drying it.
If the part is in the gum and has not been cleaned, some of the part is inside the gum and some is outside. It is recommended to remove the part inside first until it disintegrates, then treat it from the outside.
Because if you treat them together, the gum may not be cleaned, and it may also be exposed in women and in the gum decay and rot. It is recommended to remove all that has decayed and to prevent further decay or to treat any decay that already exists.
Then, apply honey on it after that with crushed cardamom shells and pomegranate kernels. Then, treat him with all the treatments until he is cured. If there is an open wound bleeding, use a kaya bandage with halal gauze on this shape:
The kaya is beneficial for both cases, meaning bleeding and wound if it has decayed. If the pearl dissolved and its poison went into a vein at any time, it should be inserted with a tube of mercury nitrate on it. As for the contact of the glove with the pearl.
This contact only occurs in someone whose glove was correct and had not been required to change and may have been exposed to a wound or tumor before, it should be scraped with a sharp knife until the bandage dissolves and the pearl is removed from all sides.
If it is difficult to distinguish it from the inquiry, it should be scraped something from the pearl and from the glove, because the glove is thin, perhaps it has been pierced for its smoothness quickly, then separate between the glove and the pearl with a fine silk thread that has been boiled in cold water so that it does not stick either.
Then he treats with a drink that causes the bone to soften until it dissolves.
Chapter 75.
In the purification of boys and treatment of what they expose themselves to from sins.
The separation of the testicles is not something other than the division of the connection, like all surgeries, except that when we do it with our own will and use it in boys especially, it is necessary to draw the best work in it.
And the easiest way to safety, I say that the early ones did not mention the separation in anything of their books because it was not used in their rituals, but rather it is what we have acquired.
By experimentation, and that I found the majority of craftsmen and circumcisers using purification with a razor and a thorn and using the clamp and the tie with a thread and cutting with a pair of scissors, I have tried all these forms.
I did not find better than the purification with a razor and the tie with a thread because the purification with a razor often causes the skin to peel off because the skin of the foreskin is double-layered, so if you cut the upper layer, the lower layer remains.
It forces to cut again and it hurts, and the purification with the clamp does not match cutting the tip of the penis because it may have entered its hole, and as for the purification with a thorn, it may have pierced the skin and spoiled your work or the boy's skin was short by nature.
Often, they are born like this and do not require circumcision, as I have seen. However, the experiment has revealed to me the benefit of circumcision because the cut from above is like the cut from below.
When your hand cuts the incisions in accordance with the measurements, in one time, it will result in the tip of the thread being almost like a wall for the skin of the abdomen from all sides, without any mistake falling upon it. The work begins by imagining the child.
Especially if he understands a little that you only tie the thread in his abdomen and leave him until another day, then make him happy and secretly do everything possible to please him with his understanding, then stop him between your hands raised high.
He should not be sitting and hide the knife in your pocket or under your foot, so that the child's eye does not fall on the button or anything from the machines, then insert your hand into his abdomen and blow on the skin and cut it until the head of the abdomen comes out.
Then clean him from what gathers in him, then tie the taught position with a double thread, then tie below it a second tie, then hold your thumb and the index finger of the other hand as a good grip and cut between the ties. Then lift the skin quickly and extract the abscess head, then let a little blood flow as it is better and less likely to cause recurrence of the abscess. Then clean it with a moistened rag, and sprinkle some powdered charcoal from a burnt oven on it, as I have tried it and found it very beneficial.
Then lift the skin quickly and extract the abscess head, then let a little blood flow as it is better and less likely to cause recurrence of the abscess. Then clean it with a moistened rag, and sprinkle some powdered charcoal from a burnt oven on it, as I have tried it and found it very beneficial. Then apply a poultice of a boiled egg mixed with rosewater and rose oil on the wound, leave it on for several days, then treat it with all other treatments until it heals completely.
This is an image of the lancet used for purification.
The lancet should be sharp and have no bend in it, with the length of the blades equal to the length of the handles. If the lancet used for purification has cut through all or part of the internal skin, it is necessary to extend it with your finger before the wound starts to swell.
Cut it horizontally, if you cannot hold it with your finger, use a forceps to grasp and cut it. If three days have passed and the swelling under the abscess head has not subsided and has become soft, leave it until the heat of the inflammation subsides and then squeeze it gently.
Cut it according to what is appropriate for you, and preserve from the head of the sinew as if you cut something from the head of the sinew, it will not harm, so treat it with what heals the wound from the substances we described in the article on substances.
And if you cut from the skin more than what is appropriate and it shrinks above, it will not harm much either, so treat it with what we mentioned until it heals.
Chapter 85.
In the treatment of suppressed urine in the bladder.
Suppressed urine in the bladder is due to a blockage from scar tissue, hardened blood, or feces, or meat that has rotted and so on, so if you treat it with what we mentioned in the chapter on treatments for blocked urine.
And if the urine has not flowed and you see that the blockage was caused by scar tissue that has harmed the neck of the bladder, it is recommended to lie on his back with his legs extended, then place a leg on his back and extend his belly towards his back and hold himself as much as possible.
If the neck of the bladder is forced to push the scar tissue back, so that the urine flows out, and if it does not flow as mentioned and the situation becomes difficult for the patient, then it is recommended to use a tool called a urethra catheter, whose image is:
It is made of silver and is smooth, flexible, and thin like a bird's quill in a fine silk thread, about an inch and a half long. It has a delicate barb at the end, and its face is designed to grasp the bladder. It should be tied with a double thread of silk or cotton, tightly.
The end of the thread is inserted into the catheter and it is bent with a hook if there is some wool to enter the tube and plug it like a stopper. Then, the catheter is anointed with oil or butter or the white of an egg, and the patient is made to sit on a chair.
Then, the catheter is moistened with soft cotton or oil and thin water, and it is inserted into the opening gently until it reaches the end of the opening. Then, the opening is turned upwards towards the backside, and the catheter is pushed inside.
Until the opening is turned upwards, then the catheter is pushed inside until it reaches near the bladder. The male should bend down and the catheter is inside him until it reaches the urethra and the patient feels empty.
The procedure for this position is performed because the urethra, through which urine passes, becomes narrowed. Then, the thread is pulled with force using the cotton, as the urine follows the cotton. After that, it is removed and the urine is discharged, while the thread is replaced back into the urethra.
She continues to do this until the urine is fully discharged and the patient feels relieved.
Chapter 95.
How to inject urine with the zarqa.
The tools used for this purpose are made of silver or hollowed-out copper with a long tube on the end of a spoon. The water and medicines are mixed in this tool, which is called the zarqa. Here is its image:
It is made of silver or hollowed-out copper with a long tube on the end of a spoon, which is all hollowed out except for one end. This end has three holes, two from one side and one from the other, as shown in the image.
The hollowed-out part where the pistons are placed is filled to the extent that it does not overflow, even if something is drawn into it from the moisture. If it is pushed out, it will be expelled to a distance, as it is made for the naptha lamp used in naval battles.
If you wish to remove moisture from the urethra, introduce the tip of the catheter into the moisture and draw it upwards with the syringe until the moisture is drawn into the catheter's tip, then insert the tip into the urethra as described in the Qanun, then expel the moisture using the syringe.
If those moistures reach the urethra, the patient will feel them. Here is a delicate image of a syringe that also injects into the urethra:
It is made of silver or spadroia, with a small beak at the top and a hollow below containing a rubber, then it takes a catheter and places the moisture you wish to inject into the urethra, then it ties it between the two pieces firmly with a double thread.
Then heat that moisture slightly on the fire, then insert the tip of the syringe into the urethra, then press your hand firmly on the urethra with the moisture until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the urethra.
If you do not have a catheter, take a piece of linen and make it into a circle, then pierce all its holes with a needle, then insert a strong thread through those holes as it spins, then gather the circle as the maidens gather after they put in it whatever moisture, paste, or water you wish.
Then, tie it in the machine and make it as you made the catheter from the beginning of your finger until the moisture reaches the catheter.
Chapter Sixty.
In extracting the thorn.
We mentioned in the division of types of thorns and treating them with drugs and mentioned the difference between the thorn that develops in the kidneys and the thorn that develops in the urethra, and all their signs, and mentioned the thorn that occurs in the hand and the splitting.
And that is the thorn that develops in the urethra, especially one that erupts during urination, and I describe that with a detailed explanation and abbreviation.
I say that the thorn that develops in the urethra is more common among boys, and its signs are that the urine exits from the urethra like water in its flow.
And it shows in him the sand and causes circumcision and disturbs him, and often it spreads and appears with it the foreskin in many of them, and it is easy for boys to remove it until they reach fourteen years old, and it is difficult for the elderly, and as for the young men, it is moderate between that.
And whoever has larger thorns, his treatment is easier, and the smaller ones are the opposite of that, so if we come to treatment, it is appropriate first that the patient be injected with an injection that removes all the feces in his abdomen, because it may prevent the presence of the thorn during examination.
Then the surgeon takes hold of the patient's legs and raises them, causing the foreskin to slide down to the neck of the penis or he repeatedly presses from a raised position, then places him between your hands, leaning forward with his hands under his buttocks, so that the penis is all inclined downwards, then examines him.
If he feels the foreskin in the space, then immediately use your knife to cut it, if it does not come under your touch, then it is necessary to wipe the little finger of your left hand with oil from your right hand if the patient is a child or the middle finger.
If he is a young boy, insert it into his anus and examine for the foreskin until it comes under your finger, then slightly move it upwards to the neck of the penis, then grasp it with your finger and push it outwards towards the place you want to cut.
And command a servant to scrape the penis with his hand, and command another servant to extend his right hand above and his left hand to extend the skin under the foreskin towards the place where the cut will be made, then take the probe that looks like this:
Cut between the anus and the foreskin, not in the middle but to the side of the left urethra, and the cut will be on the same foreskin and your finger in the anus, pressing it outwards so that the cut is wide from outside and narrow from inside, just enough for the foreskin to come out of it.
Do not press the finger in the thorn that is in the palm, near the side, as it may come out easily without difficulty. However, know that there may be angles and letters in the thorn that could make its extraction difficult.
Among them are those that resemble the needle and are easily extracted, as they do not have angles and letters that could make extraction difficult. If it does not come out in this way, it is recommended to grasp it with a sharp instrument, such as a scalpel.
To apply pressure to the thorn, do not let go of it and if possible, insert a delicate instrument with a sharp tip from below. If you cannot, slightly widen the opening and if blood overpowers you, cut it with a needle.
If there are more than one, first push the largest one towards the mouth of the wound, then cut it and then push the smaller ones afterwards, as you would do if there were more than two. If it is very large, it is foolish to cut a large opening in it, as it exposes the patient to two dangers.
Either he may die or it may cause permanent damage to the bladder, as it does not let go of the position easily. However, try to push it out or break it with forceps until it comes out completely.
If you have finished your work, clean the wound with sandalwood and vinegar or with oil and rose water and cold water to cool the hot tumor, then let the patient lie on his back and do not apply the bandage until the third day.
If the position becomes loose, clean it with much water and oil, then treat it with the Nux Vomica and the Basilicon until it is cleared, if there is a hot tumor, excessive pus, and the like, such as freezing blood in the urethra and preventing urination from it, and this is known by the exit of blood with urine.
Then insert your finger into the wound and remove that blood, for if it remains it causes damage to the urethra and its inflammation, then clean the wound with vinegar and water and salt and apply each type of remedy according to what is suitable for healing until it is cleared.
In all cases of treatment, it is necessary to bind the buttocks and bring them together to support the medicines applied to the position, for if the fistula is small and has become in the urethra and grown in it and prevented urination from exiting, then treat it with what I mentioned before it becomes hardened.
Often, this treatment has been successful in avoiding the incision, as I have tried it; it is to take a piece of iron from the nails of the dead and shape it like this:
A triangular piece of iron, sharp and pointed, is inserted into the urethra, then a thread is tied around the glans to prevent it from returning to the bladder, after which the iron spicule is inserted into the incision with gentle pressure until it reaches the same glans.
Then, with your hand, gently rub the spicule in the same glans until it pierces from the other side; as the urine will escape from its source, then place your hand on what remains of the glans outside the penis, as it will swell and exit with the urine, thus purifying the wound.
If it is not possible for you to perform this treatment, then tie a thread under the glans and another above it, then cut between the threads along the glans in the same penis.
Then, remove the thread and clean the clotted blood that has accumulated in the wound, as it is only necessary to tie the thread under the glans to prevent it from returning to the bladder and the other thread from above to ensure that if the thread breaks after the glans exits, the skin will return to its place and cover the wound.
Therefore, if you tie the upper thread while suturing, it is recommended to lift the skin so that it returns to its place when you are finished and covers the wound as we mentioned.
Chapter Sixteen.
In the extraction of the uterus for women.
The uterus rarely grows in women, but if one of them presents with a uterus, it is difficult to treat her and many people refuse to face this situation because the woman might have been a virgin and the second reason is that you cannot find a woman who allows herself to be examined by a doctor.
If she is a virgin or from those who are forbidden to be examined by a doctor, and the third reason is that you cannot find a woman who improves this craft and especially works with her hands, and the fourth reason is that the place where the uterus is removed from women is far from the place of the uterus underneath, so you need to make a deep incision.
And in this case, there is a risk, but if necessity requires it, then a woman should be found who is skilled and experienced, and if she does not exist, then ask for a pure and trustworthy doctor or prepare a woman who is skilled and experienced in women's matters or a woman who can indicate in this craft.
Prepare her and command her to do all the examinations of the uterus first, such as checking if the woman is a virgin, then it is recommended to insert her finger into her vagina and examine the uterus, if she finds it and presses it under her finger.
When she commands the incision on herself, if she is not a virgin and has a hymen, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the vaginal opening and examine the hymen after placing her left hand on the clitoris and gently rubbing it well.
If found, it should be gradually removed from the mouth of the vagina down to the extent of her ability until it reaches the base of the buttocks, then incise her there, at the front of the vaginal opening, at the base of the buttocks from whichever side she feels the hymen and has sensation in that direction.
Her finger should not be removed from the hymen, pressing it down, and the incision should be small initially, then the midwife should insert her finger into that small incision, if she feels the hymen, she should increase the incision to the extent she knows the hymen comes out from it, and know that there are many types of hymens.
Among them are small and large, smooth and rough, thin and thick, fused and torn, long and short, and those with a fringe. Know their types so that you can determine what you want, for if blood dominates, remove it from the place of the wound, wipe it off, and hold it until the blood stops flowing, then return to your work.
Until the placenta is expelled, and you perform what you have memorized from the tools mentioned in the extraction of the placenta for men to assist you in your work, as blood loss and palpation of the blood indicate that it is from a severed vessel. Then apply pressure to the affected area.
Tie the wound firmly and do not retie it, and do not remove the placenta, as the mother might die. Then treat the wound. If the bleeding stops after days and the wound heals, then return to your work until the placenta is expelled.
Chapter Two: Sixth.
In the shaving of the aqueous humor.
The aqueous humor is merely the collection of moisture in the white substance that is underneath the eyelids and is called the conjunctiva, which may have a special membrane that naturally prepares it for the eye.
Until he thinks it is another egg and there is between the eyelids and the white substance that we mentioned, which only occurs in rare cases. This humor is produced from weakness that exposes females to it, and they may be affected by a blow.
This moisture has many colors, sometimes it may be colorless, and sometimes red, and sometimes black, and sometimes white, and it is most often like that, and the signs by which it is recognized.
Where the water meets, if it is in the white foam that we mentioned, then the tumor is smooth and short, like an egg shape, and does not show its defect because the moisture surrounds it from all sides.
And if the moisture is in a thin membrane, then the tumor is smooth on one side like an egg white.
And for this, a person might think that it is another egg white, and if the moisture is between the skin of the pubic area and the white foam, then it is felt under the touch, but if you want to know the color of the moisture, press the tumor with the square sponge that we showed its image, and what comes out of the sponge is judged by what is inside.
And if we come to treatment with iron, it is appropriate for the doctor to order suction if possible, and then see his body full, then he lies on his back on something slightly high, and places a large number of pads under him, then you sit on his left side.
The servant is commanded to sit on the right side of the patient and extend his male organ towards one of the sides of the scrotum and towards the direction of the navel. Then, a wide, flat instrument is taken and the scrotum is cut from the middle lengthwise until near the anus.
The cut should be made straight and parallel to the line that divides the scrotum into two halves until it reaches the white, swollen part of the glans penis. It is then scraped off and protected from being further cut. The scraping should be done from the side that adheres to the glans, as much as possible without causing harm.
Then, the filled glans penis is squeezed out with a wide, open mouth and all the water is removed. After that, the edges of the cut are separated with forceps and the glans penis is extended upwards without touching the remaining scrotum. The glans penis is then cut as much as possible, either in one piece or in several pieces.
Especially the delicate side of the glans penis, if you do not scrape off all the pieces, you may not be able to remove all the water. If the white part of the glans penis comes out of its skin while you are working, and when you finish cutting the glans penis, fold it back and then suture the edges of the scrotum with stitches.
Then, he treated the rest of the surgeries until he was cured. If the egg was infected with another disease, it is necessary to tie the veins in the incision to prevent bleeding, then cut the incision from the incision and remove the egg, then treat him as we mentioned.
If the water is collected in both sides together, know that they are two. Split the other side as you did in the first one, whether it is balanced or not, then do the work alone, then wipe the blood.
Then, insert into the incisions cotton that has been soaked in oil or fat of the rose and it comes out from another cotton that has been soaked in water and oil and spread on the incisions and abdominal wounds and place from above a closed wound and this is the benefits. And tie it from above with a suture which has six ends in this shape:
Then, take two incisions and fold them and fill with cotton that has been soaked in oil on this example and make the ends from cotton or wet cotton and tie them with thread in a belt of silk and one end to the back.
And the second to the nape and the ends on the shoulders from below and the remaining ends on the armpits and tie all the thread in a belt of silk, and this suture can also be made with linen instead of cutting with iron.
Take a fine, sharp-edged knife and make an incision in the skin of the scrotum as described earlier until the white, thick membrane containing the water is exposed. Then take another cloth on this appearance.
It resembles the Greek eye, then press that membrane which is moist until all the moisture comes out. Then extend the membrane with the scissors and scrape it with the cloth until you extract all of it and preserve the egg whites without exposing them to fire.
Know that this procedure is safer and better than cutting, so if it encounters any obstruction in the groin or at any time, a hot, sharp object, bleeding, or anything else, it should be treated as appropriate for each case as mentioned earlier.
If the patient is impatient and does not tolerate this procedure due to its discomfort, then use the following method as described earlier if it is suitable for you based on the evidence we provided.
The tumor should be placed below on a raised chair, and the catheter should be inserted widely along the body until all the water flows out, then place cotton on the site and bandage it.
Leave him to suck the rest of the water, then treat him until the wound is cleansed. If the flow of water stops suddenly, it is because he has swallowed some of it and this is only due to the white membrane blocking the wound's mouth, preventing the flow of water.
Then, it is recommended to insert a probe or the tool that extracts the water of the beloved ones, which has been shown its image or increase in opening the wound slightly.
Know that the water may return and gather after six months or so, if it gathers, then treat him with the same method and the physician should keep his days off.
The third and sixth chapter.
On the treatment of hernias and their healing.
Know that the treatment of these hernias is one of the most dangerous causes of death in many cases, therefore, they are left untreated and their safety is prioritized. I will mention the work done on them and types of tumors.
I say that many tumors have occurred in bodies composed of females and this is due to various reasons, either from a favorable wound that is implanted in females or from a blow and the color of the tumor is like the color of the body and there is no water in it.
The tumor is jaundiced and sometimes it may be a gallstone with no sensation to it, and it could be due to the obstruction of the bile ducts or the swelling of the veins, as mentioned earlier, or from the swelling of the veins. If it is due to the swelling of the bile ducts, it can be recognized by the disappearance of the tumor.
If it is pressed with your fingers and it should not be exposed to the sunlight, and as for the one that is due to the swelling of the veins, it does not disappear when pressed with the fingers, and this type may require surgery on itself and on other meat.
It is to incise the skin of the scrotum, then extend the white egg upwards and extract it from the white scar, remove the adhesions from the vessels, tie the vessels, and cut the adhesions after removing them from all sides of the eggs, if the egg has adhered to those meat.
It is necessary to extract the egg and cut it, and if there is adhesion between any of the eggs or in the vessels, it is necessary to remove all that adhesion and cut it evenly.
If the meat tissue is in the position of adhesion that is behind, it is necessary to cut all of it and extract the egg as we said, then if you have finished your work, apply the powdered borax in oil of wormwood and wine on the wound, then treat it with all other treatments until it heals.
Chapter Four and Sixty-One.
In the treatment of the uterus when it is prolapsed.
The prolapse is a tumor that has become loose and resembles a hernia, causing difficulty in movement, exercise, and walking. In the treatment of this condition, it is similar to what was mentioned earlier.
However, we should mention the operation on it as the early physicians did. I say that it is necessary for the patient to sit on a raised chair, then push down the hernia, and finally grasp the skin of the scrotum with your fingers along with the vessels that are close to the penis.
Then, a servant other than you should grasp it and extend it to a great length, then sharply cut it with a wide, sharp knife along the vessels until the vessels are exposed, then scrape from all sides as you were told in the treatment of veins in the appendix. Then, insert a needle into it with a double-threaded suture.
Then, suture it at the first place where the hernia appeared and also at the last place, then cut it in the middle vertically along the length of the body and extract any accumulated fluid or rotten matter.
Then, treat the groin by performing all the surgical procedures that you wish to perform in order to produce a period of time for the veins to drop, which will supply one of the females. There is no harm in that, as long as the dilator exposes all the veins, it is recommended to extract one of the females along with the veins in order to prevent the egg from being damaged. Before cutting the veins, they will rot and will not be useful.
The fifth and sixth chapters.
In the treatment of the hernias that are inguinal.
The occurrence of these hernias from a place that is exposed in the stomach wall, in a way between the ribs and the navel, the inguinal is inclined from that opening to one of the females.
This opening can be from a place in the stomach wall or from its extension, and these two types occur due to many reasons such as a blow or a jolt or a scream or lifting something heavy and so on. Its sign if it is from the extension of the stomach wall is that it will occur a little at a time over a long period.
And it will not occur suddenly and the tumor will be level to about the depth before the stomach wall erodes the inguinal, its sign if it is from a place in the stomach wall is that it will occur at first with great pain and a heavy blow and the tumor will be different in appearance under the skin near by.
The exit of the stone and its passage out of the body, and it may exit with the stone, which is called a stone-passing stone, and it may be with a wind, and it may pass in the stone, and it may remain there, and it may cause death.
Because it causes severe pain and shaking, especially if it is crushed, and treatment of these types of disease with iron is dangerous, so it is necessary to be aware of the possibility of falling into it, and the method of work is to command the sufferer to return the stone to its inside by his hand if it comes back.
Then he lies on his back between your hands and raises his legs, then the skin that follows the armpit is extended above and the skin of the groin is pierced completely by length, then it is inserted into the sides of the cleft according to the amount needed to open the cleft with them.
The cleft should be as large as possible to allow the egg to come out, then the armpits that are under the skin of the groin are scraped until when the white hard armpit is revealed from all sides, then at that time insert your thumb into what follows the egg.
Between the white armpit that is under the skin of the egg and the second armpit and release the grasp from behind the egg, then bend your right hand into the skin of the groin and at the same time extend the white armpit above with your left hand and raise the egg with the armpit to the side of the cleft.
The servant should pour the egg whites on top and then release the yolk completely from behind, thoroughly checking with your finger to ensure there is no mucus from the white that has hardened in the clear, solid albumen. If you find any, remove it and throw it into the belly below.
Then take a needle in it with a thick thread that has been twisted from ten threads and insert it at the end of the clear, solid albumen under the skin of the glans following the groove, then cut off the ends of the thread's four tips. Then tie some of it together firmly and tie the albumen that we said is under the skin of the glans tightly from both sides, also tie off the ends of the thread firmly so that nothing can reach any of the vessels that supply it, as if something could reach it. So that nothing is exposed from it, make a hot, firm second tie outside the first tie, far from it by less than two fingers, and after these two ties take from the albumen under the skin of the glans as much as the thickness of a finger's bone.
So that nothing is exposed from it, make a hot, firm second tie outside the first tie, far from it by less than two fingers, and after these two ties take from the albumen under the skin of the glans as much as the thickness of a finger's bone. And cut the rest of it all at once and take the egg white with it, then cut under the skin of the glans a groove that allows blood and the albumen to flow from it as we described earlier, then use the cotton soaked in oil and place it in the wound and use the tie that we described.
The white ligament that we mentioned after its amputation should be cautious of bleeding, as it often exposes this. The bandage should be left until it falls off by itself, but if it is slow to fall off, it should be soaked in warm water and then lifted off.
Then the wound should be treated with all the treatments of surgery until it heals.
Chapter Six and Sixty-One.
In the nostrils, these nostrils, I have not seen anyone dare to treat them with iron, and the ancients mentioned that one should make as we described in the nostril with a spoon, that is to tie the nostrils after cutting them with a downward pressure.
Then cut in the middle and treat the tumor with what opens it until the nostrils fall out, and treat the wound as we mentioned until it heals.
Chapter Seven and Sixty-One.
In the fistula that is in the anus.
The fistula in the anus may expose itself as we mentioned, and nothing from the rectum falls into the vagina, and if it does fall, it is slow and returns at all times.
But if the time is long, it increases the cut in the ligament until the rectum and throbbing fall into the anus and expose this from the extension of the ligament that is in the anus as we mentioned. The treatment is such that it extends the fracture, then relaxes it and moves the position, and its treatment with the clay as you have described its description.
He can also be treated with iron in this manner, which is that he lies on his back between your hands, then you split the position of the fracture wide open horizontally across a pot three fingers wide, then you reduce the fractures under the skin.
Until if the white fracture that follows is revealed, then you take a red cloth and place it on the position of the fracture and press it into the depth of the abdomen, then you sew the two positions together from the fracture with stitching one to the other.
Then you pull the end of the cloth and do not cut the remaining fracture and do not touch the egg white or anything else as I have taught you in the treatment of broken eggs, then treat him with the treatment of wounds.
If the stitches are cut and the wound is sutured until it heals, then the fracture will heal and there will be no increase in the fracture gap.
The best clay for this position is because it is closest to safety.
Chapter 8 and 60.
In the relaxation of the skin of the scrotum.
Often, the skin of the scrotum relaxes in some people without relaxing the muscles inside it, which detracts from its appearance. Therefore, if someone wishes to treat this, they should lie down on their back.
Then cut all the relaxed skin on the thick skin, then gather the lips together. If you wish, first stitch the edge of the relaxed skin with three or four stitches and then remove the stitches, then cut between them.
Then treat it with the treatment for other surgeries until it heals and the stitches fall out.
The ninth and sixteenth chapters.
In the incision.
The incision is forbidden in our religion.
Therefore, it was my duty not to mention this in my book, but I only mentioned it for two reasons: one, so that a doctor would know how to treat it if asked, and the other, because we often need to make an incision on some animals for our benefit.
Such as the camel, the cow, and cats, etc., so I say that incision is made in two ways: either by piercing or by cutting. The way of piercing is that we place the animal in hot water until its flesh relaxes and becomes soft and tender.
Then, you should crush it with your hand until it breaks without leaving any trace upon touching. As for the particular cases of cutting and amputation, it is recommended to grasp the animal and shave the affected area with your left hand, then connect the incisions and cut each egg separately.
When the two eggs emerge, cut them after shaving and do not leave any mark on them except for the thin incision that is on the vessels, and this method of cutting from particular cases is better than the previous one.
Because the previous method might have left something from the females, so the animal may have mated again, then treat the wound until it heals.
Chapter 70.
In the treatment of the male.
The male is of two types, one of which appears in the area below or on the skin between the females in a shape similar to that of a woman's private part with hair and may discharge urine from where it is located on the skin.
And in women, there is one type that appears above the vagina on the clitoris like the legs of a man, small and curved towards the outside, like a penis, and the other two are similar to females. The treatment of the three types.
The two types of men and the one type of woman, it is necessary to cut those excessive flesh until the effect of it is removed, then treat them with the treatment of all surgeries until they are cleansed. As for the second type of man who expels urine from him that is in the skin of the penis, there is no work in him and no benefit from it.
Chapter 70.
In the removal of the hymen and the surrounding flesh from the women's genitalia.
The hymen may have grown too much due to the natural condition until it becomes narrow and unsightly, and in some women it may grow so much that it spreads like men and becomes like them in terms of intercourse.
It is necessary to hold the hymen with your hand or a pair of forceps and cut it, but do not rush in the cutting and especially not deep into the root so as not to expose bleeding blood.
Then treat it with the treatment of surgeries until it is cleansed. As for the surrounding flesh, it is flesh that grows in the womb until it fills it.
And sometimes it may come out externally like the umbilical cord. And for this reason, some early scholars call it the disease of the umbilical cord and it is necessary to cut it like the hymen, regardless, and treat it until it is cleansed.
Chapter 72: Treatment of Fractures in the Lower Extremities
In the treatment of fractures.
Fracture is when the female genitalia are not intact or when the fracture is small and it can be either natural, born with it, or artificial, which occurs due to a reason that has already occurred. The artificial one is from excessive tissue of the labia minora.
Or a thin or thick fracture, which can be in the depth of the uterus, its sides, or its top or bottom, preventing intercourse, pregnancy, childbirth, and sometimes male ejaculation. Knowing this is by examination of the vaginal opening.
If the obstruction is visible and close, if not, examine it with her fingers or a probe. If the fracture is from thin splinters and close to the labia minora, then break it by placing something similar to the dildo on the labia minora, then place both hands together.
And if the woman is flat on her back, spread her legs and extend the labia minora with force until the thin splinters break and the obstruction opens, then take some cloth and soak it in oil and place it on the position, and the woman should unite every day to prevent the position from closing again.
If the abscess is thick and dense, it is recommended to incise it with a wide-bladed knife similar to an elephant's tusk. If the wall is made of flesh like a plant, fasten it with sutures and cut it, so that you have medicines to stop bleeding without causing pain, such as quince, shiyān, and labdanum mixed with egg white.
Then, use a wide-bore copper tube to prevent the wound from closing too quickly, hold it for several days and use a dry cotton yarn, then treat with the rest of the treatment until it heals, and if there is another flesh plant in the uterus, it is recommended to cut it on this method.
If it is not a cancerous tumor, the cancerous tumor that exists in the uterus does not appear with iron bettāh.
Chapter 37.
In the treatment of boils, thrush, and red pustules that appear in women's privates.
As for boils, they are a swelling of the glands' mouths until blood pours out from them continuously. If the boils appear, they become thrush, and you mentioned their types and signs in the section on incision, so we will mention them here.
The diseases and conditions that can be treated and those that cannot, I say that the kidneys and ovaries, if they are deep within the womb and not visible to touch, do not allow treatment with iron, but if they were in the mouth of the womb and could be touched, they are the ones that can be treated.
It is appropriate for the woman to enter a cool place, then extend the ovaries with a cloth or a rough needle and cut them from their roots, then apply a remedy at the time of menstrual bleeding from one of the drugs that stops blood flow without causing harm.
Then raise her legs against the wall for an hour, then dip them in cold water. If the bleeding continues, place her in a vat of sesame oil and pomegranate skins and cinnamon and so on, then take some flour and mix it with honey and vinegar.
If the bleeding stops, then apply it on her back, but if not, use the hard clay and the soft cotton without a condition, then take some linen cloth and soak it in the essence of tarragon or the essence of lion's tongue or the essence of artichoke with a drink of cinnamon and maintain the position.
If the tumor settles, treat the area with a poultice until it is clean, and as for the red nodules, they resemble the rough surface of the hare, so it is appropriate to cut off what has appeared from it according to what was mentioned in the ovaries, whether large or small, and treat it until it is clean.
Chapter 74: On the Treatment of Wounds and Ulcers
In the wound that is exposed on the uterus.
In the uterus, various types of tumors may be exposed, such as cancer, benign tumors, ulcers, bedsores, abscesses, fistulas, and inflammatory tumors. All these diseases and their types and symptoms have been mentioned in the chapter on classification.
It should be noted in this article that the inflammatory tumor that appears in the uterus, if it is one of the tumors that collects pus, its treatment with iron is recommended. If the pain of the tumor at the beginning is severe, accompanied by fever and inflammation, it should be examined.
If you feel that it is red, do not rush to treat it and treat it with what promotes maturation until the symptoms subside. Then, it is recommended for the woman to sit on a chair with two seats and lean on her back.
And she should bring her legs to the lower part of her abdomen, and her buttocks should be spread apart, and her arms should be under her knees, and they should be tied with a bandage that is appropriate.
Therefore, the woman should sit on the left side and use the tool that opens the mouth of the uterus that appears later, and if you want to use this tool, it is recommended to measure the depth of the woman's uterus so that the one that enters from the tool is not deeper than the uterus.
If the weapon is deep, it is necessary to place a bandage on the lip of the womb above the navel to prevent the entire weapon from entering deep into the womb. The tip of the weapon should be on the side of the weapon.
And you hold the weapon and the servant manages the ligature until the womb opens, if the thread appears and you touch it with your hand and it is soft and thin, it is necessary to cut it at its head with a wide needle until all the time has passed.
It is necessary to place a thin, moistened thread soaked in rose oil or green oil with some honey in the wound and the thread should be outside from the cut, on the womb and on the navel, a clean cotton soaked in boiled flour.
Then treat after two days with the mercurous chloride that is suitable for it until it is cleansed.
The womb and the wound can be washed by injecting water and honey, then boiled water with a long piece of sos or zaranda, then return to the mercurous chloride, if the thread is hidden inside the womb.
It is necessary to avoid treating him with iron, but treat with what we mentioned in the division.
Chapter 75: Treatment of Fractures and Dislocations
In the teaching of fractures, how to treat living bones that have come out of their natural shape.
The surgeon should first know the natural shape of birth, and its signs, such as when the woman leans down and wants to inhale deeply, and her breathing becomes shallow.
If the child comes out quickly, know that this birth is in its natural shape, with the head coming out first and the shoulders following, or attached to the umbilical cord. If you see these signs, it is recommended to cut the mother's abdomen so that the child comes out quickly.
If the child comes out on its head, the mother came out with it and cleaned herself from those folds cleanly. If this birth is not natural, it is impure because the child may come out on its legs and its hands come out before its head and legs.
One leg or arm may come out, or the head and hand come out together, or it comes out twisted, and sometimes it turns over on its back and similar impure shapes. The surgeon should be skilled in all these things and warn against mistakes.
I clearly explain every form of it and how to diagnose and stop at that point, if the baby comes out on its head in a natural way and the woman suffers from that and the divorce is difficult for her and you see that her strength has weakened, then I make her sit on a chair and order women to control it.
Then I moisten her perineum with a hot poultice and wet cotton, then the forceps is inserted between her fingers as a small hook to tear the membranes or tear them with her fingernails until the fluid in it comes out and the woman's abdomen is scraped until the baby comes out.
If it does not come out, it is appropriate to inject the woman with a mixture of poultice and shergum, then order her after the injection to vomit and rub her mouth and nose with candies and hold her mouth and nose, because the baby comes out from its place, if the baby's hands come out first, then it is appropriate to gently push them back.
If they do not come out, place the woman on a board and raise her legs above her head, then shake the board on the ground and the woman holds on so that she does not fall when shaking, if the hands do not come out and the baby dies, cut them off and remove the rest of the baby.
Tie his hands with a rope and pull them gently, for if the fetus emerges from his legs, it is necessary to push them upwards and gradually rotate the fetus until it is aligned, then grasp one of his legs and extend it slightly.
If they have emerged to the buttocks, command her to squat and strike them with a stick, for it will emerge. If it does not emerge as described, gradually pull the fetus slightly until it assumes its natural shape, then it will emerge smoothly. If she refuses to do as described, do nothing.
Take a pinch of the khutammii powder, halba powder, sherje butter, and a diluted musk, mix them together and apply to the abdomen of the woman and below her navel, then make her sit in warm water until the fetus is expelled.
If you see that it has emerged below her, make her a sling and let her bear it for an hour, then make her sit on a chair and strike her, close her mouth and nose, and gently massage her lower abdomen. The fetus will emerge from its position, emerging from his legs and arms.
If this condition occurs, he should gently insert his fingers a little into her vagina, then she lies on her back with her legs raised, while lying on a bed and holding her hands together, then he should massage her abdomen slightly. Then he should remove all the pads under her legs until they are flat, if the fetus has not come out yet, then take both of her legs and move them vigorously, then massage her lower abdomen slightly until the fetus rises above, then insert his hand and adjust the fetus gently.
The woman should bear down until the fetus comes out, the fetus coming out resisting and extending one of his hands, if she cannot pull it back, then make her stand and walk, if she cannot walk, then let her lie down.
Her bed and shake her legs vigorously, then use the cushions she mentioned from the pads, if he pulls them out, then make her sit on a chair, then treat the hand and adjust the fetus to its natural shape, give her medicine and order her to bear down until the fetus comes out.
Exit of the fetus by pushing its hands and facing its face towards its mother's back, it is appropriate to hold the grasper of the fetus's hand then gently turn it a little and adjust it gently. When it becomes stable, lift it onto its mother's chest with the ointments and lubricants as described.
Then, she should gently move a little, and if she does, then seat her on the chair and instruct her to lean towards the right side. Then, she should shake and wipe her with a cloth as it comes out, the exit of the fetus grasping onto its side.
If it comes out through the mouth of the womb in this manner with the forceps, then the forceps should be broken from the mucous membrane until it is free from moisture. If it sticks to the face and neck of the fetus, cut it from the cord so that it does not choke and die. Then, push the fetus inside until it is positioned correctly.
And instruct the woman to shake frequently, as it comes out easily, the exit of twins or multiple fetuses. Know that twins often give birth to three or four and live, except in rare cases. As for five, it is unnatural and they do not live all together.
If they are surrounded by many people, and if they are separated by a barrier between them, each one being tied in his own secret place, and if the single one has already come out naturally and easily, and if they come out badly as we have described.
If some of them have difficulty in childbirth and have become as we described, not naturally, then treat him as we described, and let the midwife be gentle and do what she does with tenderness and patience, and adapt to every shape according to what is available to her from the path leading to safety.
Mentioned what is imagined in the womb of women, they may fall out, one or two or three or four or five or six or seven or more than ten, and it is true that a woman gave birth to seven and another gave birth to fifteen, all of them imagined that.
By the estimation of the noble and wise, all of this should be in the knowledge of the midwife, perhaps she will encounter something like that one day, so she should respond to it appropriately.
Chapter 67.
In the delivery of a dead fetus.
If the dead fetus was treated as mentioned in the division of treatments, and it did not come out, then the situation requires manual intervention. If the woman is healthy and has no symptoms that one fears for her from them, then it is appropriate for the woman to lie on her back on her stomach.
The translation of the excerpt is: "Her head leans downwards and her legs are raised, and a nurse adjusts her from both sides or ties her to the bed so that her body does not adhere to the wall when the fetus descends.
Then, he moistens her mouth with the wet cotton mixed with honey and barley flour, then the midwife applies this cotton and honey to the uterus with her hand, then she inserts it into the uterus gently, and removes the placenta from the fetus, and the appropriate places for that.
If the fetus is coming out from the head, then the placenta should be removed from its eyes or ears or mouth or navel or under its hair or on its back or in the nearby ribs or under the armpits.
And if it is coming out from its legs, then in the ankles and middle ribs, and it should be held by the left hand and the placenta should be inserted between the fingers of the right hand gently, and the placenta should be removed from some of those places that were mentioned.
Until she reaches a place that is empty, then another placenta or third one should be inserted to make the attraction equal and not inclined to one side, then the extension should be at an even level and not just in a straight line, but it should be moved in all directions.
It is not easy to remove it as it is done by pressure at the base, and it is necessary in between that the forceps be rocked, and if some of the substance remains, it is necessary to grease the forceps with some fingers and insert them from the side to remove what remained. If some of the fetus comes out, the surgeons move to other places.
If she raises it a little and does this, the fetus will all come out, but if one hand came out before the other and it was not possible to put it back due to its swelling, it is necessary to make an incision on it and then pull it until all of it comes out, then cut it.
Either in the wrist or in the elbow, and so on, it is necessary to do in the other hand and in the legs, but if the head of the fetus is large and its neck is wide, pressure is needed for its exit, or if there is water in its head, it is necessary to insert a sharp hook between the fingers.
And split its head so that the water comes out, or squeeze it with the tool called the crotchet, which comes in the shape shown in the following illustration.
Also do this if the fetus has a large head by nature, split its skull or squeeze it with the crotchet as we said, then extract the bones with the forceps, but if the head comes out and swells at the neck, cut until the moisture in the chest is removed.
If the ribs do not come together and cannot be brought out, then cut them as much as you can, especially if they are at the lower abdomen or have abscesses, it is advisable to remove them until the moisture comes out of them.
If the fetus is on its legs, it is easy to grasp and bring it to the mouth of the womb, but if it is pressed against the abdomen or chest, it is advisable to grasp it with a forceps that you have prepared and made thin, and then tear the abdomen or chest until what is inside comes out.
If all the organs have been removed and the head returned, but it was retained, then the left hand forceps should be inserted if the womb mouth is open, then insert your hand into the neck of the womb and grasp the head with it, and then pull it out with your fingers to the mouth of the womb, then insert a snares or two snares into it and grasp it with them.
If the womb mouth has been closed by a hot, swollen tumor, then it is not advisable to force it, but rather, at that time, use moist, soft substances and apply compresses and sit in cool water to soak and moisten.
If the fetus is on its side, it is advisable to use what we mentioned for live fetuses if possible, but if not, then cut it and remove it, and it is not advisable to leave any of the membranes inside the uterus. Then, after you have finished treating yourself, use what we mentioned for treating hot tumors that appear in the womb.
If the bleeding is visible, it should be placed in cold water and all treatments can be used, as I have seen a woman who had miscarried and then had her umbilical cord tied again.
Then the other fetus also died after a long time and there was a lump in her abdomen, it inflated until it burst and she was treated with a tube for a long time, but the wound did not heal so she had to apply strong adhesives to close it.
Then a bone came out and then more days passed and another bone came out, she was surprised as there were no bones in her abdomen, so she suspected that it was the bones of the dead fetus, so she examined the wound and removed many bones from the skull of the fetus.
I continued to follow this and eventually removed many bones from her, the woman was in good condition and she lived like this for a long time, only coming back now with this rare case.
Because there is knowledge and assistance for what the doctor tries to do with his hands in treatment.
The seventh chapter.
In it are images of the tools needed for removing the fetus.
Image showing the opening of the liver through the mouth of the womb.
This mold that is used in the books, whether for two livers in the ends of the wooden boards, except that this liver should be gentler than the mold and either made of abnos or made of boxwood, and the width of each board is the span of two fingers.
And their length is towards a finger, and their width is half a span and a half, and in the middle of the boards there are two pieces of the same wood that have been driven into them, with a length of half a span or slightly less, and a width of about two fingers or slightly more, and these two pieces.
These are the ones that enter into the mouth of the womb in order to open it with them when you are extracting the livers, an image of another tool like this, gentler and softer.
It is made of abnos or boxwood in the shape of forceps, except that it has two pieces at its end as you see, with a length of each piece of about a span and a width of two fingers, so if you want to open the womb with it.
Then the woman sits on a bed with her legs spread apart, and between her legs, then insert these two forceps into the mouth of the womb and you hold the end of the tool underneath between your buttocks, then open your hand with the tool as you do with forceps, whether as much as you want to open the womb. Until you make the incision as you desire, a figure of another's lobe mentioned by the first ones.
Figure of the instrument that pushes the fetus.
Figure of the mashdak that forces the head of the fetus.
It resembles a chisel with teeth at the end as you see, and it can be made straight like the forceps on this figure with teeth like those of the manchineel tree, which cuts and is useful.
Figure of another instrument also:
Figure of a gimlet.
This gimlet has a small sharp point so that it does not break when pulling the fetus with it, figure of a gimlet with two prongs:
Figure of wide, flat scissors for cutting the fetus.
All these tools, the more varieties there are, the faster they can be made by the maker and more highly regarded by people for their usefulness, so do not neglect having one of them as you may need it.
Chapter Eighty-seven.
In the extraction of the mummies.
If the mummy is stuck after the nose, it is appropriate for the midwife to hold herself and then wipe it with a cloth and pull on its mouth and buttocks, if it comes out with this, otherwise take a spoon.
Pierce the lid with a hole and place in it the opened spices for the mouth of the womb like fennel, cumin, clove, pepper, ginger, saffron, and cinnamon. All these drugs or some of them are soaked in water and then placed on the fire. Then an silver tube is placed on the hole of the lid and the other end in the mouth of the womb.
Hold it until the steam reaches the bottom of the womb, then rub as we said. If the miscarriage comes out quickly, but if it remains after this treatment and does not come out, the midwife should immerse her right hand in lard or mustard oil.
Then insert it into the palm and search for the miscarriage with it. If it touches it, grasp it and pull it out a little at a time until it comes out. If it is stuck deep in the womb, insert the hand as we described until you find the miscarriage, then gently pull it out.
Lest the womb tear when pulling strongly, it is better to gently move to the sides, right and left, then increase the pull gradually. At that time, it will come out and be released from the attachment. If the mouth of the womb is stuck together, we have described the treatment as rubbing and treating the lid and spices.
If you have not extracted all that we have described, then avoid force on it in the process of re-suction. However, it is recommended to connect what has come out of it to the mouth of the woman, then inject it into the buttock of the woman, as it cleanses her after days.
It liquefies and comes out, except that if it is cleansed, it gives off a foul odor to the stomach and head, which harms the patient. Therefore, it is recommended to use appropriate smoke.
Therefore, some early experimenters used smoke from the cinnamon and tin, a device that boils in it the woman during the retention of the semen and the like.
It is made from copper that resembles the mortar, or it is made from brass, the narrow end is placed on the forehead and the wide end on the fire, the smoke is rolled up on the coals until it disappears, then it is returned.
The ninth and seventy-third chapter.
In the treatment of unbroken hernias.
Many boys and their hernias may not be broken, which has been closed by a thin string, the midwife should pierce that string with her finger, otherwise, she should pull it with a sharp needle and warn the muscle not to touch it.
Then, place a moistened piece of cotton or oil on it and treat it with probes until it is clean. If you fear that it might close up, insert a lead tube into the hole for several days and remove it when the child wants to urinate.
The closure of the sinus may also be due to a deep wound or tumor, in which case it should be incised and then treated as mentioned earlier.
Chapter Eighty.
In the treatment of fistulas that occur in the lower part.
Fistulas that occur in the lower part are complex and dense, which occurs near the sinus from outside or in the space from one of the sides, and the fistula is one or more.
If this complexity is opened and water-like or thin diarrhea flows from it, it may be one of these fistulas that open into the bladder and into the intestine and not open. The open one can be recognized by what comes out of it when using the probe.
And perhaps the intestine came out of it, and it may be fistulas if it is open from the space to the urethra and to the urethral canal, and it may be open to the hip joint and to the buttocks, and what is known as the open fistula that opens into the sinus is also not open.
It is important to insert the little finger of your right hand into the mouth and insert a thin, flexible instrument made of copper or iron into the throat if there is no sharp edge in the instrument. If there is a sharp edge, then insert a thin, flexible instrument made of fine silver or horsehair into it.
Until you feel the instrument or the hair in your finger, if you do not feel it at all and nothing comes out of the wound such as blood, wind, or pus as we mentioned, then know that it is not open, and proceed with the treatment.
If the instrument is open to the urethra or to the urinary tract, then its sign is the exit of urine from it and its refusal to adhere to the place with medications. However, if it is open to the hip joint or the penis, then its sign is the insertion of the instrument there.
If there is no sharp edge to the bone and pain in the direction of the wound, and constant discharge from it, and if it does not respond to treatment and does not adhere with a probe, then all these open instruments are not the cause of the bleeding.
Treatment of these is a futile effort for those who are ignorant about it, and if it is not open and not chronic, then it is recommended to remove it with iron as I described and tried, which is to place the patient on his back between your hands.
The patient should be positioned with his legs raised upwards and his buttocks tilted towards his belly, then insert the copper or lead probe until you know where it ends. If the patient feels pain towards the coccyx, then you should insert your little finger into the coccyx.
If you feel the probe in your little finger, it has pierced itself without any obstruction, so there is no need to worry about it, as we have mentioned earlier.
Some people claim that it can be removed in certain cases, and for treatment that is expected to benefit, you should apply a thin piece of cloth according to the size of the probe, as previously mentioned, then insert it hot into the probe until it reaches near the coccyx, then remove it twice or three times.
Until you know that all those excess, softened meat resembling a bird's beak has been burned, then treat it with a mixture of salt and fish in order to remove the burnt meat, then treat it with a mixture of vinegar and honey if it is removed.
If not, it will never be removed by any other treatment. If the probe was inserted and did not reach your little finger in the coccyx and there was a thick layer of meat or skin between them, and you saw the probe on the surface of the skin, then split the skin from the beginning of the probe. When passing through the narrow path with the mule, you should continue until you reach the end of the path where the mule's tail ends and it defecates, then clean that part of the mule's body which resembles a bird's feather pipe, leaving nothing behind.
Then, treat it with strong salt to cleanse it completely. If blood overpowers you and you are in a difficult situation while working on cutting those parts of the mule's body, it is better to burn them quickly using fire or a strong medicine, as burning with fire collects two good things: burning those excessive parts of the mule's body.
Then, cut the blood and remove the moisture. Treat it with a paste made of fat mixed with salt or baking soda in oil until the wound area becomes clean and those burnt parts of the mule's body come out in the cloth. Then, treat the wound at that time with strong salt paste prepared for hard meat.
These are the medicines that have a bite and remove moisture. If it bites, it has been cleansed and should not be touched. If the mule has reached deep into the mud and is far from the body surface, insert your finger into the mud and search for it.
If you feel the mule and there is a barrier between you and it made of straw or meat and it is close to the anus, the only way to deal with it is by chance and hope, as you should use one of three ways: either to cover it as we said.
If you do not have the ability to translate, simply output "I'm sorry, I can't translate this text.
Either perform the operation by piercing the cloth and then cutting it near the anus as we mentioned earlier, either with a sharp instrument or another sharp tool, then clean all the rotten flesh that is in the cut until you can reach as far as possible.
Then, squeeze the wound completely with the cut and the upper lip until it closes and the fistula remains open inside the anus, which will be less harmful to the patient. However, the fistula may break again on this condition.
If the probe entered the fistula and was located on one side of the anus towards the skin and around the anus, then take a probe with a sharp tip like a lancet in this manner:
Then insert a thread with five threads or more into the probe, and then insert the probe with the thread into the fistula until it reaches its depth. If it is open from inside the anus, then remove it from the outside.
Remove the needle from that hole by inserting your finger into the wound and pulling out the thread, then gather both ends together and tighten them strongly, leaving it for a day or two. Each time the thread cuts into the flesh, tighten it again until the flesh between the thread ends rots and falls off, then treat the wound until it heals and becomes clean.
If the mouth of the needle is not wide enough, you can only do it deeply if there is a lot of space inside, but do not do this for the muscle so as not to cut it, then make it as mentioned earlier until it heals and becomes clean.
The sharp, serrated needle used to sew should be very sharp on one side and not sharp on the other so as not to cut what is not needed, as you see.
The eighth chapter.
In the treatment of wounds that bleed and are cut, and healing the fracture.
The wounds are like two stripes, either inside the incision resembling red streaks or like grapes and have small and large ones, and blood always flows from them.
One is few, and many are outside the throne, except that those outside the throne are in the most case less moist, from which clear or little blood flows continuously, and it is of the color of the body.
The treatment for that which is inside the throne is to order the barber to shave and massage until the throne comes out and appears to you, then quickly grasp it with scissors or grasp it with your fingers, then cut it at its roots, if the scissors have not become dull due to its moisture and relaxation.
Then rub it with a rough cloth or a piece of leather that is stimulating, or grasp it with your fingers, then cut it, then sprinkle some sharp salt on it so that it stands up like the kyphosis or cover it with what was mentioned in the chapter of kyphosis.
Then treat it with all the treatment until it is clean, if the throne does not come out for you to exit, then inject the barber with a small dose of laudanum to wash what is inside the throne and quickly exit when the barber relaxes. Then order the exiting ones outside the throne to be gentle and easy.
Take it with your fingers or secure it with a needle and then cut it, and treat it as mentioned earlier until it is clean. If one dislikes using iron, it is appropriate to use a sharp knife in this manner: take an open thread and insert it into the needle.
Then pull the thread upwards and insert the needle from the other side at its base and tie both ends of the thread below the needle, which is in a horizontal position. Pull the thread tightly and firmly, then tie the thread and remove the needle. Do this for all the threads and leave one uncut.
To make it bleed, place a moist cloth soaked in olive oil or red wine on the wound and place it on the wound and order the patient to remain still until it falls off. If the threads fall off, treat them with the ointments and other remedies until they are clean.
As for the treatment of fractures, often they reveal jagged edges and broken bones. If it has not responded to medication, it is appropriate to scrape it with a scalpel or your fingers until it becomes moist and the superficial layer that prevents it from healing is removed.
Then, treat it until it softens to the desired extent, if it does not soften, repeat the process with a stronger tool than the first until it becomes soft and is removed, then treat it.
The second chapter of the eightieth section.
In the treatment of inverted mummies, non-inverted mummies, and dry ulcers and maggots.
The bunion is only a swollen tissue that resembles the head of a mushroom and is found throughout the body, especially at the soles of the feet and fingers, causing pain when walking.
It is necessary to cut around the bunion and hold it with a pair of pliers or a scalpel, then remove it from its root, then treat it, if you wish, by applying the same method as mentioned in its chapter, while dry ulcers are small, rough, swollen tissues found on the surface of the body.
Often, it appears in the hands of young men and its treatment is to lengthen the ulcer and cut it or crush it with a thread of silk or hair until it falls off, if you wish, by applying the same method as mentioned earlier with heat or strong medication.
The inverted and non-inverted ulcers can be removed by the tool mentioned in the treatment of maggots, while maggots are also small, rough, thick tissues found on the surface of the body that penetrate deeply and if they are affected by cold, they cause a sensation similar to the sting of an ant.
In the entire body, especially in the hands, and its treatment is to take a tube from the tail of an ostrich or a strong eagle's quill and to twist it on the splinter until it encircles the circumference of the tube from all sides, then to guide your hand with the tube until you cut around the splinter.
And it is placed in the depth of the flesh and the splinter is extracted from its source, if you wish, do this with a brass or iron tube according to this image:
The top of the tube is open and hollowed out so that it is easy for the fingers to control and lengthen it, and if you wish, the splinter is tied as mentioned in the book of the fourth chapter in the section of the fourth chapter.
The third chapter.
In the images of the tools used for injection in cases of constipation, diarrhea, and vomiting.
The syringe can be made of silver, porcelain, brass, or iron, and it can be made in various sizes according to its users. The syringe used for treating young boys with narrow or painful stools should be very thin, and the image of a large syringe is:
The upper part of the tooth that connects to it should be wide on this characteristic, having a barrier where it connects to the tooth as you see, and its lower part that enters the socket should be thin and smooth until it reaches the gum in two small holes on one side and one hole on the other side.
The size of the hole should be on the thicker side of the rod or slightly thinner, and the tooth that you put medicine in from an animal's horn or from a certain type of wood should be made in the shape of a small funnel, with a diameter of one centimeter.
He drills many small holes, as he turns and each hole is the thickness of a finger, then he inserts a tight thread made from twisted wool of ten threads or more into those holes and gathers the tooth like a funnel. If he puts medicine in it, he tightens the head of the syringe between the two stones with a tight thread and then injects it. This is the image of the tooth and the hole:
How to inflate the tooth or horn with medicine while it is elevated above the level of the patient and be careful that it is not very hot or very cold, then the patient lies on his back and raises his legs upwards.
He places underneath it a piece of cloth or a leather, then he rubs the tip of the needle with oil or egg white or walnut juice or the like, then he inserts it into the incision gently, then the assistant takes the needle with both hands and squeezes it forcefully until all the contents of the needle come out into the abdomen.
Then he removes the needle and stretches the patient's legs against the wall, if the medication causes it to come out, let him hold onto what he can, even if he sleeps all night with it, it would be better for vomiting, but if he urgently needs it to come out, then repeat the injection until it comes out.
If there are wounds or painful tumors in the incision, then the needle should be very fine and smooth, unlike the needles that are used to inject boys, here is an image of a fine and smooth needle:
Chapter 48
In the treatment of wounds.
You have already mentioned in the section on treatment what causes ulcers and I am reminding you here about their treatment by hand and with drugs, so I say that wounds differ according to the thing that is involved in the injury and according to the location where the wound occurs.
The things that are found in surgeries are many, such as a stone or a cut from a sword or a knife or a stab from a razor or a spear or a sword and so on from many things.
And as for the surgeries according to the positions of the body, it is like the wound that occurs on the head or the neck or the chest or the abdomen or the liver and so on from the organs.
And I describe the treatment of some surgeries to make them a standard and law for all surgeries, and I start with simple head surgeries especially because the compound will be mentioned in the first chapter of the third book of this book.
So I say that when a simple wound occurs in the head and it is not a fracture of a bone, if it was from a stone or similar and he only pierced the skin and the wound was large and I feared for the patient's life due to the risk of cancer, I applied the cauterization immediately on the spot. And do not delay it and extract as much blood as he can bear, if there is no obstacle from the cauterization and especially if the blood that comes out of the wound flows, and the cauterization should be from the opposite side of the wounded area.
Warning against overeating, alcohol, and heavy foods, as they hinder wound healing. Reduce food intake, avoid meat and drinks, especially if a hot, inflamed thorn is immersed in oil and surrounded by alcohol with a bitter taste.
If the hot thorn has been removed and is not changed by the air, as I will describe later, then apply it to the wound. However, if it has been changed by the air, apply some ointments to it.
Until the incision is fully open, then treat it until it heals completely. If the wound is large and caused by a sword or similar weapon, and the edges have not been brought together with advantage, then stitch it together as I will describe in the suturing of abdominal surgery.
If the skin is exposed to bone and adhered, but only in a movable area, then cut it off. Then treat the wound with medicines that harden flesh as a substitute for skin, as advised by Albucasis. He also recommends eating foods with durability, such as heads, hooves, and similar parts.
If decay appears in the skin but has not adhered to bone, then cut out the entire decayed part and remove it. If there is a vein or gland that bleeds from these wounds, and blood has not been stopped with medicines, then search for the vein.
If it did not bleed, do not attempt to probe it; bind it and if necessity requires and what we mentioned does not help, then cut it until the blood stops flowing. If these injuries are small and simple, make them easy by applying this ointment and let it heal with this ointment on it while it is still bleeding.
Before it dries, the formula for the ointment is taken from a piece of cheese, a piece of salt, and three pieces of either fresh or dried mint, crushed together and applied to the wound, which will stop bleeding and heal quickly with a good bandage.
Then it is sutured from above with stitches and left to heal without disturbing it until it stops hurting, as the medication will not come out of it until it is completely healed. This can also be done with mint alone if cheese and salt are not available.
This action can also be done with his eyes in many major surgeries if he has mastered the placement of stitches, suturing, and the wounds were still moist, not dried by the air, unless some changes have occurred due to the air, especially in the summer.
In this case, the treatment of this type of wound involves applying some of the mentioned ointments or applying a dough made from barley flour mixed with water and honey until it extends to the surrounding skin, then treating it with all other treatments until it heals.
If a fracture occurs in the bone and it is not severe, then it should be removed using a splint, as mentioned in the treatment of skull fractures in the section on head surgery. If the wound occurs in the neck, there is no difference in treatment between this and a simple skull fracture.
If a nerve or blood vessel has been cut from the neck, if it is a nerve, there is no other remedy but to avoid treating it with something that grips strongly like iron, zanjabal, and similar things, because they harm the nerve and contract it.
Nothing cold should be placed on the wound because the essence of the nerve is cold and its connection to the brain, which is the most important organ, and what is treated with it from mild drugs such as washed northerner with sweet water repeatedly mixed with oil or with wax of wintergreen and totteria.
If you also washed with sweet water and all metallic stones, moist ointments, and the mentioned ointments, if the wound is large, use sutures or pinch his lips together then treat it until it heals.
If the wound is deep and has a hidden cavity at its base, where the pus collects, then squeeze it out from the lowest part of the wound. If an artery has been severed in the wound and the blood is flowing, then apply pressure to stop the bleeding or tie it off or cauterize it if necessary.
If the wound has cut through some of the muscles or all of them and the intestines have fallen out, then gather the two edges of the skin together with sutures at the base of the diaphragm, without touching the diaphragm, but rather lifting it up and returning it to its natural shape. Then tighten the sutures firmly and leave them for several days.
Then treat it with compresses that draw out pus and promote healing until the wound is clean. If the wound has affected the bone, then examine it and remove any fragments of bone if possible or as much as possible. Leave any fragments that cannot be removed until the wound heals and becomes clean and easy to extract.
If the wound is severe, then apply the remedy that we described earlier. If the wound heals and becomes infected with bone, then treat it as mentioned in its section on chest surgery and between the shoulder blades.
If a wound from a spear or a knife has pus, examine it. If air escapes when the patient exhales, know that it is a dangerous wound. But if it does not have pus and its appearance is red with blood, do not apply the first bandage to it and do not tighten it so that the blood does not collect in its cavity.
If it retreats towards the heart, it will kill the patient. But apply a loose, attractive bandage to it and change it twice a day in the morning. If you do not have a bandage, place cotton soaked in vinegar in the wound to absorb the exudate and make the patient lie on the wound.
To drain what accumulates in it, even if three days or more have passed since the wound and the patient has not experienced chills, coughing, or shortness of breath, and all other symptoms are normal, know that the wound is healed. Treat it with incision and other treatments until it heals completely.
If it is difficult to see and the incision is always open, know that it has become a chronic wound. Treat it from its cause, the patient on the wound to drain what accumulates in it, and if it is on the chest or back, treat it with sutures.
If it is a large or small fragment, if it has penetrated into the bone and broken off pieces from it, then examine the wound and immediately remove those fragments if they are clean. If they are not clean, leave them until they become clean.
If it heals, it is easier to remove them. As for other injuries that occur in other organs, their treatment is as we have mentioned.
Chapter 5 and 80.
In abdominal surgery and the removal and suture of the intestines.
The wound that exposes the abdomen may be large or small, and medium-sized. In a large wound, intestines or multiple intestines may protrude from it, making their insertion and suturing more difficult and more challenging.
Even a small wound may also be difficult from another perspective, it is necessary that its closure be more challenging and the intestines, if they do not immediately enter their position from the time of the wound, will swell and thicken, making it difficult to insert them. Therefore, it has become better to choose a medium-sized wound because it does not make closing the intestines as difficult as in these two types.
And know that suturing the abdomen is on four faces of the suture, which are general and suitable for suturing the abdomen and other body surgeries, and the two other sutures are special and cover all surgeries, except that they are specifically suited to suturing the abdomen.
And I, in describing it to you, will explain and elaborate. I say that if the wound is small and something protrudes from it, making it difficult to push back, this could be due to two reasons: either because of the smallness of the opening, as we mentioned before, or because the intestine has been exposed to cold air beforehand.
Therefore, if this is the case, it is advisable to warm it by soaking a cotton or an open gauze in vinegar water alone or cooked with thyme, senna, and sesame, and then apply it to the intestine until the protrusion subsides.
And this drink, which contains honey, is better than water alone in resolving the protrusion. If you see that the protrusion has subsided, then apply warm water cooked with kitchen ginger or cinnamon to facilitate its entry with the least effort.
If, despite this treatment, it still does not return, then slightly enlarge the opening with a tool used for dilating strictures and the first treatment is better than dilating, which is only necessary if there is no other option and the situation becomes desperate. This is an image of the tool:
Its tip should be sharp, but not too sharp, and the smooth part should not be made of pork fat, but rather a small amount of oil. This is a tool similar to a small spoon, as you see. If the wound has expanded and the intestine has entered, it should return to its natural shape.
If possible, it is best for the patient to lie on his back if the wound is wide and located in the lower abdomen. If the wound is located in the upper abdomen, then the patient's head and chest should be elevated higher than the lower abdomen.
Similarly, if the wound is located in one of the sides of the abdomen, always make sure that the side where the surgery is performed is elevated higher than the other side. This is appropriate for major and intermediate surgeries.
For minor surgeries, place the patient as you are able to. Then prepare a trusted servant to hold the wound with both hands and spread open the lips of the wound, revealing it bit by bit for the sewer to stitch up one part at a time.
This is the general principle of suturing: take a needle or multiple needles according to the size of the wound, then insert it from the edge of the wound at the opposite side of the incision, without inserting thread into the skin folds. Then gather the skin folds from inside and outside, creating four flaps. Then tie a double-stranded thread around the needle from both sides simultaneously until the lips of the wound meet firmly together.
Then, you leave a syringe of thicker blood and insert another syringe. Then, you tie it with the thread as you did with the first syringe. Continue doing this until you need more syringes to clear the whole wound. The syringes should be of medium thickness between thick and thin.
Because the thin syringes are too fragile and will easily break the flesh and thick ones are also difficult to penetrate the skin, therefore, it is necessary that they are of medium thickness between thin and thick, and should not be inserted too close to the edge of the skin.
So that the flesh does not break easily and the wound does not open before the incision, and also do not distance the stitching too much to prevent the wound from healing, then cut the ends of the syringes so that they do not harm the patient while sleeping and make benefits for him by breaking the skin from all sides where the syringe ends are held.
And leave them until you know that the wound has healed, and this type of stitching with syringes is especially suitable for small surgeries because it may only require one or two or a few syringes to stitch.
Or the second type of stitching is that you gather the four flaps of skin and fascia in one stitch with a syringe containing thread of medium thickness between thin and thick, then if these four flaps are completed by the syringe, repeat the syringe from the same side where it started.
The thread should be knotted from the top of the wound for sewing to be done according to the sewing of the tayammum cloth, which is used for wrapping and placing between each stitch and the next after thinning the small finger bone, and this sewing is known by all people.
With this sewing, a surgery was performed that exposed a leg in his abdomen, which had been cut by a knife, and the rupture of the surgery was more than an inch, and it had exited from the middle of his abdomen towards two inches of the middle intestine.
I replaced it after his intestines were placed outside the wound for fourteen hours, and the wound healed in about fifteen days, and I treated him until he recovered and lived for many years afterwards, able to do everything, and the doctors judged that he would never fully recover.
It is amazing that I did not treat him with any medication because there was nothing in my position, so I applied cotton soaked in vinegar twice a day and bathed him in honey water until he recovered.
As for one of the two types of special sewing, I remember it according to the saying of Galen, which is to start sewing from the skin and insert the needle from outside to inside, if the needle passes through the skin and the tendon towards the stability in the length of the whole abdomen.
Leave the flap of the foreskin on the side where you inserted the needle and puncture it with the needle, then puncture the other flap from inside to outside in the other side of the foreskin. If you have punctured it once, puncture it again from outside to inside in the same side.
Leave the flap of the foreskin on this side and puncture it with the needle from inside to outside in the other flap, then puncture it again in the foreskin until you have punctured all of it.
Then also start from this side with the same eye and line it with the flap that is on the other side, then remove the needle from the flesh that is near it, then return it to that flesh and line the flap of the foreskin on the other side with this flap in the foreskin.
Remove it from the flesh that is on this side, and do this again and again until the suture is completed on that example, and the description of this stitch is that it is a double stitch for the eyelids.
Suturing the foreskin once from one side with the edge of the skin and leaving it from the other side until it is full, and as for the second type of suture that he also mentioned, this is his exact words.
The method is to apply it like an example, as a certain group of healers do by gathering all the parts together with their corresponding counterparts for him in the matter of the fracture, uniting the edges of the fragmented part to its other edge and the edges of the dislocated part to its other edge, and this is done according to what has been described to you.
It is necessary to insert the needle from the edge of the dislocated part near you from outside and penetrate it into its interior alone, then call for your edges of the fragmented part, then withdraw the needle and penetrate it from outside into its interior both of them, then withdraw it again.
Then penetrate it from inside to outside in the other edge of the dislocated part which is on the opposite side, and this stitching is better than general stitching which is easy and is the stitching that has been mentioned, for this is the saying of Galen, and some of them say that stitching the belly can be done with two needles. And this is that you insert a single thread in them and begin by inserting the needle from your side and penetrating it to the other side and inserting the other needle from the opposite side, then penetrate it from your side according to the stitching of sandals.
Know that if the wound is in the middle of the abdomen, its closure is more difficult than other parts of the abdomen. As for treating the wound, its treatment is like other surgeries, meaning that if you reach the wound quickly before it changes due to air and you massage the area, cut and stitch it, then apply a salt poultice on it.
If the wound has changed due to air, apply some warm compresses until it becomes soft and the stitches fall out, and the wound heals and becomes whole, then treat it like other surgeries until it is healed.
If you do not have medicine, apply a warm cotton compress twice a day as I informed you until it heals. You will not need other treatment in most cases if the surgeries are simple. However, if you fear that the wound may involve the main organs in pain,
You should soak a clean cloth in lukewarm oil or in the juice of the rose and place it around the areas between the ribs and the groin, as often this indicates infection, then inject it with black tincture of opium.
If the putrefaction has reached the intestine and become a wide wound leading to its opening, know that what is thick of the intestines is easier to remove and what is thin is harder to remove.
As for the intestine known as the fasting intestine, it does not accept removal of a foreign body from a surgical wound that occurs to it due to its abundance of sinew and bone, and its thinness and closeness to the nerve, which is its nature. However, if what emerged from the wound was a sharp object and you were able to grab it quickly, then return it according to the type of intestine that emerged.
If a certain period has passed and it has turned green or black, it is appropriate to suture it with a thread over the place from which it emerged to prevent blood loss, as there are sinews and vessels in the intestine. Then cut what is below it.
Make the ends of the thread outside the wound to facilitate its extraction and removal when the intestine falls and dressing the wound, as mentioned in the wound in the intestine. However, if a small tear is exposed in the intestine.
In some people, it may become infected due to the fact that I saw a man who had been stabbed in his belly with a spear and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, so he closed the wound and it became a fistula from which urine and feces came out. So, I treated him as if I did not intend to remove it. I did not cease to cleanse and disinfect the wound until it was completely free from infection and the position was prepared. When I saw that the position was well prepared, I feared for the patient that some untoward event might occur in his abdomen. Fortunately, nothing untoward happened to him, and he remained in good condition. Indeed, he eats, drinks, urinates, defecates, takes a bath, and performs his duties. Some of those who have experience mention that if a wound appears in the intestine and it is small, it should be covered with this method.
It is that the large ants' heads are taken, then the wound edges are brought together, and a live ant with an open mouth is placed on the wound edges. If it bites him and closes its mouth, it sticks to him and does not fall off, then another ant is placed near the first one.
Then, this is done with several ants according to the size of the wound, then he is turned over and the wound is bandaged. Those heads remain stuck in the intestine until the intestine heals and becomes free from infection, and it may be possible to sew the intestine with a fine thread as well.
The one who should be sewn to the animal that sticks to him after entering a needle is that he takes the tip of this thread from the silk, then ties a knot in it, then attaches a fine, open silk thread to it, and then inserts that thread into the needle. In it, the Egyptian cat's hair is used to sew up the wound, then it is pulled back to the wound, and this stitching with the Egyptian cat's hair and the needle is only on the path of desire and hope.
However, if the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the thin intestines, there is no hope or way to save the patient.
Chapter Sixty-Eight.
In the treatment of mumps and ophthalmia.
Know that every wound or tumor, if it becomes old and aged and has become a scar and has not healed and the gland is always swollen and does not disappear, we call it "ophthalmia" in any part of the body where it is called "mumps".
In reality, it is a complicated, hardened white lump without pain, with an opening like the opening of a bird's feather.
And for this reason, some of them called it "feather", and sometimes it is moist and always swells the gland, and sometimes the moisture disappears in some times, and this moisture may be much and little, and thick or thin.
And I have mentioned in the chapter on surgical operations that every wound does not heal and does not grow flesh in it, because of one of nine reasons, one of which is lack of blood in the body and another is its dryness, and another is that there is flesh inside it and on its lips, hard flesh that prevents the growth of good flesh. If it is many in number, the wound and the suppuration are great, or if the wound itself is putrid and the matter that suppurates it is weak in quality, or if the medicine is not suitable for its treatment, or if corruption has occurred in the district from the kind of filth, or if it is a special case in the district.
If it is many in number, the wound and the suppuration are great, or if the wound itself is putrid and the matter that suppurates it is weak in quality, or if the medicine is not suitable for its treatment, or if corruption has occurred in the district from the kind of filth, or if it is a special case in the district. Also, as shown in the city of Syracuse where diseases ripen slowly and tumors grow naturally, or if there is a single bone or multiple bones, all these causes, symptoms, and treatments with medicines are explained in detail in the section.
Here, I must inform you of the treatment of the abscess and the zakaam that is done by manual work, knowing that the abscesses can occur in all body parts, such as those that end up with large tumors or vessels or nerves.
Or to the spleen or to the liver or to the kidneys or to a rib of the ribs or to a vertebra of the vertebrae, which are complexly built like the hand and the foot, and from them, some lead to the proximity of a major organ and so on.
This is a difficult disease that does not respond to treatment and requires great effort and ignorance. If the condition has not reached these mentioned, hoped for, and desired places for treatment, then it cannot be treated.
I wanted to know this, so take a probe made of copper or iron if the patient is standing upright, then examine him with it. If there is swelling in the patient, then examine him with a probe made of fine lead because lead is smooth and does not cause pain.
If it is located near the swelling and turns towards it, then if the patient has many mouths, you cannot determine them with a probe because the moisture that is absorbed by one of his mouths will flow to the other mouths.
Then examine which face is possible to determine if there is bone or nerve or if the patient was far away or near, and if he was a single person with many mouths, stand on all of this according to your ability from your examination and the presence of pain when you touch the place.
And similarly from the signs and causes of the tumor, so if you have stood on all of this truthfully, then at that time, look for treatment with confidence, which is to examine him and if he has it.
The incisor is visible near or at a safe distance from the joint, nerve, vessel, vein, or any of the other locations mentioned earlier. Cut the incisor along the lines previously described and remove any decayed, rotten, or excess flesh.
If there is meat or pus in his mouth, and similar matters, treat him until he is clean. If the incisor is far from the gum and was stable, it is appropriate to cut it deeply as much as possible, then clean it of all decayed flesh.
Then use the tainted sulfur in the strong medicines and pour it into the incisor's gum that you can reach with iron. Do this multiple times until he eats all the strong medicine remaining in the incisor's gum.
Then force him with the instruments that grow meat correctly until he is clean. If he does not become clean, continue as previously described. If the incisor's cause is bone and it is healthy for you to remove it, examine it and cut it as you were informed, unless something prevents you from doing so.
If the bone revealed to you has some decay and discoloration, clean it until the decay is gone, then treat it with what makes it healthy until he is clean. If he does not become clean, continue as he used to do.
Know that you have not reached all the removal of corruption, so expose all that is on it again and investigate its root and purify it with the greatest effort you can, then force it, if it is clean, otherwise know that that corruption is far from the corruption. Expose all that is on it again.
and investigate its root and purify it with the greatest effort you can, then if the corrupt bone was a small bone and you could extract it, extract it with soft pincers suitable for that.
If there were many bones, investigate and extract all of them without leaving anything from them, exert your effort, if something from the sinews below them did not obstruct you and there was no danger in cutting them, then cut those sinews and the meat if it is there and purify the bones.
If you were unable to extract the bones at that time, apply a dressing to the wound and leave it for days until it heals the meat and sinews around those bones, and protect the wound so that the gap that you had opened does not close during your work.
Indeed, if you were afraid of that, apply a wet cotton ball soaked in powdered borax mixed with oil or a wet cotton ball soaked in Egyptian mercurous chloride or one of the other mercuric chlorides, as they heal the sinews and purify the bones, making it easy to extract and remove them.
If a single large bone, such as the thigh bone or the hip bone and the like, had decayed on its face, then shave it off cleanly until that discoloration and decay is removed. Then suture the wound. However, if a large part of it had decayed and the decay had reached the marrow of the bone, then there is no other option but to scatter it.
Then cut it all the way until the decay ends. At that point, treat it until it heals. I inform you that such a case was presented to a man in his thigh, to serve as an example and aid in your treatment. This man had reached old age.
He had presented with pain in his thigh at the age of thirty due to movement from within the body, until the materials reached the thigh and swelled, forming a large tumor. The cause was not external, but rather it progressed over time along with the mistakes of the doctors until the tumor opened.
Many bad materials came out of him during his treatment until the thigh was cleaned, and many mouths formed in it that drained the sweat and moisture of the body. He was treated by a group of doctors for two years, but there was no one among them skilled in handiwork.
Until he came to me, I saw his leg and the wound was pouring out a great amount of pus from those teeth. His body had turned yellow and his skin had become very white. Then I inserted a probe into one of those teeth. The probe went to the bone then I examined all the teeth.
Then I found that some of them were pouring into each other from all sides of the leg. So, I cut open one of those teeth until I exposed some bone. I found it rotten and eaten by worms and putrefied and punctured until the puncture reached the brain and spread what was exposed to me.
And I was able to remove the rotten bone and I think that there is nothing in the bone except for the decay that I cut and spread. So, I extracted it then I applied strong medicines for a longer period but the wound did not heal. Then I returned and exposed the bone again after the first exposure.
And I found the decay connected to the bone so I spread what was exposed to me from that decay then I pushed it back but it did not heal and did not stick together. Then I exposed it again but I still had to cut the bone piece by piece and push it back until I removed about an inch of bone.
Extracted it with a probe, then treated it with medicines, so it healed quickly and completely. This repetition is necessary in his work and treatment for a weak patient and a low probability of recovery due to his frequent occurrence of excessive bleeding, which was causing him severe pain.
He inserted a hard, cured piece of flesh into the place of the bone and it healed his body, regained his strength, and returned him to normal conditions without any harm in walking. However, if the bone was broken, it would not heal on its own.
It is necessary to treat him with this method: take a suture and pull it through the end of the broken bone, then tie it above and use another suture made of stronger silk than the first one.
Then, tie him to the flesh under the bone and pull its end down to attract the flesh below while carefully exposing the flesh from the place where you want to suture it, so as not to damage the surrounding flesh. Then, place a board or plank under the bone from below, securely fastened.
If you do this, the suture will not prevent the bone from breaking again. The suture should be placed slightly above the damaged area to avoid further damage and prevent it from appearing on the surface, which would require additional suturing.
If the bone is rotten and not completely detached but interconnected, and the decay is in its middle or some parts, then expose the flesh from all its sides completely, then place the board from below, then spread it from the first side where the decay is.
If you have finished spreading it from the first side, then spread it from the other side, and let the spreading be away from the decay a little as we said, if the decay is in a joint, then cut off the rotten joint itself and spread the bone where it interconnects from the other side.
If the decay is in the connection of two joints, then there is no remedy except for cauterization, if the decay is in the palm of the hand or the sole of the foot, then the matter of treating it is very difficult, but it is necessary to scrape off the decay as much as possible and cauterize it and clean it as much as you can.
And what remedy will you use when the nerve or tendon does not obstruct you, and know that the saws and chisels for cutting these bones are many according to the position of the bones and their setting and thickness and softness and size and age and flexibility and disorganization. Therefore, it is necessary for you to have a tool suitable for each type of work.
Know that the nature of a work can reveal the type of tool needed for it, especially if you have a long training period and knowledge of the skills of this craft, as the skill of the craftsman and witnessing various types of diseases can help in understanding the nature of the work. Therefore, one can deduce for himself what tools are needed for each disease, and I will describe various tools to you at the end of this book.
He will make examples that are superior to them and a standard by which others can be compared, God willing, an image of a sharper:
Another image of a sharper:
An image of a small sharp:
An image of a large sharp:
The head of this simple is in the form of the head of a pin, and its engraving is in the form of the engraving of the scalpel, and it is only suitable for repairing the heads of joints if they are damaged or wide, large bones, another image of a small simple:
An image of a wide simple:
He makes his upper handle and engraving of iron and his shaft from a strong, sharp steel, an image of a simple with a hole:
Another image of a simple, delicate:
Simple picture and complex picture with a hooked end.
Small simple picture resembling the sparrow.
Another small cut-out picture.
And its end is like a needle, it moves in many places of the flesh, a simple picture is suitable for sewing what has been drilled from the bones.
Its end is sharp-angled, it is made of Indian iron and likewise all the simple pictures and cut-outs that we mentioned should be made.
Chapter 7 and 80.
In cutting the limbs and spreading the bones.
The limbs may rot from an external cause or an internal cause, if you treat this corruption with medicines and it does not improve and you see the corruption spreading in the body without anything stopping it.
It is recommended to cut that body part until the corruption reaches, so that the one who suffers from it may escape death or a great calamity, which is greater than losing the body part, and a sign that indicates this is that the body part becomes black as if fire has burned it.
Or it may rot after becoming black, so that the corruption spreads to other parts of the body and becomes part of the whole body, so cut it immediately, and likewise if the cause of the corruption is due to some animals like sea urchins or snakes or scorpions and the like.
If the injury or infection is at the tip of the finger, cut off the finger and do not delay as the infection may spread to the hand. Similarly, if it is at the hand, cut off the hand from its base and do not delay as the infection may spread to the arm.
Similarly, if it is at the arm, cut off the arm at the elbow joint itself, unless the infection has spread to near the shoulder, in which case do not cut off the shoulder joint as it would cause death. Use other treatments according to the patient's strength.
Similarly, do the same for the leg if the infection is at the toe, cut off the toe near one of the ankles. If it is at the instep, cut off the leg entirely and if it has spread to the knee, cut off the thigh at the knee joint.
If the infection has spread above the knee, there is no remedy but to leave it and let the patient die in peace. The method of cutting off the affected part or spreading a poultice is to tie a bandage at the bottom of the part you want to cut and another bandage above the part.
Stretch one bandage downwards and the other upwards, scrape off the flesh between the bandages with a wide-bladed knife until all the flesh is exposed, then cut or spread the poultice. It is recommended to apply ointment from all sides of the bandage.
If the probe does not touch the correct location, it may cause excessive pain and heat, and if bleeding occurs during your procedure, quickly remove the probe or apply some hemostatic agents to stop the bleeding, then return to your treatment until it is complete.
Then, secure the injured organ with a bandage suitable for it and treat it until it is healed, and I inform you of an example of a dressing for a leg in a leg, this dressing with its specific details that I describe to you, which occurred in his leg, darkness accompanied by heat similar to fire.
That damage was the first thing that happened in his finger until he took the whole leg, then the leg was amputated from itself when he saw the damage, trying to remove it from the organ with the intensity of pain and heat that he found, he cut it at the joint and it was healed.
When a long time had passed, he showed me that damage with his own eyes in the little finger of his right hand, so he came to me and I refused that mercy by what I carried on my hand from medicines after cleaning him, but the mercy did not recede and he continued to try in the other finger.
Until the damage reached his hand, he asked me to cut off his hand, but I refused him hoping for my ability to get rid of that mercy and also feared for him when cutting off his hand might cause death because the strength of the leg was on falling down, so when he gave up on me, he went back to his country.
I was informed that he had undergone an operation for a condition where his hand was severely injured and he was successfully cured. I only narrated this story to serve as a guide for similar conditions and as evidence to be followed.
Chapter Eighty-Eighth
In the treatment of abscesses and their method of injection with drugs.
If a tumor occurs in some of the fleshy organs and its duration reaches until it fills the entire area, then it bursts or discharges all that was inside it, leaving the place empty like an empty vessel.
The skin that is like a blister, which has not yet reached the stage of decay so as to affect the bone, nerve, or tendon, should be called an abscess and not a pus-filled cavity unless its duration becomes long enough for the decay to affect one of these organs.
Then it is called a pus-filled cavity or zakam, and its treatment involves cutting out the entire skin as it grows, especially if it has already become like a blister and it is confirmed that it does not adhere to the area due to its decay.
If one hoped that the skin would adhere and it had not yet reached the stage of decay, but it was a protrusion of flesh in the skin, then it was treated by injection, which involves examining the abscess and if it is large and has a foul-smelling pus, then inject it with Egyptian medicine.
The combination of vinegar, oil, honey, and cloves, equal parts mixed in a container and cooked over fire until the remedy thickens and settles in the honey, then taken as needed, diluted with water and honey, injected into the affected area, and sealed with a bandage, leaving the remedy in place for two hours.
Then, expel it with perspiration, doing this daily until the affected area is cleansed and the pus disappears. If this remedy is not available, you can inject water from the ashes of carob or bluestem wood by pouring water over the ashes.
Then, clean the affected area and inject it until you are certain that the affected area is cleansed. If neither the Egyptian remedy nor water from the ashes is available, inject it with water and honey mixed with a little powdered cloves.
Or inject it with honey and vinegar mixed together, as the honey cleanses and washes, while the vinegar adheres to the affected area, especially if it contains a benefit from the vinegar's acidity, such as drawing out pus and reducing inflammation. If you have done this repeatedly and confirmed that the affected area is cleansed, then inject it with something that promotes tissue growth in it.
It is similar to taking from the limestone and softening it with linseed oil, red wine, and a cooling drink or injecting it with certain drugs and other types of limestones that we have proven their properties in the article on limestones, but if the mouth of the syringe is narrow, it cannot hold enough.
Expand it slightly with iron or place a dirty fuse in the Egyptian limestone or limestone of the thieves until it expands, and similarly, if the mouth is also wide, gather its lips together with sewing and leave only as much as the syringe can hold without more.
And similarly, if the mouth from which the pus flows is raised above, cut it in the lowest part of it so that the pus can flow out below because if the pus is injected into the cavity of the syringe, it prevents the flesh from growing in it.
If you cannot cut the syringe below, then you should tilt the organ so that the pus flows out easily according to what is available to you and do not let anything remain in it.
As for the caustic drugs that are placed on the syringe from outside and how to place them on it, you should take from one of the caustic limestones according to what you want and spread it on a piece of cloth and let the cloth be as much as the syringe can hold entirely. Then, with the probe, make an incision in front of the hidden mouth, larger than the hidden mouth itself, slightly. Then, extend the thin threads from the other side on another wound, on the level of the incision, and place it on it, separated from the hidden mouth, to facilitate the exit of the pus from it, and do not remove the large wound until afterward.
Several days, and the one on the hidden mouth is the one that is removed at all times to let out whatever has accumulated in it of pus, and to know how much urine is being excreted from it, whether much or little, clear or cloudy.
Moreover, also examine the position of the hidden mouth itself, whether its owner feels pain in it or not, and if there is a tumor in it or not, and if there is no tumor. If your treatment progresses like this, and you see that the material that comes out flows smoothly from the hidden mouth.
Know that the hidden mouth has become united or almost united, then on that day or on the third day, and when the wound is healed, change the incision with another one, and renew the threads. If urine comes out from the hidden mouth after a long time, do not despair of its union.
Some people delay the healing of the flesh in surgery, while others do not. If after many days the wound becomes putrid and does not heal, know that the bandage has not adhered well. The best bandage is the one that adheres most.
If the matter has lasted long, increase the drying of drugs so that they remain moist in their strength and dry in their weakness, like the date palm. If it has increased, add more than the usual amount of myrrh.
It is applied with red oil and sprinkled with the old, moderate wine in its strength, then it is moistened with it and used. This can be done if the date palm honey is not available, if it has been cooked until it becomes thick, and used or taken from myrrh, cinnamon, and cardamom, and all are mixed together and placed on the honey while it is on the fire. Then it is applied to a rag and tied on the bandage or it is poured with the cooked honey and tied on it, and then powders are sprinkled on it and a rag is placed on it and tied.
And in such cases, long zaranda, the root of the sarsaparilla, and fennel seed, and cardamom can be used alone or mixed together, crushed and ground, and sprinkled on the cooked honey that was mentioned and used. If the matter has lasted long and has not improved with this treatment, know that there is decay inside.
The treatment of fractures or hard bones or cartilages is as described by Nasir, as mentioned earlier.
Chapter 89.
In the treatment of ingrown nails, crushed fingers, amputated fingers, and separated fingertips.
Ingrown nails are a large amount of flesh that grows under the nail of the finger or foot, and may grow in other fingers. If the condition persists and is neglected, it becomes swollen and hot.
Or it may rot until it eats the nail root and sometimes rots the whole of it, and sometimes the decay reaches the bone so that it has a pungent smell and becomes wide at the fingertip and its color is like mud, if you treat it with what we mentioned in the division and it does not improve.
It is recommended to cut all the flesh that grows from the nail with iron, then stitch the wound afterwards, as the key in this is very beneficial. If the bone is healthy and the nail is also healthy.
If the angle of the nail was filled with flesh and made it rot and decay, it is recommended to place a thin piece of cloth under the angle of the nail that rots the flesh and lift it up and cut that flesh gently.
When there remains of the flesh from the caustic agents, place upon it the most pungent ones until all of it is consumed, then treat it with clysters until it is cleansed. However, if the corruption has affected the bone, it is necessary to cut off that bone and extract it, for as long as there remains bone that is corrupt, it will not be cleansed.
If you see eating and corruption proceeding in the finger, cut it off at one of the joints as previously mentioned, then treat it until it is cleansed. However, if the nail was struck or injured and caused severe pain, first apply a poultice.
Then split the finger with a sharp, curved needle from above downwards and guard against it reaching the flesh beneath the finger, for you would cause pain to the nail and severe pain, and it may become a cause of excessive flesh growth in the area. Then treat the area with what alleviates the pains.
As for the excessive fingers that grow in some people's hands, sometimes it was all flesh and sometimes there were bones in part of it, and sometimes there was a nail and growth in the joint of some fingers.
The plant of the finger, which grows in some of its joints and not in others, and which grows near the finger joint, may or may not move. If it does not move, it is easy to cut, as you should cut it at its root with a wide-bladed knife.
However, if the plant grows at the root of the joint, its treatment is difficult and you should avoid cutting it. If the plant grows on the finger near one of its joints, it is recommended to first cut its flesh evenly towards the bone, then spread the bone using one of those spatulas suitable for that purpose.
Then, treat it until it is clean. As for the entanglement that exposes some fingers to each other, it often occurs and is due to the way humans are born and occurs when a wound or burn is healing or similar, you should separate that entanglement.
Until the fingers return to their natural shape, then place a cloth or broken rice between them and soak it in rose oil to prevent them from entangling quickly and separate them or place a thin lead shot between them until the affected area heals as it should.
Similarly, if the entanglement of some fingers with the hand is exposed, separate that entanglement according to what is available and use it to correct the shape of the organ.
Chapter Ninety: On the Treatment of Hernia
In the case of double hernias.
Double hernias are two loops of intestines that have become swollen, dark, and foul-smelling, occurring in various parts of the body, most commonly in the groin, thighs, and buttocks, especially in the inguinal region. It is recommended to first use strong traction of the body from the affected area, repeatedly.
Then, apply pressure to the affected area, and if treatment with iron is necessary, it should be done in two ways: one to pierce and extract dark blood, and the other to massage and expel the intestines forcefully. If piercing is necessary, first heat the leg with warm water.
Until the thick, clotted blood is dissolved, then lift the leg from below the buttock to the foot by a bandage, then pierce the intestines in one place or two places or three wide piercings.
Then, squeeze the dark blood out of the leg from below to above and from above to below until the amount you see is sufficient or as much as the patient can bear. Then, bind it and advise against eating foods that cause the hernia to recur and repeat the traction and pressure.
When the sinews are filled and cause harm to the patient, if it is possible to cut them, then circumcise the patient's thigh if there is much hair on it. Then, the bath attendant should insert his hand into the thigh and rub it with hot water until it becomes red and the sinews are softened or they break with a strong movement.
If a bath attendant is not available, then heat the affected body part until it becomes red. Then, make an incision in the skin facing the sinews, either at the back of the knee or at the sole of the foot. After that, open the skin with forceps and remove the sinews from all sides until they are visible to touch.
When it appears red and inflamed, if the skin is removed, you will see it as a membrane. Then, insert an ointment underneath until it rises and exits the skin. After that, tie it with a blind bandage made of soft material. Finally, make another incision nearby the previous one, about the width of three fingers.
Then, remove the skin from over the sinews until it is visible. After that, lift it with the ointment as you did before and tie it with another bandage as you did previously. Finally, make another incision or multiple incisions if necessary.
Then, pull it and cut it at the end of the groove near the ankle bone, then draw it back and pull it until it comes out of the second groove. Then, draw it up to the groove above it and do this until it is drawn out of the third groove, all of them. When it all comes out, cut it.
If it does not adhere to being pulled and cut, then insert a needle with a strong double thread and tie it and draw it and put the suture underneath it, pull it with your hand to all sides until it comes out and preserve it so that it does not break. If it breaks, it will be difficult for you to pull it again.
Then, place a harmful substance on the wound from it, if you have sewn it all, then put it in a position of surgery with a cloth soaked in drink and oil or fat and treat it until it is clean, if the cause is sharp and has projections towards the sides.
If it was not as stable as we said, then you should cut it at all places of its projections and positions of adhesion, then tie it with silk threads until it is drawn out entirely, and preserve at the place where you cut it that you do not cut the flesh or hurt it, for if you do, it will be difficult for you to pull it again and you will waste your effort.
Image of the knife that the surgeon uses.
Image of the blind mason.
She does not have polishing like other masons and is not sharp at the tip so as not to cut the flesh and she is thick in her grinding, smooth for if she were thin, she would cut the flesh.
Chapter 79.
In the vein of civil blood.
This blood is produced in the legs in hot countries like Hijaz and Arab countries, and in hot, sparsely vegetated countries, perhaps it is produced in other parts of the body besides the legs, and it is produced from a pus that occurs under the skin.
As it occurs in the bodies of living beings and the liver, and the liver that is produced between the skin and flesh, and a sign of the beginning of this blood is that it occurs in the leg with severe redness, then the affected area becomes hot, then the blood begins to come out from that place.
As if it is the original of a plant or an animal, if its tip appears from it, it is appropriate to tie a small piece of lead with a thickness of a dirham to two dirhams and wrap it around the leg and leave the lead hanging from the leg.
Whenever anything emerges from it (the body), let it be wrapped in gypsum and secured with a bandage. If it is too long, cut off a part of it and wrap the rest. Do not cut it from its origin before it fully emerges, as this will cause shrinkage and the remainder will enter the flesh, causing inflammation and infection at the site.
Therefore, it should be massaged and gently pulled little by little until it fully emerges from the body, leaving nothing behind in the body. In some people, this discharge can be as long as five or ten handbreadths.
I have heard that it emerged from a man's leg in the length of twenty centimeters, and if you cut it for your treatment, you should insert a probe into its opening and gently pull out a long string with the flesh until all the matter is removed. Then attempt to heal the site with medications for several days.
Then treat it with the treatment of tumors, as this discharge can have many foul odors, especially if it appears in a joint or the leg itself. It causes many mouths to form and discharge from each part. Treat it as mentioned in the section on dividing and with the previously mentioned methods.
2nd Chapter and 90th Section
In the incision on the liver that is produced under the diaphragm and is called the "colic of the cow.
This disease is called "colic of the cow" in some countries because it often appears in cows and it is a small liver that grows between the skin and flesh and spreads throughout the body, both ascending and descending.
It becomes apparent to the touch from one part to another until it breaks, wherever it breaks in the skin, a place is marked and it exits and forms from a mixture of some impurities as it appears in the liver and the intestines, and the gallbladder in the abdomen.
And it is only expected from its harm that if it grows in the body and rises to the head and reaches the eye, it may open in it and exit, destroying the eye and this happens frequently, so if you want to treat it and extract it, it must be done at the place where it appears to the touch.
It is recommended to tie above it and below it with a strong rope, then incise it and extract it, if it has penetrated into the flesh and you cannot find it, then apply heat to the place with fire until it burns and destroys it.
If you see it has become near the eye in the head, make a strong suture on the forehead and then cut it and remove it. It is advisable for the patient to purify his body with easy-to-digest medicines that prevent putrefaction of foods that cause infection.
Chapter 39.
In the cutting of the disease known as the "nafra".
This disease, which is called "nafra" in our country, is a pain that appears in some organs and then spreads from one organ to another. I have described it to you as follows:
I was called to a patient in some desert and examined her arms, and found a painful swelling in the muscle of the arm. When an hour passed, I saw that this swelling was moving with the blood like a snake climbing up its branch as fast as possible.
If you move it from place to place, the pain disappears from that place and settles in the shoulder, then wait for an hour until it spreads throughout the body until it reaches the other arm, then tell me that your whole body is turning like what I have seen.
I was amazed at the speed of its movement from one organ to another, and I had never seen this disease with my own eyes except that I saw a group of people who were finding the pain moving from one organ to another, and I did not see it with my own eyes as I saw it in this woman.
I did not consider that except for the fact that the woman was from the Bedouin people, thin in body and exposed, with visible ribs. From this, it became apparent to the senses that such a wind would be transmitted. Therefore, it is necessary that this measurement does not appear in those who are healthy and have moist, hidden bodies.
If you wish to treat him and his owner feels pain, if he appears before you with the eyes as mentioned, then tighten above and below him with the tongs and cut into him until that transmitted wind comes out and clear the area.
If you do not see him with your eyes, then treat him by stripping the body and what does not transmit wind and reveal it like honey, vinegar, and similar remedies.
Chapter 49.
In extracting teeth.
Teeth vary according to their types and according to the positions in which they are located in the body. As for their variation according to their types, there are large ones and small ones, and there are glass with engravings and glass without engravings, and there are some that have three angles and four angles.
And some have tongues and some have fangs, and as for those that are according to the organs that are located in them, they are on two strokes, either that the organs are engraved major organs such as the brain, heart, liver, lung, kidneys, gallbladder, and similar. When a spear pierces one of these parts and signs of death appear, as I have previously described to you, it is advisable to avoid removing the spear from that part, as death often follows in most cases. When these signs of death do not appear and the spear has not penetrated deep into the body, remove it and treat the wound. Among the signs of brain injury, if a spear pierces the skull and fractures the bone, causing a severe headache, delirium, and spinning sensation, these are indications of such an injury.
When these signs of death do not appear and the spear has not penetrated deep into the body, remove it and treat the wound. Among the signs of brain injury, if a spear pierces the skull and fractures the bone, causing a severe headache, delirium, and spinning sensation, these are indications of such an injury. Redness in the eyes and tongue, trembling, confusion of mind, vomiting, and discharge of blood from the nostrils or ears, loss of speech and voice, and white, moist matter resembling mortar or meat juice coming out of the wound are signs of such an injury.
If these signs appear, refrain from removing the spear and treating the wound if it has not already been removed. If the spear has pierced the heart and is close to the left nipple, feeling as though it has penetrated something solid rather than empty, these are signs of such an injury.
Sometimes, the spear may have a pulsating motion similar to a heartbeat, and black blood may flow from the wound, followed by cold extremities, cold sweat, and a feeling of impending death. If the lung is pierced, oily blood flows from the wound, indicating that death is imminent.
If the arteries that follow the neck twist and change color, and the patient takes deep breaths and seeks to inhale cold air, then if the spear has penetrated the cloth in the chest, it is close to the small ribs and the breathing is very strong with severe pain.
If the spear has penetrated the spleen, all the organs of the abdomen will move and there will be severe pain and blood will come out of the wound that resembles liver in its redness, and if the spear has penetrated the stomach, it may have come out of the wound with something that was not digested.
His condition is evident, and if the spear has penetrated the abdomen and there is inflammation in it and something comes out of the wound that is urine or feces or intestines that have burst, then there is no treatment for him and no way to remove the spear, but if the spear has penetrated the urethra and urine comes out.
Something protruded from it and the pain on the chest intensified, so know that he is dying, but as for the other organs such as the face, eye, neck, shoulder, arm, back, thigh, leg, and others like them, they have been lost due to the most severe condition.
When a dart does not pierce an artery or nerve and is not poisoned, and I inform you of some observations I have made regarding this matter to help you determine your treatment, which is that a dart had struck a man in the corner of his eye at the base of the nose.
Then I removed it from the other side under the earlobe and he was cured, and nothing bad happened in his eye, and I also removed another dart that had struck a Jewish man under his eyelid at the lower corner of his eye, and the dart had become hidden and I could only remove its small tip that stuck to the wood.
And a large dart made of the mixed arrows of the Qasī was square and smooth, it did not have any holes, so the Christian man was cured and nothing bad happened in his eye, and I also removed another dart from the neck of a Christian man and the dart was round.
And he had holes, so I made incisions between his ribs and it had entered his neck, so I gently cut him until I removed it and the Christian man was cured and survived, and I also removed another dart that had struck a man in his belly and we thought he would die from it.
After thirty days or so passed and nothing changed in his condition, I made incisions on the dart and turned it over him and removed it and he was cured and nothing bad happened to him, and I also saw a man who had been struck by a dart in his back and the wound was infected.
When seven years had passed, a spear pierced his thigh, and I saw a woman who had a spear in her womb, and the wound was healed and the spear remained without changing its condition or causing her any harm in her natural activities.
I also saw a man who had a spear pierced in his face, and the wound healed and he did not feel much pain, and many similar cases existed. I extracted a spear from the nose of a soldier of the Sultan who had it lodged in the right side of his nose.
The spear disappeared completely, so I was called to treat him after three days, and found the wound of the spear very narrow, so I probed it with a thin probe, but I did not feel anything, and he felt pain under his right ear.
I thought that this pain was from the tip of the spear, so I stopped the place with a cloth containing strong adhesive and waited for it to swell up as a sign of the spear, but nothing happened in the place indicating that the spear had reached there.
I continued to apply the cloth to him for many days, but nothing happened, so I bandaged the wound during that time and kept him from being extracted until I felt the spear inside his nose one day, so he told me about it, and I applied a strong antiseptic to the wound for many days.
Until I opened and cleaned it, and felt the tip of the thin arrow that stuck in the wood, then I enlarged the wound by using this harsh medicine until the tip of the arrow appeared to us visibly, and it took four months for him to get rid of it.
Then, when the wound had widened and I was able to insert my fingers into it, I stimulated and moved it, but it did not respond to exit, so I continued to massage it and apply pressure on it with various tools until one day I caught it firmly with forceps in its final form as it appeared at the end of the book.
The physicians judged that the piece of his nose did not need to be sutured, so I closed the wound and healed completely without any harm, and I am informing you about some methods for extracting some arrows as a comparison and evidence for what I have not mentioned.
Because parts of this craft and its details cannot be understood by description or book, only the skilled craftsman can measure a little on a lot and understand what is present based on what is missing, and invent new work and new tools in unusual circumstances.
If you fall from this craft, I say that arrows only emerge from the body parts where an inflammation has occurred in two ways: either by attraction from the place where they entered or by repulsion from the opposite side, from where they entered.
Either the arrow is thick in a place of fleshy tissue, it attracts and exits. If it does not draw you out from the time it entered, it is appropriate for you to leave it for several days until the flesh surrounding it rots, making it easier to draw out and exit. Similarly, if it inflames in a bone.
If it does not draw you out, also leave it for several days and move it every day until it exits. If it does not draw you out after several days, it is appropriate to drill around the arrow in the same bone from all sides with a fine drill until it expands, then draw it out and exit.
If the arrow inflamed in the bone of the head and penetrated into one of the sinuses of the brain and symptoms of those that you mentioned to you appeared, then do not draw out the arrow and leave it until its condition improves after several days.
In cases of severe bleeding from a wound and its extraction, if the wound does not clot well enough for extraction, use the cauterizing iron around the spear as described to you, then treat the affected area until it heals, and if the spear has penetrated deep into the body, leave it in place. If the spear is not felt, search for it with a probe, if you feel it, extract it with some instruments suitable for extraction, but if the wound is too narrow and the spear is in the gut and it is not a bone, nerve, or vein.
Cut around it until the wound widens and you can extract the spear, if it has ears, cut away all the bleeding flesh from both sides with every method possible, and if you cannot remove the flesh, crush it and pull it out.
If you attempt to extract the spear from any part, use forceps to all sides until you remove it, and be gentle so as not to break the spear, as it will be difficult to extract and remove it if it breaks.
Leave it for several days until the flesh around it rots, then attempt to remove it, as it will be easier at that time. If bleeding continues, use the methods mentioned in the chapter on treatment.
With great care, you can remove the arrow and it should be done gently, carefully, and firmly as described to you. It is recommended that you use the tip of the arrow at the time of extraction, as it was originally in place when the arrow struck.
If you cannot do that, then use whatever shape you can manage. As for the arrow that exits from the other side, either it has broken off inside or you will find the tip of the arrow by feeling it from above the skin, near and ready.
Make a cut over it and let the cut be as wide as can hold ten fingers. Then pull it out, for it will be easier to extract. If it sticks in bone, then press your hand firmly on the bone until the arrow affects the bone and expands itself, then pull it out.
If not, leave it for a few days until it exits. If the arrowhead is inside, then push it out with something. If the arrowhead has fallen off and you want to use pushing, then insert a probe into its tip to enter its hole in the bone, then push it out with it.
If the arrow is sharp, then push it out with a tool that enters that hole, for the arrow will exit easily. If the arrow is poisoned, then it is recommended to cut away all the flesh that has been affected by the poison if possible, then treat it with what is appropriate for that.
If the arrow is in the chest or abdomen or urethra or thigh and it is close to being pierced by a probe, and you can cut into it, cut and remove it without severing nerve or muscle and extract it.
Then suture the wound if necessary, then treat him until he is cured, like the image of the caltrops that attract arrows:
Its tips are sharp like the beak of a bird if it grabs onto the arrow or anything else, and they can be made in various sizes according to the size of the arrow, its thickness, and the width and narrowness of the wound.
Image of the hollow arrow:
Image of the barbed arrow:
This is a barbed tip like the corkscrew to facilitate its entry into the hollow arrow and push it out:
Chapter 59.
In the treatment of nerves.
The nerves that are usually cut in the body are thirty, of which sixteen are in the head: two pairs of nerves behind the ears known as the auditory nerves and two pairs of nerves in the prominent parts of the eyes known as the optic nerves.
The sweat that gathers in the middle of the forehead, the sweat at the tip of the nose and ears, the sweat on the neck, the sweat on the upper lip, the sweat on the lower lip, and the sweat under the tongue are known as the Jahark.
The sweat that gathers in the arm and hand consists of five glands, one of which is called Qayfala, located on the inner side and commonly known as the head sweat and Akhal, which is the middle sweat and is composed of the Bastiqa gland and a part of the Qayfala gland, also commonly known as body sweat.
The Bastiqa gland, also known as the Ibtii, is located on the inner side and is commonly known as the abdominal sweat, arm belt, and it is located on the zinda, which is the one that sticks out and is visible above the eyebrow, clear and Asilam.
Between the kneecap and the ankle, there is a gland with two parts, in the thigh and leg, there are three glands, one of which is located under the heel on the inner side and the second is called Safna and its location is near the Achilles tendon on the inner side, the sweat of women and its location is near the backbone on the inner side.
In the other leg, there are three veins similar to them, namely, those behind the ears, which are beneficial in treating chronic conditions such as headaches, swelling, and scalp irritations. The method of their treatment is described as follows:
The method is as follows: shave the back of the patient's head and scratch it with a rough tool in the area of the veins. Then, tie the patient's neck with a cloth until the veins and their location behind the ears become visible in the lower parts of the head. Examine them with your finger, and where you feel their pulsation beneath your finger, that is where you should apply the cauterization.
Then, take a sharp, pointed scalpel and insert it under the vein in the skin until the tip of the scalpel reaches the bone. Then, lift your hand along with the vein and skin above it and cut the vein and skin together, tearing them apart, making the length of the cut about two fingerbreadths long.
Or, similarly, let out enough blood to the desired amount and then suture them together and leave them until they heal. It was previously mentioned in the book that cutting and cauterizing them is also beneficial. As for the two veins in the chest, they are beneficial in treating chronic coughs, severe headaches, constant dizziness, and profuse tears that run to the eyes.
Method of extracting them as you have described, the surgeon should tie a bandage around the neck of the patient until the veins appear clearly for examination and to feel their pulsations under your fingers. Then, you learn the measurement and remove the skin from above the vein to the desired length, above the finger of the surgeon.
Insert the probe from below and raise the vein above, tie it as you did with the other veins, send blood according to your need, then clean the wound of the patient and place your finger on the vein for an hour.
Then, you place a bandage and cotton on it, tie it strongly from above, and leave it until it is completely healed. They mentioned their extraction and cutting in the first book. However, for extracting veins from the forehead, it is beneficial to extract them after extracting the frontal sinuses for chronic facial conditions such as pimples, boils, and red spots.
Method of extracting them as you have described, the surgeon should tie a bandage around the neck of the patient until the veins appear. Then, you take the tool called the "fas" and this is its image:
Then, you place the needle at the tip of the "fas" on the same vein and hit it from above with a feather or something else in that direction, allowing the blood to flow according to your need. Then, clean the wound of the patient and tie it strongly until it is completely healed.
It is important to note that a wide incision should not be made unless the chisel is sharp, but rather it should be slightly wide and thinned at the edge because the bone is close. Therefore, if the chisel is thin, it may break in the bone.
As for the ducts that are in the corners of the eyes, their purpose is to drain the eye from foreign bodies, redness, and swelling, and diseases of the face. As for how to extract them, it is by making the patient lie down with his head raised, and then thinning them while standing on his head, and the thinning should be done at an angle slightly towards the length with a small, slightly wide chisel.
If there is no flesh in the place, then if the chisel is thin, it may break. Then, you should send for a doctor and put gauze on them and press them for one night, then clean them. As for extracting the nasal duct, it is beneficial in severe inflammation.
Severe headache and diseases of the face such as redness that appears in the nose, especially if it is chronic, and how to extract it, it is by making the patient lie down with his head raised, then holding his nose with your left hand and taking a thin, long chisel.
He should place it in the middle of the rabbit's own body, between the nose and the firmness of the forehead, because the blood does not feel there, so when the blood flows out, you should gently press with a needle a little bit to remove your need, then bind it for a night as it heals quickly.
As for the wooden pins, their use is to relieve the pressure on the skin and the beginning of the swelling and the diseases that appear on the surface of the skin such as blackheads, boils, red spots, and pimples, and how to use them is that the doctor should tie a bandage under them in the neck of the patient and the doctor should stand on the head of the patient.
The patient is placed on a chair then the blood is drawn until it is long and wide, a little bit, then the appropriate amount of blood is drawn from the vein according to what you see as needed, then do the same with the other blood, then bandage it.
The veins are tied tightly but not too tight so that the patient does not suffocate and it heals the wound, and as for the veins of the neck, they are useful to be drawn after drawing the jugular vein because it benefits from the stones in the mouth and decay of the tongue and red spots and splitting of the lips and red spots.
How to remove a thorn from the nose and its surroundings, and how to identify it by having the patient sit in front of you and holding their neck with a cloth, then turning their head sideways so that one thorn appears on the right side of the mouth and the other on the left, and identifying them by their darkness.
Also, there are thin, dark veins around them, so cut them in small, torn pieces, if you doubt about what they are, then look for the largest one and examine it, and do the same with the two veins inside the lower jaw.
As for the veins under the tongue, they are useful and should be removed after removing the quills for the worms that can cause diseases of the throat and mouth, and how to remove them is by having the patient sit between your legs with a sunshade, then raise their tongue and look under it from one side, revealing one vein, and from the other side another vein, and identify them by their darkness.
Then remove them and keep them without cutting into pieces, as under them are veins that may expose bleeding from those veins, and as for the three veins that are usually removed in the armpit, they are the ones commonly removed in people, and removing them should be done on both sides.
Either a wide-bladed knife of iron or a wooden one, or a sharp one of steel, and this is the image of the wide-bladed knife:
It should be wide like you see to open the prominent, filled, visible veins that are hard and thick like a drill, and this is the image of the olive wood knife:
And this knife is narrower and sharper, it is suitable for cutting the thin veins that contain clear yellowish blood, and this is the image of the bone knife:
This bone knife is suitable for splitting and comes in various types of thin and fine according to the size of the veins, also narrowing them, and this can be used to identify others and it is well-known among craftsmen:
And as for the basilisk, which is one of these three veins, it is beneficial to cut it because it attracts blood from the arteries that are under the neck and chest, down to the chest and abdomen, and when the cutter cuts it, he should be careful and have a sharp point on it, as there is an artery underneath it, so if he makes a mistake and adds too much to the wide-bladed knife, he will cut that artery.
When there is bleeding, it is necessary that the clot not be removed with a probe but rather with a narrow-bladed knife, for if the ulcer does not show signs of healing, it is best to avoid it and proceed to another area or request some of its tissue.
Or, if it is necessary to remove it by hand, it is best to first locate the pulsating spot and then apply pressure on it with a narrow-bladed knife.
Then, tie the arm and cut the flesh in a zigzag pattern with the narrow-bladed knife as we mentioned, and be careful that the blow does not hit near the vein. If you feel resistance when tying, blow on the spot where you applied pressure to prevent the vein from becoming inflamed.
If you see the blood flowing like a young boy's urine and it is thin and red, know that it is from the vein. In this case, quickly place your finger on it for a long time, then remove your finger. If the bleeding stops, often the arm should be bound tightly.
Leave it, and warn the patient not to move for several days until it heals. If the bleeding does not stop and overwhelms you and no medicine is available, cut the vein if it appears to you that its ends are narrowing and the blood stops flowing.
Take a piece of date shell, split it, and take half of it. Tie it firmly on the wound with stitches and bandages until another day. If bleeding stops, otherwise treat it as mentioned before, by placing cauterizing agents to stop the bleeding, and cutting his blood vessel is not difficult in most cases.
If the wound is small and the stitches are placed in the arm, know that it is beneficial to squeeze the blood from the top of the head and the bottom of the body to a place where it is composed of a part of basilica and a part of quince as we mentioned.
The one who is squeezing should have a cloth under him because if there is a nerve underneath, it will increase the risk of infection and if it is damaged, it will cause difficulty in movement and sometimes it was not clean from the beginning. This nerve often appears by touch.
If it is hidden in some people and is thin so that it does not appear, it is recommended to make your cloth sharp with a needle and avoid the nerve, your effort should be to tear the skin between the nerves, and if the blood vessel is between two nerves, tear it long, and as for the quince, it is beneficial to squeeze it because it attracts blood from the head.
It is beneficial for eye diseases and it is especially suitable for this type of wound if you want to discharge it; it is recommended to use olive oil or wide-leaved eucalyptus oil because it penetrates all the tissues since there is no vein or nerve under it.
However, it is recommended for you during the discharge to avoid using oil on the muscle head only and to request a smooth position, as it does not harm him if he is not hit by the first blow; unless perhaps some people swell in certain cases if it was not discharged in the first blow.
However, that swelling does not harm him; and as for the method of discharge, its symptoms, and what should be done to repair it, firstly, it is recommended to know that the discharge can either be used for preserving health only.
And it can be used in diseases and the one used for preserving health and its durability and preventing the occurrence of diseases is that the discharge is in one of the three veins in the arm, meaning the cephalic, median, and basilic, and that the discharge is in the first spring if signs of fullness appear.
The cauterization should be performed on Sunday or Tuesday, after the day has passed for three hours. However, if it is used for diseases, it does not have a specific time limit and can be done whenever necessary, whether at night or during the day.
At every hour and at every time, it is not appropriate for boys to be cauterized until they reach fourteen years old, and the elderly who have exceeded sixty years should not be cauterized either. If someone decides to undergo cauterization for any reason,
it is recommended to clean his anus with a laxative injection if there is much thick feces hidden, so that it does not adhere to the intestines during cauterization and cause damage to the main organs. Cauterization should not be performed on those who are pregnant, diabetic, or constipated until these conditions are resolved.
Cauterization should also be avoided after menstruation, diarrhea, constipation, excessive coitus, fatigue, exercise, staying up late, fasting, and any physical or mental strain that weakens the body. Before cauterization, it is recommended to check the menstrual blood if it is thick.
In foods, drinks, and medicines, if possible, the bath attendant should engage in some physical activity to raise his blood and make his chest full during the day as we mentioned, so that he may keep his chest free from all trivial mental ailments during the day.
From fever, anger, fear, and all bodily ailments such as exhaustion, extreme hunching, and the like, he prepares his remedies from various kinds of good things, fragrances, and perfumes, and other similar items, according to each person's ability.
Then the fistula patient should sit on a higher chair than the one used by the healthy person, then he should extend his arm and the fistulista should massage it with his hand twice or three times, then he should tie the bandage firmly but not too tight, and roll it twice or three times.
Because if the bandage was too tight, it might prevent blood flow, and if it was too loose, it would also prevent blood flow. After tying the bandage, both hands should be massaged together with their fingers intertwined.
Until the vein inflates and is palpable, then gently wipe the infected abscess with old oil, especially, then place the little finger of the left hand on the same vein under the place where he wants to lance, slightly to prevent the vein from escaping. Because from the vein, there is what you do not find it like the wound that escapes when lancing and from it what is filled with air, then when the abscess was placed on it, it sank under the abscess and deceived the lancet and if he opened it, it would only be a narrow opening.
Therefore, it is necessary for the lancet to be firm and careful in all these matters, then the abscess should descend, if the vein opens from its first opening, otherwise he should repeat it again under that place a little or above it urgently if the place does not swell.
If it swells or the skin is sore, leave him for a day or two and do not bind the bandage, because perhaps he brought and inflamed hot and do not enter the bathroom, then if he wants to lance again, if the abscess entered and the opening was small and the blood flowed thinly.
I am afraid that the amount of blood that you want to remove may not come out, so prepare the lancet in the puncture site itself and apply pressure on it firmly. Then add a little in the incision and do this with the lever before the position throbs. For in many people, the position may throb at a small incision.
If you see that it has throbbed, do not add the betadine to it, for it will not help you at all. Place something oily from the lever on it, for it facilitates the flow of blood and is better in this position than oil itself and other ointments.
Use the lever oil in all your wounds for the vein when blood flow is difficult and it may do this tarry and shakhznaya if one of them places on the position, for the blood will boil and dissolve if it is thick.
If a big lump occurs in the wound site, it often happens, especially for those who have not incised except that time or if the vein opening was small, then immediately place a moistened sponge soaked in water and a little salt and warm on the lump for an hour, for it will dissolve.
You should do this after the blood comes out from the vein itself completely or from another vein, for if it remains in the position for days a little black or green, it does not harm that, but if you like, carry something of patience and dissolved mercurous chloride on it.
Or a piece of the vomitus and its like, often a ram and a natew occur at the extraction of the basaliq. Place your hand on it, if you find it, it will stain upon looking at it. That is a bad natew, so be cautious not to put anything on it that we have mentioned.
For perhaps it bleeds from a blood vessel, but squeeze it with what is in it to coagulate the position, then treat it with all the treatment until it is purified, and it is necessary for every person to extract blood according to his strength and what appears of the dominant color on the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it come out until it turns red, and if you see it thick, send it until it lightens, and if it is sharp, let it come out until its sharpness disappears. It is necessary for one who is full, strong, and needs to extract blood in one go.
That the extraction of blood should be wide and the puncture wide, and if one is weak, then the opposite of that, it is necessary for him to extract it in stages and that the hole should be narrow, and the best thing used for extracting blood is a sharp, rough, serrated needle without any holes.
This is a blow to the lance that is completely healed from bleeding and from cutting the nerve, and it is named after Ahmad and is safe from the lance in terms of size and length, and if someone is accustomed to the lance being deep, it is recommended to give him something wet from bread soaked in water mixed with lemon or sugarcane juice before the lance.
If he has expelled blood three times or four times, and if his temperament is cold, he should take something wet from bread soaked in water mixed with wine, or in a drink of honey sweetened with fenugreek, or in a drink of herbal tea.
If the lance causes pain at the time of insertion and its cause is the excessive expulsion of blood, it is recommended to drink meat broth and a drink of herbal tea with a mild intoxication, and to use the gall for rubbing his chest with it, and to use all that we mentioned in the section on lancing in the chapter on lancing.
If it is a case of stagnation, and if someone wants to relax his arm and let out blood again, it is recommended for those who have frequent lancing and weak strength that they let out blood little by little in consecutive days according to their strength.
And if someone wants to relax his arm and let out blood again and his body is strong, he should do this on the seventh or ninth day from the first lancing, and if someone wants to draw blood from his body towards the side that it flowed to, it is recommended for him to go on the second or third day.
If there is much blood in a person's body, it has become heated and hardened, and has caused fever, it is necessary to remove all the blood at once, remove a large amount of it, and widen the incision until the peritoneum is exposed after ensuring that all the conditions for drainage are met. And place your hand on his pulse when the blood is flowing to prevent death from occurring at the site of the incision, as this often happens if the surgeon is inexperienced and negligence occurs. It is not advisable if you intend to break the arm and release the blood again.
If the mouth of the wound has been closed and it is difficult for the blood to escape, you should press on it with great force or pull it out with strength. This is very dangerous, as it may leave him until you operate again, or use a probe to scrape off the clotted blood from the mouth of the wound.
Or carry something salty that has been dissolved in water on it, or carry something bitter like tragacanth or senega and gently press on it until the blood comes out. If the abdomen is swollen, leave him.
Do not touch him until the tumor has subsided, unless necessity requires releasing the blood again. If so, you should operate above that position or in the other arm or in the other abdomen.
If the tendon of the arm is severed, it can be replaced by the achilles tendon or the plantaris muscle if they are available, as they are connected to it. If they are not available or hidden, then the surgeon should insert his finger into hot water until the flesh reddens and the sweat appears clearly, then tie a little tight bandage above it.
Then the blood vessel is severed slightly, neither too wide nor too long, so that the incision is wide enough and the tendon is just above the wrist joint. If bleeding is difficult to stop, then place the hand in a container of hot water and let the blood flow into the water.
Until you reach your desired outcome, if you are in the summer, then you can omit placing the hand in hot water and more importantly, letting the blood flow into hot water in winter is more effective. This severed vessel is cured from all other vessels. Because there is no tendon or nerve underneath it, and if the siliqua from the left hand is severed, it is beneficial for the liver. How to sever it is by tying a bandage over the palm of the hand or with your finger after placing it in hot water until the blood vessel expands.
Because there is no tendon or nerve underneath it, and if the siliqua from the left hand is severed, it is beneficial for the liver. How to sever it is by tying a bandage over the palm of the hand or with your finger after placing it in hot water until the blood vessel expands. The sense of touch should be tested thoroughly, then slightly refined with a slight adjustment, even if it is completely lost, it will not harm him at all. Do not let your fingers slip on the bone as there is an nerve beneath it and the position is exposed to the flesh, then return the hand to warm water.
If blood is left in him, if you do not bring it back to warm water, the blood will freeze in your mouth and you should avoid bleeding. When you have removed the necessary amount of blood, apply salt and vinegar on the wound so that it does not stick quickly.
Likewise, it is recommended to do this for each narrow part, and as for the benefit of the sinus from the left hand, it is beneficial for diseases of the abdomen such as inflammation of the intestines, and so on, and as you did in the second one, and as for the benefit of the sinus of the nose, it is beneficial for diseases at the lower part of the body such as inflammation of the reproductive organs.
And the preservation of semen and diseases of the kidneys, chronic sores on the buttocks and thighs, and other diseases, and how to drain it is that he puts his leg in warm water and holds a sponge on it until the tendons are softened, then tie above the knee joint with cotton and the position of the flesh is at the ankle, visible towards the instep.
If a thorn pierces the sole of the foot, it should be extracted from the widest part of it or near the heel, at its junction with the foot. This is the best and safest method, as extracting it from the face of the foot may sever nerves beneath it on the face of the foot.
Make your extraction gentle, as if you are trying to pull out the thorn without breaking it. If blood flow is difficult, place the affected foot in hot water and let the blood flow until it stops. If the extractor breaks the thorn on the first attempt, they should not force it out.
If the extractor tries again, they should do so gently, as the location is safe and there is no risk of causing harm if the nerve was severed as we mentioned earlier. This also applies to extracting thorns from the other foot. As for women, the location of their blood is as we mentioned, near the heel on the lateral side.
The benefit of extracting it is that it relieves pain in the heel, especially if done before hot blood flows. The method of extraction is to insert a thin, long-nailed finger into the heel from below up to above the heel with four fingers, as this is the only way to remove it.
If it appears, extract it in any way possible, either gently or by forcefully pulling it out or breaking it apart, as the location is safe and it is one of the most hidden and deepest thorns in people. If you cannot find it, do not force it out.
If the bone has not fully appeared, then make an incision in some of its parts, which is the part that appears at the back of the foot towards the ankle and the knee, and it protects from the nerves and sends out the amount of blood that you desire.
Then, loosen the sinew and place a cotton on the incision site and tie it tightly at the location, as it will quickly heal.
Chapter 60.
In the hammers and their uses.
The hammers can be made of wood, copper, and glass, and the mallets are of two types: one is the mallet with a sharp edge to extract blood and the other is the mallet without a sharp edge.
This mallet without a sharp edge has two faces.
And the hammers of the Akhaduin are both temples at the back of the neck, and the hammer of the jaw is under the lower jaw from the mouth, and the hammer of the elbows, and the hammer of the knees on the back of the thighs, and the hammer of the calves, and the hammer of the armpits.
The bandage primarily attracts blood from the thin, exposed vessels in the flesh, and because of this, it should not be used to press on a wound or a bruise, nor should it be used with fire or without fire in any disease that causes fullness until the whole body is purged.
If necessity requires the use of a bandage for a disease or by custom, we used it at all times, in the beginning of the month, at the end of the month, and at any time when it was needed.
And this is because some people, when their blood increases to the point of needing to be drained by a bandage, find heaviness and headache in their heads, and among them are those who find fullness and redness in their faces, heads, and necks, and among them are those who find wrinkles and dark spots on their faces and eyelids, and among them are those who scratch the place where their bandage is.
And among them are those who increase their laughter, and among them are those who find the taste of blood in their mouths and on their teeth and drool blood, and among them are those who increase their sleep, and among them are those who see in their sleep blood and redness and wounds and surgeries and things similar to that. When we saw anything like this.
Especially, if it is in the middle of the month, our command at that time is to perform cupping after two or three hours of daylight. The benefit of cupping for the nose is that it relieves heaviness in the head and water that settles in the eyes.
However, it should be done after the body has rested and this cupping may serve as a substitute for fumigation. It is warned that it should not be used by those who have cold brain or have a headache, as it causes great harm.
Therefore, it should not be used by the elderly and those who have cold diseases in their head, and those who are addicted to it give birth to forgetfulness.
Therefore, it is recommended to instruct the cupper to slightly move his hand downwards with the cupping instrument out of fear of causing forgetfulness. As for cupping for the back, it serves as a substitute for fumigation of the neck and the basilic vein.
Therefore, it benefits from asthma and shortness of breath and inflammation of the lungs and coughing and congestion. It is recommended to raise cupping for the back slightly because if it is lowered, it causes weakness in the heart and stomach.
As for cupping for the face, it benefits from sudden injuries in the head and the temple and the forehead and the jaw and pain in the roots of the teeth and it serves as a substitute for fumigation of the basilic vein. It is recommended to instruct the cupper not to deeply move his hand with the cupping instrument lest he cut a blood vessel and cause bleeding.
And as for the tooth worms under the gum, they are beneficial in preventing cavities and decay in the teeth and mouth, and other dental diseases. They can also fill the spaces between the teeth and relieve heat.
And as for the tooth worms of the zandin, they are beneficial in preventing the bleeding of the three major veins: the basilic, the cephalic, and the median cubital. This is because they attract blood from all the small veins in the meat, and also attract the smaller veins from other veins until they reach the major veins.
It is recommended to instruct the tooth worms not to bite into the meat because the place where they are located is prone to infection and has nerves and vessels underneath. However, the single tooth worm that bites into the flesh is beneficial for preventing the development of ulcers and lower jaw pain.
It is recommended to instruct the tooth worms to be large and made of metal because the place where they are located requires a strong bite and maybe the glass tooth worm has broken and caused a great deal of pain, and as for the calf tooth worms, they can relieve the swelling.
It attracts blood from all parts of the body and benefits those suffering from chronic ailments in the kidneys, intestines, and bladder, it nourishes the male, benefits from pustules and boils, and stands as a barrier against snakes and scorpions, except that it weakens the body greatly and causes fainting in most people, and the benefit of its blocking the pores is nearly equal to that of the padding of the thighs.
The method of applying the poultice is as follows: first, place the poultice empty and moisten it with a moderate amount of water, do not prolong the application of the poultice, but apply it quickly and remove it quickly to allow the mixture to settle evenly at the site, and repeat this process until you see that the site has become red and opened.
When the redness of the blood appears, then it is necessary to repeat the application of the poultice repeatedly, then examine the condition of the body, if one of the people has loose flesh with wide pores, it is recommended to apply one poultice only lest the site becomes inflamed.
The padding is recommended to expand the poultice and slightly deepen it and adjust the poultice gently, if there is much blood in the blood, it is recommended to apply two poultices, if in the first one it opens a path for the thin blood and its moisture, and if in the second one it examines the exit of thick blood.
If the blood is very thick, repeat the procedure a third time to achieve the desired result. In general, if we want to extract a small amount of blood, one incision suffices. However, if we aim to extract a large amount of blood, a more frequent incision is required. If we estimate that the blood is extremely thick.
It is necessary to make a deep incision and the moderate depth of the incision should be equal to the thickness of the skin only. The adhesive tapes used for securing the needles, water, and what the surgeon should avoid are as follows: if the patient's skin is thick, hard, dry, and has narrow incisions.
The positions of the needles should be anointed with a wide, pliant, and sticky adhesive tape. However, if it is during summer, use a grease like karri, benzoin, or sweet almond oil, or henna paste.
However, if it is during winter, use a grease like camphor, suet, or banana oil, or bacon fat and similar substances. If the patient's skin is thick and cold, use a grease like marrow, butter, or bear's fat, or similar substances.
If the surgeon has wide incisions and the flesh is loose, it is necessary to avoid using grease. These individuals should wash their needles after the operation with rose water, cold water, or water from grape hyacinth, henna paste, or rose water, and similar substances. However, if the patient's blood has a lot of moisture.
Wash the chest with water or acacia water and its likes, but if his sweat is thick, wash his chest with old wine or water of murzanjush or cooked shaboth or baboon and its likes, and it is recommended to warn the patient in the bath and after the bath.
It is recommended to use it after leaving the bath for an hour or two, and it is not recommended for anyone to sleep after the bath, what should be done by the sick person before and after the bath.
First, if the sick person is a feverish and his blood is thin and prone to inflammation, it is recommended for him to take cooling drinks such as rumman and hindbah with water, vinegar, skunk juice, and its likes, and his food should be light, such as fried fish, meat of the goat, and its likes.
And if his condition is cold, it is recommended for him to drink honey drink and meibas drink or skunk juice of the pure, and take aromatic wine of medium strength which is between old and new, and order him to have less food, and his food should be light, such as fried fish, quails, partridges, and chicken soups. It is recommended that the drink on the day of the bath and the fesd be more than the food.
It is necessary to give some people, at certain times, a draught of the farrago or musk or shiltht before the hajamah and before the cupping or after it, in order to strengthen the principal veins and quicken the blood. It is not advisable for the barbers to do this.
As for the hajamahs that have no condition, they are those placed on the liver, spleen, breasts, abdomen, flanks, and kidneys, as these organs do not tolerate a condition being placed upon them. The purpose is simply to draw blood from one organ to another.
We place the hajamah on the breasts in cases of rheuma or to remove a cold wind that has entered the organ. We place the hajamah on the abdomen and flanks as it causes the organ to ferment, heat up, and expel the pain that was causing it.
The hajamah may be placed on the kidneys if there is a stone or gravel in them, as perhaps it might open the stone or dislodge it from its position. Similarly, it may be used on the liver and spleen when wind is causing trouble in them. These hajamahs are sometimes used empty of the cup.
The text can be translated as follows: "It is important to use fire and water or water filled with impure water in the treatment of shock, for it is necessary to fill the vessel with hot water alone or with water that has been boiled with some herbs suitable for this purpose.
The text can be translated as follows: "Then it is placed on the affected area and held in place, removed, and repeated according to the need, and this is an image of the vessel used with fire.
The text can be translated as follows: "Its size is two fingers wide, with a small hole on one side that is one-half of its width, and it is made of brass or copper with a thick rim.
The text can be translated as follows: "It is flat and rounded, with a central piece of copper or iron where the match is placed on fire, and this vessel can be made larger or smaller according to the disease.
The text can be translated as follows: "It is used for males and females, but not for children or pregnant women, and the method of placing this vessel on fire on the affected area is to light a piece of cloth or a small match made of pine wood and place it in the middle of the bent penis, which is in the middle of the vessel.
The ascent of the flame should be from above to below the hammer, so that the flesh of the patient does not burn. Then place the hammer on the limb and the finger on the hole that we mentioned until we remove the hammer, we do not remove the finger.
Then the needle exits that hole and the hammer breaks on its place, then the thread is placed on the wound and it is returned if needed, as for the hammer used in the case of a broken tooth with water, it does not have a sharp point or a hole.
And it is only used by filling it with water and placing it on the limb, this is its image:
This hammer, the larger it was to hold much water, the better it was.
Chapter 70.
In commenting on the eyelid.
The eyelid is only used in most cases of limbs where it is not possible to place the hammer due to their smallness, such as the cheek and the throat, and so on, or because the limb is bare of flesh, such as the finger and the nose, and so on.
How to use it is that from the eyelid that is in the sweet water free from impurities, it is left for a day and a night in the sweet water until it becomes soft and nothing remains in its cavity. Then, the body is prepared first with the fisk (a type of astringent) or with the hajama (a type of caustic substance), then the affected organ is wiped.
Until it reddens, then it is applied to the affected area, if it swells and bursts, if possible, apply the hajama (caustic substance) again for better effect, otherwise wash the area with vinegar then with plenty of water and massage it gently. If the bleeding persists after the fall of the scab, apply a cold compress made of kataan (a type of cloth).
Then, it is applied from above until the bleeding stops, if the bleeding is heavy, apply a powder or ointment made of qawabid (a type of herb) or similar substances until the bleeding stops or apply an antiphlogistic poultice made of baqal (a type of herb).
Then, the baqal (herb) is left until it sticks to the affected area, as the bleeding stops. If a new scab is needed, do not use the same scab if possible. If the scab refuses to stick, wipe the area with fresh blood.
Or, insert a needle into the affected area until blood comes out, then apply it to the wound if it feels anything from the blood. If you want it to fall off, sprinkle some salt, sand, or ash on it, so it falls off the wound.
Chapter Three: The Treatment of Fractures and Dislocations.
In the Jawbone.
This chapter also deals with the skills required in medicine, which is setting fractures and dislocations of bones.
Know, O my sons, that this chapter may be claimed by the ignorant among physicians and laymen, and those who have not perused the works of the ancients in it, nor read a single letter from them.
For this reason, this art of medicine has become lost in our country, and I have not found a single expert in it. I only benefited from it due to the length of my reading of the works of the ancients and my effort to understand them, until I extracted knowledge of that from them, then I was compelled to practice and trial throughout my life.
I have illustrated for you in this chapter all that I have learned about it. My experience continued after I presented it to you and freed it from the length of explanation, and summarized it as much as possible, and explained it as much as possible, and depicted for you in it many images of the tools used in it.
For it is a matter of addition to explanation, as I did in the previous chapters, and there is no power except by Allah, the Exalted.
1st Chapter:
In this chapter and its sections, we will discuss various matters related to the fracture of bones, which should be presented before we begin to mention the broken and extracted teeth one by one. It is appropriate that we mention in the introduction of this chapter some general statements and sections. First, you must understand them and establish their truth, as you and those who are eager to learn this noble art are not like others.
I say that when a fracture, dislocation, or extraction, or fall occurs, it is appropriate to go immediately to the site of the injury or excretion, or both. If something prevents this, such as weakness of strength or the person is a child or an elderly person with arthritis, or the time is very hot or extremely cold, then...
Then, in his food, he should limit himself to cold vegetables and poultry meat and avoid drinks and heavy meats and overeating, and all food that fills the veins with blood until the swelling subsides and it is not expected that any material will be applied to the site.
Then, the patient should return to his usual diet, and if the broken bone is in the jaw, the patient should eat foods that are rich, thick, and strong, such as lentils, rice, meat heads, carrots, and beef ribs. Eggs, fresh fish, and thick drinks, among others, when used in this manner, facilitate the healing of fractures more quickly and effectively. Know that broken bones in strong men and elders cannot naturally reunite and heal.
Due to the softness and flexibility of their bones and their ability to reunite and heal, unlike the bones of young boys, nature causes the broken bone to grow from all its parts, like a callus, which hardens and knits together until it is necessary for one part to join with another.
Until it reaches its original strength and durability, so that nothing hinders him from his usual activities.
Therefore, the food of the patient should consist of foods that are durable and thick, as we mentioned earlier. Know that fractures can vary depending on the type of bone, as a fracture of the leg bone is different from a fracture of the skull, and a fracture of the chest bone is different from a fracture of the backbone.
Similarly, all other parts are different from one another, and we will mention each type of fracture in detail in its own section, and the type of bone fracture can also vary within itself.
The fracture might be a simple one without splinters and it could occur along the length of the bone, with some splinters and unprepared or prepared fragments. The fracture may also have a wound and tear in the skin, and it could be a slight gap.
For each type of fracture, there is a specific method for reduction, which will be detailed in its respective section. One can identify a bone fracture by its deformity, shortening, visible appearance, and the feeling of crepitus when gently touching it with your fingers.
If there is no visible deformity, crepitus, or pain when gently touching the bone with your fingers, and if the patient does not complain of much pain, then it is not a fracture but could be a sprain or a slight gap, and thus should not be manipulated with traction and gentle pressure.
Instead, apply the medications mentioned later that match the location, then gently and carefully bandage it. Note that a bone, if it disintegrates and becomes fragmented without causing splinters, means that all its parts have separated from their original owner.
You should act promptly and reduce the fracture before a severe swelling occurs. If swelling does occur, leave it for some days until the heat subsides, then gently and carefully align it in any way that seems appropriate, using kindness and skill.
Know that it is easier to fracture and set a bone than one which has already developed splinters. Then, as he mentions later, if the bone has splinters, it is necessary to extend the broken part from both sides, whether it be an arm or a leg.
Either by your hands if the part is small, or with two ropes and a hand, and let your setting of the broken part be in a position that is level with its natural shape until when it has extended, then fracture those splinters in their places with all the skill and gentleness you possess.
Be careful in your efforts not to cause pain or injury with your actions, and strive to unite one of the bones with its owner in the best possible condition. At that time, you should touch and feel them with your hands, and if you see anything that is not in its proper place, correct it to the best of your ability.
Be cautious of excessive extension and strong pressure, as many ignorant people do this and often cause harm to the body by doing so, such as causing a fracture or dislocation.
Then, after setting and perfecting the bone and applying pressure, ensure that the part is at rest and quiet, and warn the patient not to move it at times when they are awake or asleep, during changes in their condition, and during defecation and all other movements, as this will cause pain.
When the patient feels pain or discomfort in the position of the limb, it is necessary to transfer him to a different position where he does not feel pain, while also ensuring that the position of the limb is level and straight.
To prevent the limb from becoming dislocated if it is forced, and regarding how to set a broken limb, I have already described that in my previous explanation. Know that the sizes of broken limbs vary, some are small like fingers, arms, and so on.
The splints for fractures should be thin and flexible, while the thick ones are needed for larger bones to set them evenly without any misalignment.
Then, after the setting is complete, you should apply the appropriate plaster. Gently apply the splint on the fracture site, using three or four layers depending on the size of the limb, and slightly pull it up towards the higher side of the fracture.
Then, gently pull the splint away from the fracture site, slightly relaxing the tension until you achieve a proper position, and then apply another bandage on top of the fracture.
First, you should apply the bandage to the higher part of the fracture and then to the lower part, as previously mentioned in the first bandaging. Then, you should place a soft or stiff pad between the bandages to adjust the deformity of the fracture.
If there is a deformity, do not put anything in it, then bandage it with another bandage, and adjust these loose bandages according to your watch if there is no heat or redness in the limb.
If there is heat or redness, apply what can soothe the inflammation and remove the heat, then leave it for some days, and then bandage it with loose bandages made from the sliced rind of a large cucumber or from the bark of the Gorabil tree.
Which is made from the cedar or palm leaves or wax or chalk and so on, as available, and each bandage should be of equal size according to this shape.
However, the bandage placed directly on the fracture should be thicker and slightly looser than the others, and its length should be determined according to the size of the broken limb.
Then, suture the wounds with another needle according to the first suture's size. Then, tie it from above with strong, secure threads as mentioned earlier, ensuring that your suture is on the location of the fracture, making it stronger. The more the fracture, the less the suture.
The threads should be medium in thickness and flexibility, especially since if they are thick like what you have seen from the ignorant people who make their threads from rolled sheets of cloth, it is a great mistake.
Because the suture will be out of balance with them, and flexible threads also do not work because you cannot reach the suture with them as desired, and it is not appropriate for there to be less than a finger's width between the wounds.
If the healthy part of the wounds is affected by the ends after suturing in the correct places, place soft cotton or compressed cotton underneath it so that nothing hurts him from that. But if the fracture is with a wound and a tear has occurred in the skin, mention it separately.
And know that not every broken bone should be sutured from the first day, because if the bone is large, it is not appropriate to place sutures on it for five days or seven or more depending on your safety from the occurrence of hot tumor.
This is the property of bandages used for covering fractures, dislocations, and wounds, a general-purpose short bandage that can be used to fix fractures and correct for various defects, especially for children and women as it is not affected by heat or cold.
It is that you take from the flour dust that is in the sieve when it is shaken in the sieves of the mill, and you knead it as it is without whitening it with egg white, and make the dough neither too thick nor too thin, then let it rest.
This is another property of bandages that can be used to fix fractures, dislocations, and wounds, made from the hide of a cow, lead, aloe wood, rassan, magath, and skins, 10 dirhams for each one, and for every five dirhams of patience, and 20 dirhams for the glue, either Armenian or Roman. All are beaten and mixed with the glue or egg white if the weather is hot, then this bandage is used, as it is good for binding broken bones quickly and correcting for most people due to its flexibility.
This is another property of bandages that can also be used for fractures and wounds, made from magath, hide of a cow, and white khatam, 10 dirhams for each one, and for every five dirhams of patience, 6 dirhams of aloe wood, and 20 dirhams of Armenian glue. All are beaten smoothly and mixed with water or egg white, then used.
Procedure for dressing joints and missing bones that have departed from their original positions, to alleviate pain and prevent dislocation of the bone and fracture, take a cotton swab and immerse it in vinegar and heated oil, then place it on the affected area. This dressing does not contain any forceful means.
However, it is beneficial for alleviating hot tumors and relieving pains, especially. Another dressing is necessary to force broken bones, taking tin foil and clean parchment paper, then grinding them all together and applying them as wet compresses. Another brief dressing is used during childbirth for fractured bones.
To analyze the remaining tumor, take equal parts of chalk, gypsum, and indigo, grind each one separately, then mix them together and add lime plaster if the tissue is not burned, but if it is burned, mix it with water or vinegar and use it.
Another strong dressing for analysis from this first one is used when a solid tumor occurs during childbirth, taking chalk, coriander seeds, bay leaves, king's crown, marjoram, and indigo, grinding each one separately.
The entire body is to be dressed with the juice of lemon, or with sweet water, or with paint, according to the heat of the limb and its tranquility. As for Aetius, he did not mention in his book that it should be applied on a broken limb while setting it.
Except for the Qayrawani, who recommends a mixture of wax and oil, no other method is mentioned in his book. He describes it as being moderate between tightness and looseness. As for Jalinus, he believed that it should be applied on a broken limb while setting it, along with things that have pores and some heat, such as honey, salt, and so forth, as mentioned earlier.
Recipe for a poultice that is beneficial for stiffness and pain: Take equal parts of meal, ginger, human hair (or bird feather), chalk, and salt, mix them together, pound them well, and apply them as a poultice. As for the amount, it should be enough to cover the affected area.
Then, if nothing happens after applying it for a long time, and there is no pain, stiffness, or movement of the broken bone from its position, do not apply it for many days. If something happens in that position, such as severe pain, intense stiffness, or shortness of breath, then remove it immediately.
When you first open the wound, do not delay it and apply a bandage to it. Then take a clean cloth or sponge made of seaweed and soak it in fresh water. Gently rub the affected area with it until the pain subsides and the inflammation is reduced. Then leave the affected part to rest for an hour.
Then apply a poultice made of bread soaked in vinegar or oil, or a plaster of garlic and bind it to the affected area for the night until the heat subsides and the pain is relieved. Then return it to a soft bandage and a light bandage, but do not use the first strong bandage.
Then rub it gently until it is clear, if you see that the swelling, redness, pain, and shortness of breath have all disappeared, then return to the bandage and the bandage as you did at first, if nothing else happens in the affected part.
Do not open it again for three, four, five, or seven days, and sometimes it may be left for twenty days, depending on the condition of the affected part, as we mentioned, until it is necessary to cut it open and approach the healing of the flesh.
When performing the suture, add more stitches than your first attempt, and also increase the thickness of the diet for the injured part as previously mentioned. If you notice that the fracture site has become dry and is moving more than usual, know that the food is prevented from reaching it.
Rinse the injured part with thin water every three days and slightly loosen the suture. This action allows the food to reach the affected area and heal quickly, unlike the method used by ignorant quacks who break the fracture again.
If it does not set properly as intended and sets with a deformity, this is due to their mistake and a great deception. If they were correct in their claims, I would have mentioned them in my early works and tried it, but I have not seen any effect from anyone else in this regard. The correct approach is not to use it.
The second chapter.
In the case of a skull fracture.
There are many types of skull fractures with various shapes and causes. Some fractures occur due to a sword blow, which may result in the entire bone being displaced until it reaches the sagittal suture under the bone. As is done with wood.
Therefore, this type of fracture is called a 'wooden' fracture, and sometimes it is a cut of the sword that only cuts the face and does not go through to the end, and this type of fracture is called an 'absolute' fracture, and the wound of these two fractures can be either large or small.
And from the fractures is what is called 'splintered' or 'crushed', and its cause is a blow with a stone or falling on a stone or similar, and this fracture can be either open, approaching the periosteum under the bone, or in the face of the bone.
And the wound of these two fractures can also be either large or small, and from the fractures is what is called 'hidden' in the bone at the root of the hair and it is a slowly spreading infection.
Therefore, this type of fracture is called 'hairy', and from it is a fracture that occurs due to a fall or a stone or similar, and enters the cortical bone into the inside and becomes in place as described if it was hit by a blow, part of it enters inside.
And the most common of this is in the soft bone of the skull, such as the bones of children, and all of these types of fractures can have sharp or smooth fragments, and we will mention treatment for all of this in its place, and we will recognize all of these types of fractures by examining them.
Inspection of the wound with probes and removal of decayed flesh from it, and as for the hairy type, it is known that it should be exposed to the bone and smeared and painted on it with mud, because the fracture appears black, and as for the treatment of the fracture, one should first look at the symptoms of the patient.
If you see any of his symptoms that indicate a clear sign of fear, such as vomiting, protrusion, loss of consciousness, loss of voice, convulsions, high fever, and so on, do not approach the patient and do not treat him, because death is certain with these symptoms in most cases.
If you see symptoms that do not indicate immediate danger and you hope for his safety, then in that case take him in treatment, because if he comes to you with the wound immediately after being injured and this happened in the days of winter.
It is necessary to strive in removing the bone before the fourteenth day, regardless of the situation, and if it is in the days of summer, it is necessary to hurry in removing the bone before the seventh day lest the tissue under the bone spoil, exposing those symptoms that we mentioned.
If the fracture of the bone has reached the pia mater covering the brain and it was accompanied by depression and discoloration, it is necessary to cut the part that was crushed and discolored on what I am describing to you, which is to circumcise the head of the injured person.
If it is possible for you to expose the bone in any way that suits you, according to the shape of the wound and what is hidden from sight, then if, upon exposing the bone, blood flows or a hot mass appears, treat it as appropriate.
Then, apply a poultice soaked in alcohol and oil, wet red cloth, and clean the wound until the mass subsides and the bleeding stops. Then, you will either have to examine or remove the bone, which can be done in one of two ways.
The single way is to cut the bone with a thin, narrow saw, like this: [image of a narrow saw]
Then, use another saw to cut from the first one, exposing a little more and like this: [image of a slightly wider saw]
Then, also use another saw that is wider than the second one. It is necessary to have several saws of different sizes, some wider and some narrower than others, with sharp edges made of Indian steel or good iron.
Use gentle force when striking the saw to prevent the bone from breaking and causing injury. If the bone is strong and hard, it is necessary to drill around it before using the saws with non-puncturing drills, not puncturing drills.
The excerpt reads: "For it does not exceed the limit of the acetabulum to what lies beyond it, so that the hook has a straight point below its sharp part, resembling a ring or small circle, which prevents it from sinking and exceeding the edge of the bone.
It is advisable for you to take many of these hooks, so that each one of them fits the length of the edge of that bone, until you have a hook for every acetabulum with a sharp point of equal length and adjusted according to the length of its edge. This is an image of three types. Large, medium, and small hooks.
As for the method of hooking around a fractured bone, it is to place the hook on the bone and guide it with your fingers until you know that the bone has passed, then move the hook to another position and place it after each puncture at a distance equal to the thickness of the rod or near it.
Then you cut between each puncture with scissors, doing so to the extent that you can be merciful, as we mentioned, until the bone is removed, either by hand or with some other tool that you have prepared for this purpose.
Like the jaw and the teeth, which are delicate, it is necessary to exercise extreme caution when touching or cutting anything from the bone, as if the bone has become softened and freed from the bone, if it was attached to it and removed, then it is necessary to cleanse.
And smooth the roughness that remains in the bone with another tool that resembles the cutting instrument, but it is necessary for it to be softer and gentler than all other cutting tools, as if there are small bones or fragments left, then take them with care using the tools you have.
Then treat the wound afterwards with the plasters and bandages mentioned, and as for the other face of the work, it is a simple matter far from deceit, as mentioned by Galen and praised greatly by Madhavi, this is his saying. First, you should begin by revealing the part of the bone from the place where it was fractured, strongest and most prominent until when you have revealed that part, you should replace it underneath with a tip of this dental tool, and this is its image:
The dental part of it should be smooth and does not cut anything, and the sharp part of it in its lengthy sides as you see for the dental part to be supported by the bone and then strike on the tool from one side.
With a small saw, cut through all the bone gently as it rotates, while you are in a safe area of the membrane, so that no alarming incident occurs; even if the surgeon is unaware of people and their conditions, yet he is skilled.
If something remains attached to the bone from the membrane in certain parts of the bone, remove it with the tip of the lancet itself and gently separate it from the bone; it will come off without pain or fear.
But if the fracture of the bone did not reach the membrane and what was cut from the bone was the face and some sharp edges remained, it is necessary to remove those sharp edges and cut off those fragments with a fine, varied set of instruments so that you can use them in every position where they fit and repair them according to what the work guides you to do.
And the same fractured bone and its shape, it is necessary to use first in your dressing for the bone the most coarse of those instruments, then after that use the finest from them, and continue doing so until you reach using all the finest and smoothest of them.
And as for the rest of the small, hair-like fractures and fine fractures, it is necessary to use each one in a different treatment according to what leads to its repair, which is something that is not hidden from anyone who has knowledge of this craft and we have already mentioned and explained in the major fractures.
If the membrane remains exposed at your bone fracture, it is appropriate to take a needle of appropriate size according to the wound and dip it in red fat and place it on the wound's mouth, then take another needle, either oval or triangular. Then dip it in a drink and red fat and place it on the first needle, doing this with the least amount possible to avoid weighing down the suture, then use a wide bandage from above, but do not tighten it more than what holds the wound.
Then call him for this treatment for a day or two until the hot tumor is secured, then remove it and use afterwards the drugs that have benefit such as the essence of sosan and cardamom powder and cinnamon powder and zarand and so on, which is to make a decoction from these drugs.
And leave it on the wound as it is dry and in general use a drug that has benefit to cool and not to irritate, and strive in the time of your treatment for the wound to be clean without any harm from the fat and no suppuration and do not let the pus gather in it.
Because the pus if it gathers on the membrane of the brain it corrupts and pollutes it, as a result of which great misfortune happened to the prophet when the bone exposed from him and especially if he neglected his treatment.
If you observe blackness on the surface, know that this indicates the presence of symptoms that we have mentioned, and it is certain that the patient will die, unless there is a remedy for it. If the blackness occurred due to a medication applied to him, and the power of that medication was such that it could cause that blackness.
It is appropriate to take a part of honey and three parts of beeswax, grind them well together, and apply this mixture to the affected area, then treat it with various forms of treatment until it becomes clean.
Chapter Three.
If the nose is broken,
know that the nose does not break except for the upper part of it, both of them or one of them, because they are bones, and the lower part of it is cartilage, which does not break, but only becomes displaced, crooked, and swollen.
If one of the upper parts of the nose breaks, it is appropriate to insert a small finger into the nostril and straighten the fracture from inside with your little finger and from outside with your index finger until the nose returns to its natural shape, and this should be done gently so as not to cause pain or harm to the patient.
If the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and the finger has not been applied to it, it is appropriate to apply a thin piece of wood with a slight pressure to it. If the fracture is on both sides, do the same. And let him apply force to it from the first day of the fracture.
If possible, otherwise after the seventh or tenth day when the inflammation has subsided, introduce a thin piece of cork into the nostril fracture if the fracture is on one side, or two pieces of cork if the fracture is on both sides.
The cork should be of a thickness that fills the nostril fracture, and some early forceps practitioners mentioned that the cork should be greased with suet and changed every day. However, I do not see the need for this, but it is better to grease the cork with egg white and flour.
Then leave the cork until the bone heals and the tissue hardens, and sometimes a tube made of animal horn has been introduced into the nostril after it has been coated with a thin layer of beeswax to strengthen its hold on the fractured nose, making it more effective in preventing the patient from breathing.
This is not absolutely necessary, but if you make the corks or want to do so, if there is an opening in the nose during your work and inflammation, compress the nostril with a sponge or a wet cloth dipped in water and olive oil or any other soothing substance.
If a hot abscess does not appear, it is appropriate to squeeze it out with fine salt and sharp cinder, well kneaded with egg white, then place a smooth cloth on it, but do not bandage the nose with anything at all, for if the nasal bones break, it will cause small fractures.
Or if it has spread, it is appropriate to cut it open with the tool that is suitable for it, then suture the wound and treat it with what softens and melts from the appropriate ointments. If there is a wound inside the nose, it is appropriate to treat it with filling and use copper tubes. Until it heals.
Chapter Four.
In case of fracture of the lower jaw.
If the lower jaw fractures and it is not a compound fracture with no injury to the nerve, if it is a simple fracture that has opened up to the inside, its identification is easy.
If the fracture is in the right jaw, insert the little finger of the left hand into the mouth of the patient and do the same if the fracture is in the left jaw, then lift the fragment of the fracture from inside gently to outside.
The other part of the bone, which is outside its position, should be governed by its settlement. If it is a fracture of the jaw that has displaced by two parts, it is appropriate to use the tamp from both sides to maintain its stability until its settlement is achieved, if it has occurred in the teeth due to rattling.
Or, if the part that was broken off from it is not possible to be kept with a gold or silver thread or iris root, then place the silk suture on the fractured jaw, then place a double-headed stitch on it and place a large, firm, and strong piece of leather equal to the length of the jaw. Then, tie it from above according to what is available for you to tie and match its union so that it does not break, and order the patient to rest and make his food soft and liquid. If you suspect that something has changed in its shape due to one of the possibilities, then act quickly on the third day.
Then, tie it from above according to what is available for you to tie and match its union so that it does not break, and order the patient to rest and make his food soft and liquid. If you suspect that something has changed in its shape due to one of the possibilities, then act quickly on the third day. Then, correct what you have sutured with the dust of rhubarb mixed with the whiteness of egg or fine flour after removing the silk suture from it and place a soft cloth on it, as long as it sticks to that cloth and does not change the bone's condition, leave it.
Do not suture until the fracture becomes clean and the fracture becomes severe in three weeks, if there is a hot inflammation during that period, use what we have mentioned repeatedly for its relief until that inflammation disappears.
But if the fracture is accompanied by a wound, if the bone fragments have already become separated, gently remove those fragments with what is appropriate for their removal from the tool, if the wound mouth is narrow, widen it with the probe according to your need.
Then, if those fragments have been removed and nothing remains of them, suture the wound mouth if it is wide, otherwise, use one of the needles that are suitable for that. And close the wound until it becomes clean.
Chapter Five.
In fracture of the jaw, if it is broken.
The jaw is most likely to break from the front to the back, and it breaks into one of three directions, either it breaks and disintegrates into two pieces without causing fragments, which is easier to fix.
And sometimes it may cause fragments, which is more difficult to fix, and sometimes it may be accompanied by a wound, and the work in that case if the fracture is not accompanied by a wound is to prepare two servants, one of whom fixes the broken jawbone and the other stretches the neck towards the other side.
Then, align the fracture with your fingers until its shape returns to its normal form without any deformity or angulation. If it requires more lengthening, it is recommended to place a piece of cloth or cotton underneath the bone of the ulna.
The bone should be extended to the extent of your need and lengthened, and the fracture elevated with your fingers until the fracture is aligned as it should be. If you cannot pull the end of the fracture outwards because it has gone too deep, then the ulna should lie on its back.
Then, place a medium-sized pad under the bone and press down on the fracture with your fingers until the bone in the depth rises above, at which point the fracture is corrected and aligned with your fingers.
If you feel that a part of the fracture has broken off and is moving, it is recommended to cut into it and extract that piece gently if it is embedded in the bone, cut it out with one of the instruments prepared for that purpose. After the fracture is aligned under the bone, use a splinting device to maintain the reduction, which is made of wood or metal and its image is as follows:
The shape of the scoop should resemble a spoon that does not have a sharp edge, and its width should be according to the size needed for the bone's enlargement and reduction. As for its length, it should also depend on what is possible for you to work with, so that it has two points, one wider and the other narrower, as you see in the single point of a spoon.
If the gap in the wound that you created when extracting the bone's tip is wide and you feared burning the tumor, sew your lips together with stitches. However, if the gap is small or you were worried about burning the tumor, leave the wound open and let it heal according to the size of the gap.
If the tumor is very hot, spread a mixture of honey, vinegar, or wine on the wound and place it over the gap. However, if the bone's hardness is due to not having a wound or a cut, then it is recommended to use a poultice made from the powder of burned hair mixed with egg whites. Then, place a soft cloth on it and then put a circle under the bone's root if necessary. After that, take a long, narrow cloth as a covering, then apply a double bandage to the cloth and the poultice, and finally, take a thin, flexible board. The width of them is three fingers, and in length as well, then insert them into a cavity, then insert that cavity along with the bone splint at the position of the turban that falls on the position of the fracture, then tighten the turban over the fracture as it twists. And the bandage is placed on his neck and under the healthy person's arm and under the sick person's arm, and it is repeated over all sides, as you have seen that the tightening of the fracture is firmly fixed and this is not hidden from you.
And it is important to know that the bone splint should not be removed from over the fractured bone. And for this reason, the patient should be examined every day, and whenever the bandage relaxes and you see that the bone splint has disappeared, then fix it and tighten the bandage, then place the patient's back on his back and place a small pillow under his arm when he sleeps at night.
In order for his muscle to rise away from his side, the fracture of the clavicle will rise with the elevation of the shoulder or tie his arm to his neck, and the bandage should not be removed if there is no accident in the position of coughing or a tumor for twelve days.
Then renew the bandage if you see such a face. Let the wound heal and harden before operating on it, as this will make the fracture of the bone easier to treat and less severe. It is best to wait for eighteen days. However, in some people, it may take less time than this.
The sixth chapter.
In the treatment of fractures of the arm, it is important to note that only the broken parts of the bone are affected, not the entire bone. If any part of the bone breaks or moves out of place, this can only be determined by touch. Depending on the shape of the fracture, different treatments may be required.
To set the bone back into its natural position, you can use various methods. After that, apply a mixture of powdered salt, egg whites, and a thin layer of wet clay over the fracture. Then, place a broad piece of wood on top to hold it in place.
The splint should be placed on the arm, covering all or slightly more than the affected area. If there is any movement under the splint, apply a thin layer of wet clay to stop it from moving until the splint is securely in place. Then, tie it firmly with a long bandage.
Tie the bandage securely and make sure it does not move from its position. Check the bandage every day, tightening it if it becomes loose. Make sure the arm is in the correct position and allow it to heal for twenty days.
On the fifth or twentieth day, if you have completed this period in safety, then break the bandage as these bones are not fragile and do not fear their fracture. If a sharp edge of the bone protrudes from the bone and is eating through the skin, cut it off. Then do what was mentioned in the chapter on fracturing the thigh bone, if anything of that nature occurs.
Chapter Seven
On Fracturing the Sternum
The sternum may fracture in the middle and rarely this is evident, but its ends are more prone to fracture and displacement. Symptoms if it fractures in the middle include leaning downwards, pain in the chest, shortness of breath, and coughing.
And perhaps blood will drip and the displacement in the fractured bone will be evident, which cannot be hidden by touch. Treat him by having him lie on his back with a cloth between his shoulders, then grasp his thighs and bring his limbs together with both hands from both sides, gently aligning them as much as possible.
Until the shape of the bone returns to its normal form, then apply bandages and compresses, placing a soft piece of wood or cloth underneath him in the splint after wrapping it in a cloth. Then gently tie it on the broken bone to prevent it from displacing, and repeatedly pass the bandage around the back until it is tightly secured, then frequently examine the bandage and whenever it loosens, retighten it firmly.
If necessity requires, perform the procedure at the site, if there is pain or a tumor, then proceed with the treatment and repair any issues found, then reapply the bandage if necessary. And make sure to secure it tightly until it is fully freed.
Chapter Eight.
In the treatment of fractures of the ribs, know that fractures usually occur in the curved parts behind the back and their ends from the front, because they are flexible and this is evident to the touch when examining with fingers.
Treat them by straightening the fracture with fingers until the shape is as it should be, then apply a bandage and tightly secure the broken bone with a splint if necessary. If the rib fractures are inclined inward, they may cause internal injury and severe pain.
The fracture that is visible from the outside indicates a bone fracture, which also reveals difficulty in breathing, coughing, and excessive bleeding, making treatment difficult. The ancients resorted to many tricks in such cases.
Some of them said that it is appropriate to make the patient eat foods that produce flatulence, wind, and belching to expand the abdomen and stretch the fracture outwards. We disapprove of this because it may indicate the presence of a hot tumor if it has not occurred, or if it has occurred, it will increase and confirm it.
Some of them said to place a poultice on the affected area and then bite it with force, which is similar to measurement, except that they fear that the poultice will be attracted to the affected area due to its weakness. Some of them said that it is appropriate to cover the affected area with a cloth that has been soaked in hot oil.
The bandage should be applied between the fingers until it is full, so that the fracture will be level if it is tied upright, then the patient should be treated with the treatment of the fracture from food and medicine, but if the patient is very weak, it is a difficult matter to bear. The bone fracture was very painful and we were afraid for the patient, so it is appropriate to cut on the affected area and expose the broken limb, then place a device that preserves the bone fragments as described, and cut the bone gently and remove it.
Then, if the wound is large, we gather its edges with stitches and treat it with ointments until it heals. If there is a warm, inflamed area within, we apply a poultice of wax from the willow tree on it and treat the affected area with what can soothe the inflammation from inside as well.
He lies on the side where the injury is hidden until it heals.
The Ninth Chapter.
For fractures of the back and neck.
However, if the bones of the neck are fractured and it is not clear what has happened to them or what can be done for them, and also for fractures of the back, if such a case occurs, one may ask whether it will heal or not. If you see that his hands have become limp, relaxed, and lifeless, and he cannot move them, extend them, or grasp anything with them, and if they are cut or pricked with a needle without feeling it or experiencing pain, then know that in most cases, he will not heal.
If he can move them and feel the cutting and pricking, then know that the bone has not broken and that the affected area will heal with treatment. If fractures of the back occur in a similar manner, and you wish to know whether it will heal or not,
Look at his legs, if you see that they have relaxed and what happened to the hands has occurred in them, then when he lies on his back the wind and urine come out without his will, and when he lies on his stomach the feces come out without his will. And if he lies on his back and wants to urinate but cannot, know that he is dead, so do not try to treat him, for if nothing of this has happened to him, the matter was less severe, and treatment for what happened was to calm the hot tumor.
By applying olive oil alone or mixed with cooked egg yolks on the inflamed foreskin three times a day until the hot tumor settles, then apply a strong, clean cloth to the affected area and tie it firmly, order him to rest and be still.
He should not sleep on the side that causes him pain until he is relieved, for if something has happened in the bone at the time of delivery, such as a splinter or something that can be removed, it is necessary to cut the skin and remove that bone. Then gather the wound lips if they are large by sewing, then treat with the salt marshmallows until he is relieved, for if the last bone of the little finger is broken and it is the sinew, it is necessary to insert the needle from the left hand into the cavity.
The broken bone is placed back into position using the other hand, according to what can be managed and achieved in terms of alignment. Then, it is wrapped with bandage and plaster if necessary, and then sutured if needed.
If you feel a sharp bone fragment in it, split it and remove it, and treat the wound with the appropriate treatment until it heals completely.
Chapter Ten.
Treatment of Broken Ribs.
When the ribs are broken, they usually fracture at their ends and splinter along their length, protruding inward and causing pain at the site, as well as bruising and swelling of the affected leg.
Treat it by passing your hand over it until you feel the fracture, and if it is only at the ends, align it according to what is available for you in terms of alignment, so that its natural shape is restored.
If the fracture is in the length or has protruded inward, place the injured person on their back so that you can align it. Once aligned, wrap it with bandage and then apply plaster made of wood or leather, and suture it tightly.
Do not fear the transfer of the fracture and the loss of the splint, and level the displaced fragments with what fills it until the bandage takes its place in a stable position, and command the patient to sleep on his back or on his healthy side, for if he lies on his injured side, a hot tumor will form.
Stop applying pressure and splinting until the hot tumor subsides, then carry him on what has subsided on what was previously mentioned, then return to splinting and bandage him as appropriate, for if there are fragments or separation from the ends of the bone, it is not appropriate to remove.
And do not touch it, but level it from outside as we mentioned and leave the bandage until it is released.
The tenth section.
In splinting bone fractures.
The bone is what is between the elbow and the head of the arm, if it fractures, splint it on one of its two faces, one of which should take a straight, smooth, medium-strength splint in this shape:
And fasten two cords at its ends, then hang it from a raised position and make the patient sit on a chair, then receive the broken arm on the splint until it becomes stuck in the middle of the curvature of the splint, then hang something heavy from above it.
The servant should be made to extend his arm downwards, then the physician should adjust both of his hands together until the fracture is set correctly. Alternatively, the injured person can lie on his back and have one hand tied to a support with a bandage.
Then command two servants, one to adjust the fracture above with his hands and the other to adjust it below and extend towards his side. If you want the extension to be stronger, tie a bandage underneath the fracture and above it, and then have each servant extend towards his side.
If the fracture is close to the corner of the mouth, it is recommended that the bandage be placed in the middle of the lip and the other under the fracture towards the cheek, and similarly if the fracture is close to the cheek, the bandage should be placed on that position and on the cheek itself.
Then the fracture should be adjusted gently without force until it is set correctly and the bones have realigned properly. If there is no sign of infection, then dress it with a moist, cool cloth and apply olive oil.
If the swelling has subsided, then dress it with a bandage and place a new piece of cloth on top of the bandage, then hold the arm against the bone itself and place your hand openly on his cheek.
Translation: "It is crucial to bear the fracture and pressure on the muscle and arm so that the arm can stand in place of the broken bones, unless something prevents you from doing so or something changes on you from the broken bone, then use the splints.
Translation: "And it is that you place splints on the fracture itself, which are thinner and stronger than other splints, and make a distance of a finger's width between each splint, and the length of the splints should be according to the fracture, increasing by three fingers from each side.
Translation: "Then, you tie the splints with the bandage mentioned in the beginning of the chapter.
Translation: "And it should be that your bandage is stronger at the place of the fracture.
Translation: "And as the fracture heals, the bandage becomes less strong, so if you see that the splints and bandage are placed as we mentioned at a time when you can bear the limb from your pain, then do it.
Translation: "And if you feared the heat of the inflammation, leave the bandage and splints until the seventh day as we mentioned, then examine the dressing every three days to prevent infection, foul smell, or food from not reaching the limb due to too much bandaging, and fix all of that as we mentioned.
If you are confident that nothing of this sort will happen, then do not apply the dressing until many days have passed. The patient should lie on his back with his hand on his abdomen and a folded cloth soaked in moderately warm water placed under his arm, supporting it.
Examine frequently, both day and night, to ensure that the shape of the broken bone does not deteriorate or that the dressing loosens, and repair it with all your effort. Place the patient's food on a tray as we previously advised, making it gentle at first until the bone hardens.
His food should be thickened, as it is common for bones and legs to harden in forty days. At that time, the dressing should be applied and he should use a bath and be treated with splints suitable for this, if the fracture is severe and painful.
Do not apply the dressing for fifty days or two months.
The twelfth section.
In the treatment of fractures of the arm.
The arm is composed of two bones, called the radius and ulna. The smaller one, which follows the thumb, is the radius, and the larger one, which is located below the smaller one, is the ulna. Sometimes only the radius or the ulna may be fractured, or both together, or separately.
When the small upper jaw fractures, its reduction is easier and its healing is faster. When the lower jaw fractures, its reduction is difficult and its healing is slow and painful. If the bones fractured together, if the bone that fractured was the small upper jaw, then its reduction is easier.
The physician should make the mold gentle and easy to apply until it aligns it. If the larger jaw is fractured, he should make the mold stronger. If both jaws are fractured, he should make the mold much stronger.
The hand's shape should be placed during reduction and the mold should be extended on a cushion, with the index finger raised above all other fingers, the middle finger below all other fingers, and the little finger bent on itself.
The cushion should be at the same height as the little finger to prevent it from causing discomfort.
Then, the assistant should extend the arm from below using either his hand or a bandage, and another assistant should extend it from above in the same way. Then, the physician should align the bone until it returns to its best possible shape, if there are any fracture fragments, they should be removed.
If any fragment is exposed, make an effort to return it to its original position, as if a clean fragment appears and is eating away at the skin, and you have no desire to suture it, then cut it open and remove it according to the method we mentioned earlier, for if the fracture is accompanied by a wound, you should leave an opening for it.
Then, treat it from there, if the exposure occurs in the first suturing and there is a hot mass, apply a tukkhara with the qayrotah made of henna, redwood oil, and white sulfur, and let it be medium between the stern and the saddle, and tighten the tukkhara on it gently until the mass settles.
Then, remove the qayrotah and place a prepared bandage made of flour and egg whites on it, then apply the dressing that is placed on the fracture itself to be slightly exposed and stronger, and know that the number of dressings for the arm will vary in most cases.
If the fracture was in one zandal or both, then make your suture at the fracture site stronger and sharper, and every time you pull the suture upwards or downwards, make the suture looser according to what was mentioned earlier in the beginning of the chapter.
The fracture that has occurred on top of a crack should be a soft, not very hard, fracture. The thread used to set the bone should be a specific type of thread, medium in thickness between the raque and the thick, as we have described. Examine the affected area and the union after several days.
If something happens that needs to be fixed, such as an ulcer exposed in the bone, it should be soaked in warm water until the ulcer heals and the bone is left unstitched for a night until it rests, then the stitching is repeated.
If the stitching has loosened and the bone has decayed or something similar, make every effort to fix it all. Also, if food is prevented from reaching the affected area due to excessive stitching, it should be slightly raised and left for several days until the food reaches it, then it should be stitched again.
If nothing mentioned earlier has occurred, it should not be done until twenty days have passed or something similar, then the surgeon's hand should be placed on his neck and his arms should be moderate, he should avoid strenuous movements and make him sleep on his back.
Know that this fracture of the arm heals in thirty days or in two and thirty days, and sometimes it heals in eighteen days, all depending on the condition of the patient and their strength.
The Thirteenth Chapter
In the treatment of fractures of the hand and fingers.
The use of a splint for the hand and bandages for the fingers is minimal in showing the fracture, but rather it shows the reduction greatly, so when the hand shows a fracture or reduction.
The patient should sit upright with a chair in front of him at an equal level.
Then he should place his hand on it, extended, then the assistant should extend the broken bones and the doctor should arrange them until they are well aligned, then when they are well aligned, it is appropriate to apply a bandage and a splint if there is no heat, then a plaster cast is applied from above according to the position.
And I have mentioned it in a thin splint, if the fracture is downwards towards the palm of the hand, make a circular shape from the splint and let the patient hold it with his broken hand then tighten it with a long splint.
Let the bandage be made of smooth skin that adheres to the skin and covers all the fingers, being fastened as it should be. If the fracture is outwards, then two bandages should be made, one from above and one from below in the hand, so that the hand remains open and upright.
Then, the bandage should be wrapped around the hand as it naturally curves and tied between the fingers with a knot. If the fracture is in one of the joints of the fingers, then it should be aligned correctly before being fastened with the hand. If you prefer, a small upright bandage can be made to support the fracture.
If the fracture is in all the fingers, such as the middle, index, or little finger, then it should be aligned and fastened with the correct finger or all of them together on the palm side, as this is best, or a small upright bandage can be placed on it.
As we said in the phalanges, and examine it immediately after the fracture and after healing from the heat of the inflammation, apply it as appropriate. If anything happens, repeat the description.
Chapter 14.
On fractures of the thigh bone.
The thigh bone often fractures and is easily palpable due to its mobility, as it moves forward and backward and rotates. The treatment involves placing a bandage above the fracture and another below it, with the patient lying on his back.
Then, each bandage is extended towards its respective position evenly. If the fracture is in the middle of the bone, this should be done. However, if it is near the thigh's base, a thin bandage made of silk or similar material should be used instead.
Near the thigh's base towards the knee, the splint should be placed above the fracture and the other bandage below it. If the fracture is near the ankle, the bandage should be placed near the ankle so that the splint falls below. Then, the doctor should adjust the bone with both hands until it returns to its natural shape.
If the bone is deformed, it should be wrapped and bandaged if there is no heat in the tissue. If there is heat in the tissue, leave it for several days until the heat subsides, then return to treatment.
For the bandage, a wide, stiff cloth should be folded twice or three times and whatever remains should be used for padding. Then, the leg should be wrapped until the heel returns to its natural position at the base of the thigh. A long piece of string should be inserted between the thigh and the leg near the ankle from below, with the ends coming out from both sides.
Then, treat the thigh and leg according to the preference of the splint, then place a fracture in the position of the break itself, and make a fragment from it, placing one fragment on the thighbone, then fill the gap between the thigh and the leg with a thin saw cut until it is level.
Then begin with the strong sinew from the middle on the position of the fracture, three or four folds, and as you approach from the position of the fracture, let your bandage be less and softer and more elastic.
Then, extend to the ends of the thread that you inserted between the thigh and the leg and tie it with what follows from above, then pass both ends of the thread down until you reach the ankle, also tie the ends of the fragments from the other side.
So that the bandage does not come off its place, then leave the bandage on it as long as there is no talk of discharge from the limb, such as pus and inflammation and so on, if something happens like that, act quickly to solve it and fix what happened on all of what we mentioned repeatedly.
If there is a fracture in the bone, it should be adjusted if possible, otherwise cut it and remove it, and treat the wound as we mentioned before until it heals, and this fracture of the thigh from without adding the leg with splints.
As mentioned in the bone and the arm, except that if it is fractured alone without the leg being attached to it, then it will never be possible for its owner to stand up again.
And know that the hip hardens in fifty days or increases slightly or decreases slightly, all of this depending on the difference in the types of fractures and other cases.
The fifteenth chapter.
In fracture of the knee cap.
Indeed, the patella is a small part that rarely fractures, but it can be dislocated frequently. If it fractures, it will either be sharp or split into its parts, sometimes with wounds and sometimes without.
And it should be examined in all its parts, and fractured by aligning the broken parts with the fingers until they join together and fuse according to how the alignment, tenderness, and skill allow. Then, it should be bandaged and a movable splint should be applied if necessary.
And it should be bound above with a bandage that is appropriate for that, then all the conditions that we have mentioned in other fractures, such as heat inflammation and so on, should be treated according to what is suitable for each case until it heals.
Chapter Sixteen: Operations on the Eye and Ear
Infracture of the Thigh Bone
The thigh bone has two parts, one of which is dense and called the thigh bone, and the other is thin and called the patella, and it is exposed to various types of fractures as are the humeral bones. Therefore, the fracture of the thigh bone is like the fracture of the humerus, and the treatment is the same. If both bones are fractured, the thigh will rotate in all directions, and if the thin bone is fractured, the thigh will rotate towards the front, and if the dense bone is fractured and this happens from below, it is something that is not hidden from you.
Use the splint and immobilization, and tie the fractures according to that, whether it is a fracture of the thigh or not. However, if the fracture of the thigh is a severe one with many fragments, it is better for the splint to be less and softer, and to reduce the effort in fixing it.
In the thigh, there is something more than in the humerus, and that is if you have aligned the fractures and finished all your work, take two splints made of corkwood or pine wood, which are used for leveling the gaps between the doors or from the palm leaves or similar.
Choose from them one that is slightly thick and not too thin, and let its length be equal to the length of the leg from the ankle to the bottom. Then fold each one in two, making two loops of equal length, and place one loop on the thigh and the other on the opposite side.
Let the length of the bandage be from the ankle to the bottom of the foot. Then connect the two bandages in three places along the edges and the middle, for this will prevent the leg from leaning to the right or left and will provide good support. A stick made of wood of equal length to the leg can also be used.
Place it in the bandage to protect it from movement and as much as possible, especially if there is a special wound. Then examine the leg every day and check for signs of tumor or inflammation or any other complications. When something like that happens, treat it appropriately until it is healed. The bone of the leg takes about thirty days or more to heal.
Chapter Seventeen
On Fractures of the Leg and Fingers
As for the heel, it does not usually fracture, but as for the bones of the leg and fingers, they may fracture, and the fingers also rarely fracture, but rather they are more likely to dislocate.
If the bones of the leg are fractured and you see that some of them have risen above others, then place the patient's foot on the ground in a raised position, like a lame person. Then stand and place your foot on the part that has risen from those bones and rub and smooth it.
Until it returns to its original position, then place the bandage and the pad underneath the sole of the foot as a small plank with flat ends, then tighten the foot firmly after breaking any remaining fractures and other necessary steps.
If it has been three or four days, then remove the bandage. You will find that the bones were fractured or dislocated, so act accordingly. However, if some fingers have broken, force and smooth them as you were taught to do in setting broken fingers of the hand.
Then make a splint for the broken finger, slightly longer than the finger, then place the plank underneath the foot as you were taught and tighten it firmly. If more than two bones have been fractured, follow the same procedure.
Make splints for each finger, slightly longer than the finger, and place them in a straight line in the fracture. Tighten the plank underneath the foot and ensure that each end of the plank is outside the sole of the foot to provide good support.
It is essential for you to remember to apply all that we have mentioned to you regarding fractures, of the symptoms we have mentioned, and treat each symptom appropriately.
Chapter Eighteen
In the fracture of the female thigh bone and the humerus, and mentioning the male.
When the female thigh bone fractures, place her supine and gently tilt her back slightly, then hold her from behind, and stuff the bandage into her vagina until it fills and becomes like a ball inside her.
Then shake the woman and slightly raise her abdomen, as that bandage will come out until it becomes like a ball near the vaginal opening and the fracture of the bone heals, then place a pad on her back, and when she wants to urinate, gently remove the bandage.
Then return her to the first position, and do this for seven days or so, as it heals, and if you want to give her a suppository, place an elaeaghate bottle in her mouth and insert the entire suppository into her vagina.
Then blow into the bottle with force until the suppository expands inside the vagina, as the fracture heals, then stuff her with the bandage and keep her in the described position for days until it becomes clear, and if the humerus of the man or woman fractures, use a splint.
What we have described in the bone of the foot, and it is not hidden from you that these strange fractures which are mentioned only occasionally occur, especially for those who have some experience and understand this book well, as the fracture itself occurs in many situations.
If you follow the correct method of setting and splinting, you will understand. As for the mention of the leg if it fractures, take a wooden splint and place it in the fracture, then apply a bandage over it, wrap it, and leave it for three days or so until it heals.
Chapter Eleven
In the setting of bone fractures if there is a wound.
It is recommended for those who have been exposed to a fracture with a wound, especially if the bone is large such as the thigh bone or the shoulder bone and so on, that they immediately set it at the time of the injury, provided you follow the conditions of setting as we have mentioned.
If the wound is bleeding, it is recommended that you immediately cut it and apply a poultice of powdered charcoal if you do not have anything else, then set the fracture in that same day and do not delay it.
If a hot tumor does not occur, then if a hot tumor occurs, leave the setting for the eighth day until the hot tumor subsides and do not approach it in the third and fourth days, as it may cause harmful symptoms.
If the broken bone is exposed on the skin and open, it is recommended to reduce and align it with your fingers gently and gradually, if you cannot reduce and align it with your fingers, then use this tool which is made of iron with a length of seven fingers or eight. And place it on the level of the wound.
And the physician should take three or four of them according to what is needed for treatment in each type of fracture, and they should be slightly thick so that they do not bend when looked at during work.
And it should be sharp at the tip with a sharp edge from the thickest part to the thinnest part, and this is its shape:
And it is called by the Greeks a periacton, which means a small wedge, so its sharp tip should be placed on the end of the broken bone and pushed with a stroke until the bone returns to its place and some of the fracture lines align with each other.
If the tip of the broken bone is thin and the tool did not get a good grip on it, then you should cut the tip of that bone until the tool can grip it, if you cannot reduce the bone with what we mentioned earlier, then cut it with any of the tools we mentioned.
If you are able, remove the bone from its place and clean it thoroughly with one of the recipes provided. Then, remove any remaining sharpness or thin scales from the bone. If the bone becomes painful and severe after being returned to its original position, know that the bone has not returned to its natural state.
If you are able to return the bone to its natural position, you will provide great benefit to the patient. If your work on the bone is complete, soak the bone in a strong black wine and especially if it is summer, do not place oil or anything greasy on the wound.
So that decay and corruption do not occur, use the probes during your free time from working on the bone and leave the wound open. Do not place the needle in the lacunae unless it is the size of the wound.
Be very careful not to close the wound with fractures, as many ignorant doctors have done this and caused their patients either death or gangrene or fever. Your closure should be gentle and opposing the sharpness of other fractures.
If the wound is bad or a large wound and you were concerned about some of the bad symptoms we mentioned and he had pain in the place, do not use probes on him. Make lacunae from hard-broken bone in the place of the probes and close them with it.
If it has been a day or two and you see that the wound is starting to produce pus, remove the dressing that was placed on it with the drink, then use the ferment and the marc (lees) which are from our customs that we use to treat wounds such as the quadrangular marud (a type of bandage) and so on. It is advisable for you to apply the rabat (a type of poultice).
Examine the wound every day in the evening and morning until it discharges and drains, and it is advisable to place the affected limb in a position that allows the pus to flow downwards easily. If the wound has lasted for many days and the pus has not been discharged or stopped, know that there are small fragments of bone remaining.
It is advisable to probe the wound with a probe to remove any remaining fragments that are not discharged. If they are not discharged and are causing pain and tissue damage, cut them away and remove them in any way that you can.
If the wound shows signs of putrefaction, such as foul odor or discharge, treat each sign with the remedy that you described in its section.
One should be careful and prepare oneself mentally if a large bone breaks off and remains attached to the limb, such as the thigh bone or the shoulder bone and so on. Do not attempt to remove it or extract it. Often, such death occurs and it is best to leave him until he has putrefied, for perhaps after twenty or thirty days, he will fall from himself.
Then, when treating the wound, if you see a place suitable for treatment, otherwise leave it.
Chapter Twenty.
In the treatment of the complication that occurs after some fractures.
This complication often occurs after the fracture has healed, especially if it is near a joint, causing deformity of the limb and perhaps preventing the limb from performing its natural function.
If the complication is severe, use drugs that draw out such as senna, licorice, myrrh, and frankincense, and mix them with some or all of them with a decoction, or with egg white, or with honey.
Apply this mixture to the complication in a bandage and press it strongly on it with a strong pressure, leaving the bandage for many days, then remove it and repeat it on others until the complication disappears, God willing, or apply a strong tin of calomel.
Calomel has a property that removes all that is in the limbs, so if the complication has hardened and worsened and necessity required its removal, cut it from above and cut the adjacent tissue or remove it with some forceps until it disappears and treat the wound until it heals.
The Twentieth Chapter
In the treatment of fractures, if the bone after being set becomes thin and does not return to its original shape.
If the bone fracture occurs and the bone after being set becomes thin and weak, this is due to many reasons. One of the reasons could be too much tension and tightening of the bandages, preventing nutrients from reaching the bone, or excessive tension in the bandages, or excessive movement at the wrong time, or low blood volume in the body, leading to weakness.
To treat this, one should feed the patient and massage their body to increase blood volume, use a bath, apply happiness and joy, and then apply a poultice on the bone to attract nutrients or soak it in diluted water. Until the nutrients reach him and he returns to his original shape.
The Twenty-Second Chapter
In the treatment of broken bones that have healed crookedly and prevented from functioning properly.
When the bone has been set after healing but shows crookedness or deformity of the broken bone, or complexity and disfigurement that affects the appearance of the limb. Except in cases where the limb has not prevented itself from performing its natural function, it is not appropriate to accept the claim of those who assert that they can break the limb from the head. Many ignorant doctors and quacks have done this in our country.
This act is extremely repugnant and leads to great harm, but if the injury and complication are severe, it is appropriate to apply water that has been boiled with herbs such as the leaves of the khatmii and its root and the king's flower, and so on.
He should apply the appropriate dressing, such as the well-made diachylon, or take the juice of the khatmii root and mix it with chicken glue and sherry wine and use it to dress the wound, or take fresh tin and grind it with hamam soap and other medicines called 'annihilators'.
And if the complication dissolves, use the constant gentle massage with the hands and move the limb in all directions at all times. If the injury has progressed, become hardened, and necessity requires treatment with iron.
Then it is appropriate to cut through the bone and cut away any remaining complication or bone with sharp instruments, using gentleness in this process with effort and care, then treat the wound with what was mentioned until it heals completely.
Translation: Chapter 23.
The jaw is an exostosis that protrudes from its joint, impeding movement and deforming the appearance of the organ, causing severe pain and discomfort to the patient. Therefore, if a jawbone is exposed, it is recommended to address it immediately.
Delaying treatment is not advisable, as the protrusion may become more severe and make it difficult to realign the jawbone. Therefore, it is not recommended to delay, move, or extend the jawbone during protrusion, as it often causes discomfort and painful symptoms.
However, if it is exposed, the practitioner should immediately remove the protrusion, then leave it alone until the swelling subsides slightly, then apply heat and oil to the organ, then gently realign it with the appropriate treatment mentioned for each part in its respective location.
The chapters on the jawbone have also been arranged according to what was mentioned in fractures, from top to bottom of the body.
Chapter 24.
In the treatment of the lower jawbone.
The jawbones dislocate only in rare cases, and their removal can be on one or both sides of the face. Sometimes they may slip out of their sockets gradually, allowing for some relief, or completely, allowing for full relief. To the abdomen until the tongue protrudes and he cannot grasp it, and he cannot bear to have his jaw dislocated and his tongue stick out, then if he is forced to do so gently, he may return to his normal state in most cases.
However, if the removal is complete and total, then it is necessary to hurry in his return and not delay him for a moment. The servant should hold the patient's head and the physician should insert his single finger into the root of the jaw in the mouth if the jaw is from one side.
Or he should insert all his fingers into the mouth if the jaw is from both sides, and the rest of his fingers from outside should straighten it and command the patient to relax his jaw and let it go in all directions, and the physician should straighten the jaw and push it until it returns to its original position.
If it is difficult to return them and especially if both jaws are present, then use the heat of warm water and oil until they become easy to return, and do not delay their return as we said. If they return and stand still and the patient's mouth closes and they have not relaxed, then at that time place the splints made of rags soaked in oil, wax, and red lead on them.
Then, securely tie the patient's arms in a relaxed position, with his head and back supported between two pillows to prevent him from moving his right or left side or choking on any food, making his nourishment smooth and easy.
Until the pain subsides and the jaw becomes relaxed, let him eat whatever is appropriate for him, using gentle force without forcing his mouth open during eating, drinking, or swallowing until the jaw relaxes and heals.
If the jaws are difficult to close and do not return to their original position, it often causes pain, headaches, and sometimes the patient's stomach becomes distended or he has difficulty swallowing, indicating that it is damaged.
Often, if exposed to this condition for ten days, it can be fatal.
Chapter 20.
On the treatment of dislocated jaws and the corner of the mouth.
As for the dislocation, it does not usually occur from the inside towards the chest, but it can sometimes be displaced outwards, which can be felt. To treat it, the patient should lie on his back and have his arms extended.
Then press the position firmly with your hand with force, for it returns, then place a bandage and compresses on it and bind it, and as for the part that follows the inguinal canal and is connected to it, it should not be removed except in emergencies, for if it is removed on any day, it should be returned and adjusted on what we mentioned and whatever is available to you.
Then place a bandage and compresses and binding on it, and command the patient to loosen the dressing and rest until it is clean, and with this treatment, the inguinal wound will return to its original position if it also returns to its original place.
Chapter 26.
In the treatment of inguinal hernia.
Know that the inguinal hernia only protrudes in three ways, one of which is that it protrudes towards the thigh downwards, and the second is that it protrudes towards the chest and sometimes above the inguinal canal, which occurs in emergencies.
And it does not protrude towards the back of the shoulder and not towards the front of the nerve, and the most common type that protrudes and exits downwards towards the thigh, especially in those with little flesh, as it quickly exits and quickly returns.
And as for those whose meat is abundant, it is the opposite of that, meaning that it comes out and goes in with difficulty. Sometimes, some people strike or fall, causing the anus to protrude and they rub it hotly, thinking that he has died, but it is necessary to examine this until you confirm its health.
At that time, you should advance in treating him, and recognize if the jaw is towards the bottom towards the anus, if it matches between the protruding anus and the healthy anus, you will find a clear difference between them, and you will find the tip of the anus with tremors, and underneath the anus when touched, the tip of the anus is like an egg.
And the physician should not raise his hand to his ear and move it in all movements, and similarly, if he protrudes towards the chest or above, you will find that clearly visible to touch, not hidden.
And this jaw may facilitate its return if it was twisted or if the physician was young, return it by raising a servant's hand above then make your two hands under his anus and raise the joint with force up to its position and the servant raises his hand and extends it up.
Then he should lower it, as it will quickly return to its original position if not. If the fracture has not healed despite the mentioned methods and has been present for many days, it is recommended that the patient wash in warm water and use a soft, flexible tool similar to cooking the roots of the mallow, hemp, and king's crown in water and using it.
Then the patient should lie on his back and place a soft, moderately firm cushion under his heel. The surgeon will then place his hand on the cushion and gently pull the patient's leg downwards with his hand.
He should push the cushion with his foot if it returns to its original position. If you wish, you can repeat this process on the same side. It is recommended to prepare a longer leg than the patient's and stop it from the side, then insert the patient's foot under the patient's heel and lift his heel until the patient is hanging in the air. Another servant should pull the patient's hand downwards towards his lower abdomen if the patient is light. It is recommended to attach something else to him to weigh him down, as the fracture will quickly return to its original position. He may also return to a different method.
It is essential to place a long wooden plank on the ground, with a straight shape like the handle of a hammer, neither too thick nor too thin. Then, place it under the patient's leg after making a linear incision on the top of the plank, and have the patient stand on the length of the plank.
Then, stretch his hand to the other side and extend his body from the other side with force, as the joint will return to its original position quickly. If it is difficult to restore, use this treatment: take a plank of length equal to two arms. Display it with a thickness of four fingers and thicken it with two fingers, having a straight shape to easily enter into the depth of the leg on this image:.
Then, make a linear incision on the straight shape to avoid damaging the patient's leg. Then, place it under the leg and extend his hand and arm completely on the plank and tie the plank to the muscle, tendon, and finger tip.
Then, place the arm on a support. Sling him and extend his hand downwards while leaving the rest of the body hanging from the other side. If the joint enters, it should be placed under the leg with a moderately sized cushion.
Then, he lifts the prepared bandage from the dust of the hair along with the lime and whiteness of the egg onto the wound entirely as it rotates from above. Then, he ties the circle from underneath the arm tightly and ties it firmly with a knot from above on the bandage. He then holds his hand to his neck.
He leaves his hand immobile for seven days, and it is recommended to make the food of the sick person little so that the organ becomes stronger as it is quicker to heal. Then, after the seven days or five days, he exercises movement. If it is stable and has not relaxed, then it has healed.
If the joint is frequently dislocating due to moisture or another reason, it is recommended to use the Kii with the three supports as mentioned in the chapter on the Kii, if it does this entirely and loosens the knot after seven days and the joint has not stabilized.
And if the bandage and the knot were repeatedly tied on him and it did not stabilize and he fell and relaxed and it could not be raised above, know that the nerve in the head of the wound has broken or stretched or relaxed, then know that the joint will never stabilize in its place again.
If the fracture is near the chest and breast and extends to the back, it should be pushed and massaged with hands until it returns to its place, and all types of bandages and treatments should be used until it heals, for if after healing the joint becomes swollen in the limb and its movement is slow.
The Hammam should not be used frequently until that swelling is reduced and it returns to its original state.
Chapter 22.
In the treatment of fractures of the elbow.
The elbow joint fracture is difficult to reduce and also difficult to return to its place, it can be reduced in all directions, especially forward or backward, and its reduction is not hidden from you as it is visible under the sight and touch in any form of reduction.
If the elbow joint fracture is reduced correctly, it will be evident to you by the movement of the joint, and he cannot raise his arm or touch his elbow, and it is advisable to reduce the fracture as soon as possible before it becomes hot and inflamed.
If it becomes inflamed and hot, it is difficult to reduce it, and the fracture may not have healed, especially if the fracture is in the back, as it is more severe than other types of fractures and causes more pain and often death accompanies it.
If it is possible, the assistant should extend his hand with both of his hands and arms straightened and the doctor's hands from above and below the elbow, and he pushes the joint with his fingers or the palm of his hand until it returns to its original position.
If the jaw is in front, it may return by bending the hand once until it hits the base of the little finger that is facing it. If it does not return, use very strong force and pull the arm of the assistant.
The assistant also holds two hands to prevent slipping during pulling, then the arm is moved in all directions after covering his hand with a folded cloth or wide cotton gauze, and if the doctor's fingers touch the joint, they should be lubricated so that it can slide easily.
Then the joint is pushed strongly until it returns, and after returning, it should be bandaged with a cloth containing antiseptic and tannic acid mixed with egg whites, and tightened firmly and the arm should be tied from the neck of the assistant and left for several days.
Then if the joint is in its place, remove the bandage and leave it, and if you see that the joint has not improved, replace the bandage and leave it for several days until it improves, then remove it. If there is pain after returning and removing the bandage, repeat the process.
If the patient has difficulty moving, do not use moistening in the bath and gentle rubbing and massage until it becomes soft or place a fatty piece of meat on the joint then tie it and leave it on for a day and night then remove it and put it in the bath, if sweat comes out, wipe the joint gently.
Then prepare the meat again twice or three times with entering the bath until it becomes soft, and if you want to put wet cotton soaked in fat and lean meat and tie it on him do this repeatedly as it becomes soft and returns to its original state.
Chapter Eighteen
In the treatment of dislocating the shoulder.
The shoulder is often dislocated and its dislocation is easily reduced unlike other joints, but it is necessary to hurry to reduce its dislocation at the time it occurs before the joint moves or becomes exposed and hot.
To reduce its dislocation, place the affected shoulder on a board and extend the assistant's hand and the physician places his hand on the joint and pushes it until it returns, except that he should look if the dislocation has moved to the inside of the arm.
The surgeon should place the outer part of his hand on the board at the moment of cutting and pulling, even if the knife is prominent to the outer part of the hand. If he places his inner hand on the board, the surgeon's hand will be on the same plane as the joint, so if he returns from his position and otherwise, he should tighten it with a soft bandage to prevent swelling.
Let him rest and do not repeat it, for he does not endure and you cannot return to pulling after a certain number of days except that the joint remains bent and does not harm the surgeon unless he relaxes his hand and is unable to grasp anything.
At that time, you know that the nerve has been cut or damaged, so there is no remedy except to tie it with a silk thread, perhaps it will be beneficial and perhaps not at all. If the tendon has been pulled back, then bandage it with the bandage that we have mentioned, then tighten it and leave it for five days.
Then he should massage and move his hand if it becomes stiff and shows something rigid in it, then soak it in warm water and massage it repeatedly until it becomes soft.
Chapter 19
In the treatment of fingertip amputations.
When a finger is torn in all directions, if it tears towards the back or palm of the hand, extend the finger and push the knuckle with your finger until it returns to its place, then tie the tip of the finger and position it towards the direction from which it tore.
Leave it for two days, then release and extend it until it becomes erect during the day. If it is at night, tie it according to the same method as before, and continue to soak and exercise it during the day, and tie it at night, doing this for several days until it strengthens.
Similarly, tie it towards the same direction if it tears towards the inside of the hand, and do the first treatment until it heals, and also do this when it tears towards other directions.
The Third Chapter
In the treatment of the knuckle of the back.
When a complete knuckle of the back or neck is torn, or if many ribs have moved from their places, there is no treatment for this because death is imminent.
This is indicated by the fact that urine flows out without control, and he cannot hold it, and often some of his limbs relax, either both legs or one arm, while if one rib has moved from its place, it often disappears.
The fall of it to four directions, the one that falls backwards is called a hernia, and as for its treatment, it is to look at it, if the hernia has occurred from childhood, there is no treatment in it or from it to remove the protrusion, and as for the one that occurs from a fall or blow and so on.
The earliest ones mentioned it with various treatments in long words that do not return more than a little benefit, and I have abbreviated from it what suffices to spare much of what they brought from my approach to the meaning and explanation of it, and I have illustrated the tool contrary to what they explained and illustrated.
I say that the hernia that occurs from the front in the chest has no remedy in it and no removal from it, and likewise the one to both sides, and only those that occur in the back are treated specifically with what I am describing, which is to extend the affected side on its face.
On a board level with the wall and spread underneath it and wet clay to prevent his chest from being hurt, then he puts a vertical post in a hole in the ground at the end of the board towards his head and another board towards his legs at the other end of the board.
A servant holds the board and it should not be securely fixed in the pit, and another servant holds the other end of that formation on top of that, then it is wrapped around the chest of the patient and under his armpit with a thin, strong, and tight bandage, and the end of the bandage is extended to the board which is near his head, and it is tied in it.
Then, another bandage is tied over his back and over his knees and at his groin, then all the bandages are gathered together and they are tied on the other board which is near his feet, and each servant extends the bandage to his part of the board and the boards should not be removed from their fixed positions.
Unless they are not fixed as we mentioned, and the doctor places his hand on the board with force until it returns or he places a plank on it, then he leans on the plank with his legs until it returns, if it does not return by this treatment, then he takes a plank that is about three arms long.
And he digs in the wall which we mentioned should be near the patient a place where the end of the board enters, then it is placed in the middle of the board on the wound and the doctor places his legs on the other end and ties it tightly until the wound contracts.
Return to its place, and if you wish to make it with the lancet that bends by hand and it is that you should push it into the earth at the head of the patient at the end of the operation table two pieces of wood whose length is an arm and at his legs also two pieces of wood.
And there should be between each piece of wood a span and it is made in each piece of wood an opening through which the lancet passes and all the pieces of wood are sunk into the earth until the betel does not move and a reed with a hole in it and it is the lancet that is wound in the openings of the two pieces of wood.
And at its end there is an opening through which a reed of a span long and what is wound in it is wound and in the other two pieces of wood like that, then tighten the bandage that was tied around the patient's chest in the lancet at his head and the bandages that were tied around his legs in the lancet at his feet.
Then a servant stands at each lancet bending his hand with the lancet that is wound in it and the doctor spreads the bandage on what we have prepared, and this is the image of the lancet and the operation table and the patient.
Then after the cautery returns and the position is level, it is necessary to lift the dressing dry with the whiteness of the egg then the bandage then place on top of the dressing a piece of cloth whose width is three fingers or near it and its length is enough to cover the position of the bandage.
Then, for some wounds that are correctly sutured, it is appropriate to use the suture material that is suitable and gentle on the food until it becomes clean. If there remains some tension in the place at the end of cleaning, it is appropriate to use the ointments that are sprinkled and applied with the board that we described for a long time.
In this case, a copper bowl can be used, and if there is tension remaining at the end of the sutures in the back, it may appear to be a protruding bone that has been left behind. Do not use this treatment on it, as it may cause death.
Chapter 23.
In the treatment of a dislocated shoulder.
Know that the joint of the shoulder and the joint of the elbow only expose the dislocation, not the slight swelling and the protrusion that occurs in other joints.
And that it dislocates both internally and externally, forward and backward, and more so it dislocates internally than forward or backward, and the sign of its internal dislocation is that if you place the patient's leg in a straight position, it will be longer.
The foot is more likely to be incorrect than correct and it is not appropriate for a patient to stretch his leg at the armpit, and the position that follows the armpit is arm and arm, as we have mentioned before that the top of the thigh has reached there.
The sign that exposes the jaw to the outside has symptoms against these symptoms, and the sign that exposes the jaw forward is that he straightens his leg for perfection, except that he does not do so without pain in the foot, and if he walks, he cannot do so forward.
He sits with his arm and armpit, and when walking, he leans on his back, and the sign that exposes the jaw backward is that he does not straighten his leg and cannot do so before straightening the armpit, and his leg will also be shorter than the other.
The armpit is relaxed and the top of the thigh is at the position of the breastbone, as we have mentioned before. However, if the jaw is old and has been with its owner for a long time and he did not try to fix it, there is no treatment for it.
It is not appropriate to expose him, and if he fixed the jaw recently and it was one of the four corners of the jaw, he should first wrap the joint and extend it both inside and outside, and move it gently forward and backward until it returns to its place.
Return and do not resort to other treatments, unless he does not return in this manner. If he does not return, it is appropriate to have a strong servant who supports him from below, either with his hands or with a stick that ties above the knee on his leg. Another servant should support him from above.
He should insert his hands from underneath the armpits, then tighten a thin stick on the hip bone and hold the end of the stick with another servant who is third, and he should support him either from the front towards the flank or from behind towards the back.
They should support him all at once until the patient raises his body from the ground and remains hanging, as this type of support is a common type among the four types. If the jaw returns to its original position as we mentioned earlier, otherwise, there is no other option but to use the specific treatment for each type that we mentioned.
If the jaw returns to the inside, it is appropriate that the patient lies on his healthy side, then a stick is placed on the hip bone between the top of the thigh and the position under the armpit.
Then the stick is extended from the armpit towards the top of the body towards the flank, then another strong servant with his arms takes the hollow part of the upper thigh and extends it outwards with a strong support, as it returns to its original position.
This type is easier than other types of treatment that involve the return of this organ, if it becomes difficult for you and does not allow you to enter this type of treatment, then it is recommended to tie both legs together with a strong rope on the knees and ankles.
And after each of its owners, it is four fingers long and the upper leg is longer than the other by two fingers, then the upper one is tied to a wooden board in the house and the lower one is on the ground by two arms.
Then command a strong servant to hold the buttock and tie another servant to the upper one and push the servant holding the buttock with force, then the joint returns to its place quickly, and if the jaw is outside.
The upper one should lie on the bed according to what we described in the owner of the hip and tighten the rope on his upper leg especially and on his chest then place one board at his feet and the other at his head then place an additional board in the middle of the bed firmly.
A wet cloth has been tied around her so that the servant does not stick to the lower part near the bed, then each servant is extended to his side and the doctor straightens the leg with his hands, if he answers for return.
If not, place the injured limb on a board and press it firmly against the body as mentioned in the previous section, unless the fracture is at the front, in which case the injured limb should be extended forward while being held in this position by the doctor.
Then, the doctor places his left hand on the injured limb and presses it with his right hand, gradually applying pressure downwards towards the heel, unless the fracture is at the back, in which case the injured limb should not be extended downwards.
He should be raised off the ground and placed on a rigid object, such as a board, as mentioned earlier, with his arms stretched out to the sides while being held in this position by the doctor.
As mentioned earlier, the board should also be used to press on the position from which the joint was displaced. If the joint has returned to its proper place, the sign of this is that the injured limb's legs will be extended.
If you see both legs level and the injured limb able to straighten its leg without pain, then know that the joint has returned to its proper place. At this point, equalize the hips, apply a bandage, and tie a firm bandage that does not move the knee towards any direction.
It is crucial that the bandage remains for three or four days, then remove the padding and splint, and shave the other leg. If they are equal in size, know that the fracture has healed, then let the patient walk with the bandage, but if there is any sign of relaxation, do not let the patient walk with the bandage.
Then, rebandage it and tighten it according to your initial tightness, and leave it for three days, then remove it and let him walk on it gradually until it becomes strong, if God wills.
The second and third chapters.
In the treatment of fracture of the ankle.
The ankle fractures in three directions, towards the inside, outside, and downwards, meaning towards the back, but it does not fracture towards the front. A sign of its healing is that the bandage tells him to bring his leg to his thigh.
If he does not attach it to his thigh, know that the ankle is fractured, and set all the faces of its fracture by making him sit down, and extend his legs if he can bear it, and make him sit behind him to hold his hands and turn him slightly backwards, then sit on his thighs.
You lean your back against his face and place his leg between yours, then clasp his knee with your hands and interlace your fingers around it, holding its sides firmly with your hands, while another servant extends his leg until the knee returns to its original position.
A sign that it has returned is when the thigh becomes attached to the buttock in a loose, unforced manner, then press and attach the thigh to the buttock, then tie them together with a three-day or four-day bandage, and do not use it for walking for a few days until it strengthens.
If it is difficult for you to return it as described above, then use the strong pressure bandages that I previously mentioned for treating the hernia until it returns.
Chapter 30.
In the treatment of hernia.
The hernia may disappear completely or gradually, and its return may be complete or partial, and the sign of its return is that you see the hernia bulging out clearly towards the side from which it returned.
As for the treatment of its disappearance, it is easy to return it by gently extending your hands and straightening until it returns. As for its treatment if it returns completely, it is appropriate for the patient to sit down and a strong servant to hold it from behind his back in the middle of his chest.
Then, grasp the foot with your right hand from above and with your left hand from below at the position of the Achilles tendon, then pull the foot towards you with your right hand and then with your left hand twice, then extend it with your left hand and push the sole of the foot towards the thigh from the side without force.
Then, do this twice as described, then push the sole of the foot towards the thigh in the third attempt while pulling the Achilles tendon, if it returns in one or two attempts and you see the foot level, otherwise repeat the procedure on it as it may return.
If it does not return as described and otherwise, then place the patient on his back on the ground and immerse in water deeply so that it falls between his buttocks and has been wrapped with a cloth to prevent him from being hurt, then adjust the servant of the buttock.
Then, extend another servant either with his hands or with a rope tied around the thigh, then extend each servant opposite to the extension of its master and the band is upright between the buttocks of the patient holding him so that his body does not sink down at the extension, then the physician straightens his fingers.
A servant should hold the correct leg downwards, as the jawbone will quickly return. If the jawbone returns and you see its health has improved, then apply the bandage and splint, tighten it with strong strings, and tie the foot below with a rope, avoiding the nerve that is above the ankle from behind.
To prevent the bandage from being too tight and causing him pain, leave it for two or three days, then if it relaxes, tighten it again on the third or fourth day, and the patient should avoid walking for forty days.
If walking before this period causes the jawbone to become dislodged and ruined, and he refuses treatment afterwards, if there is heat and swelling, then use what we mentioned earlier in other parts of the treatment and massage until it goes away.
Chapter 4 and 30.
In the treatment of jawbone of fingers of the foot.
It is necessary to straighten what has broken from it with gentle extension, not forcefully, as this is not difficult but easy. If the jawbone is in some of the bones at the front of the foot, then the patient should put his foot on a level surface on the ground.
On a board and standing like a donkey, then you rise and place your foot on the part of the joints that has been cut off, then rub it with your foot with force until it returns and you see it has become flat and there is no sign of it in the place.
Then place under the sole of his foot a board that takes the whole foot, it has two heads, then tighten it strongly and firmly for three days, then soften it and polish it from walking for many days until it becomes hard and the return is guaranteed, God willing.
The fifth chapter and thirty.
In types of fractures that occur with a wound or with a break or with all of them together.
When something like that happens and its treatment and reduction are delayed, it often leads to death.
And for this reason, it is not appropriate to start treatment of such things except by someone who is skilled in the craft, has a long experience, is gentle, careful, diligent, and does not have a hump or a limp, and at the beginning use only medicines that relieve heat inflammations.
May God help, except for what you hope for safety from the trouble with the illness and some hope appeared to you in it, then remove his treatment from your hands at first as soon as possible before the heat inflammation occurs.
If the member returns to its original state as desired, use the procedure that soothes the hot abscesses and treats the wound with moistened tampons suitable for it. If the jaw is fractured with a crack and sharp fragments have formed in the bone, remove them. And follow what we mentioned in the simple diseases in their respective places.
Strive with effort and keep yourself away from deceit as you were advised, for that is better for your interest and more acceptable to the public, God willing.
