The author of this book, when he completed it for you, O descendants, said: "This book which is a part of the science of medicine in surgery, with its completion and reaching its goal in clarity and explanation, I thought to complete it for you with this section that is a part of practical work.
For the work by hand is perfected in our country and in our time, to the extent that it was almost impossible to learn its science and to sever its traces. And only simple drawings remained in the books of the pioneers, which were written by hand and their reality was crooked and confused until their meanings were lost and their benefits were forgotten.
So I thought to revive it and expand upon it in this section with explanation, clarification, and conciseness, and to bring diagrams of the parts and all tools of work, since it is an addition to clarification and a help for what is needed.
The reason why there is no skilled craftsman by hand in our time is because the science of medicine is long and it is necessary for its practitioner to first study anatomy, which was described by Galen. Until he is able to understand the benefits of the parts and their positions, their humors and connections, separations, and knowledge of the bones, nerves, muscles, their number, outlets, and the sources of the veins and arteries, and the positions of their outlets.
Therefore, Albucasis said that physicians are many in name but few in deed, especially in the craft of hand surgery, as we have mentioned in this book.
Because those who are not knowledgeable about what we have mentioned in anatomy may commit mistakes that could kill people, as you have seen many claiming to be experts in this field without proper knowledge or understanding.
I have seen a ignorant physician who pierced a porcine tumor in the neck of a woman, thus severing some blood vessels in the neck, causing her to bleed to death in his arms.
I have also seen another physician who attempted to remove a boil from a man's foot, but the boil was large and he cut it off with a piece of catgut. The man died within three days, and I was called to extract it, but I saw the remains of the boil and the state of the patient was beyond what I could imagine.
I have also seen another physician who was a quack and claimed to know the medical field.
He then told a young black man who had a fracture near his buttocks and a cut, and the physician, due to his ignorance, tightly bandaged the fracture over the wound with thick gauze, leaving no room for air.
Then, let him apply it to his desires, then leave it for days, and command him not to wear the bandage until his leg and foot swell and he is on the verge of death.
Then, he was called to him and quickly removed the bandage in order to obtain relief and regain his strength from his pains, except that the decay had already become deeply rooted in the tissue and I could not remove it.
The decay continued to spread throughout the tissue until he died.
And I saw another physician who dug out a cancerous tumor and cauterized it after days until the bone of its owner was destroyed, because if the cancer is purely made of black bile, then it should not be exposed to iron.
Unless it is in an organ that may be completely removed.
Therefore, my son, it is necessary for you to know that the work of the hand is divided into two parts: work that accompanies safety and work that has a defect in most cases.
I have warned in every place of this book about the work that contains deceit and fear, so it is necessary for you to be cautious and reject it.
Lest the ignorant find a way to speak and accuse, take hold of yourselves with firmness and vigilance, and treat your patients with compassion and certainty.
Use the best and safest method that leads to a satisfactory outcome, and treat dangerous and difficult diseases with caution.
Pursue righteousness and avoid anything that may cause doubt in your religion and worldly affairs, for it is a source of strength for you and will elevate you in this world and the hereafter according to your deeds.
As Galgano said in some of his instructions, do not treat a bad disease and you will be called bad doctors.
This article is divided into three sections.
The first section.
The first section: On the knife in fire and the sharp needle used for surgery, arranged from the horn to the toe, with images of tools and their uses, and everything needed for manual work.
The second section.
The second section: On wounds, abscesses, and fistulas, surgeries, and extraction of arrows, and other related matters, all arranged and illustrated with images of tools.
The third section.
The third section: On fractures, dislocations, and treatment of hernias, and other related matters, all arranged and illustrated with images of tools from the horn to the toe.
The first section.
On the knife.
Before performing the operation, it is necessary to mention its method of benefits and harms and in which condition it is used.
I say that the discussion on the method of benefits and harms of the operation is a long and detailed scientific matter, which has been discussed by many wise people.
They differed in it and summarized their brief discussion out of fear of prolonging it.
I say that the operation is beneficial for all kinds of bad conditions when accompanied by matter and without matter, it is beneficial for two types of conditions: hyperthermia without matter and flatulence without matter.
As for the condition of flatulence with matter, they differed in it; some said that the operation is beneficial in such a case, while others said the opposite, that the operation does not cure a disease that is characterized by heat and flatulence because the nature of fire includes heat and flatulence.
It is not appropriate to treat a hot and flatulent disease with a hot and flatulent remedy, and he who says otherwise said that the operation with fire can cure a hot and flatulent disease that occurs in the bodies of people. Because when you add the human body and its moisture to the condition of fire, the human body becomes cold.
I say as he said because experience has shown me this repeatedly, except that one should not imagine about such a matter unless it has been accepted and practiced in the door of the gate of surgery. He stopped at the difference in the moods of people and the state of the diseases in themselves, their causes and symptoms, and the duration of time.
As for the rest of the moods, there is no fear of them, especially the cold moist diseases, as all doctors have agreed on them and they have not differed in the benefit of the surgery in them.
And know, my son, that the benefit of the surgery with fire and its superiority over the burning medicine is because fire is a pure essence that does not exceed the function of the organ that is affected and does not harm other connected organs except for a slight injury.
And the burning medicine may exceed its function to other organs and sometimes cause a disease in the organ that is difficult to treat and sometimes kills, while fire, due to its nobility and the purity of its essence, does not do this except if it exceeds.
This has become clear to us through experience for a long time of service and care in the craft and standing on the facts of the matter.
For this reason, I have abbreviated my speech, although it would not be fitting for this book of mine if I did not reveal to you a secret and mysterious method in the treatment of bodies and the expulsion of diseases by philosophical demonstration that pierces your understanding.
Know, O my son, that they have differed in the time when the Kay [a type of surgical instrument] is suitable, and they have made the best time for it to be in the spring.
And I say that the Kay can be suitable at any time because the harm that has occurred beforehand is consumed in the benefit that is brought about by the Kay. Especially if the Kay is of urgent and strong necessity that cannot bear delay, for fear that it may bring about a greater disaster than the harm that has occurred beforehand.
And do not let it deceive you, O my son, that the common people and ignorant physicians think that the Kay which removes a disease that cannot ever have a return is made to harm.
The matter is not as they think, for the Kay is like a medicine that changes the humor and dries up the moistures that are the cause of the diseases.
However, the knife is preferable to medicine due to its speed in healing and the strength of its action and the intensity of its power.
And it is possible that the disease may return at some time, depending on the disposition of the patient and his ability to recover and strengthen himself, as well as any conditions in his body that allow the accumulation of impurities due to neglect of nutrition and other similar causes.
O Allah, except for a disease that requires the use of the knife in a delicate manner and in an organ that is less prone to impurities and moisture. Such as the lancet for pain and similar cases, it is possible that such pain may not return in them, which is the least.
As for the common saying that the knife is the last of medicine, this is a correct statement, as they believe that there is no remedy that can be beneficial after the use of the knife and the matter is otherwise.
And the meaning of 'the knife is the last of medicine' is that when we have used various remedies for a certain disease and those remedies have not been effective, then we use the knife as the last resort, and from there it becomes clear that the knife is the last of medicine. This is not the meaning that was understood by the common people and many ignorant physicians.
The early ones mentioned that the gold suture is better than the iron suture, and they said so only because of the pliability of gold and its noble nature. They said it does not cause inflammation at the wound site, which is not necessarily true.
For I have tried this and found that it only works in some cases, not all. The iron suture is better and more suitable than gold, as they said, unless you heat the needle in the fire from gold, then you will not know when to quench it for the desired redness of gold.
Because it quickly contracts in cold and if you add more to it in fever, it melts in the fire and causes the maker to be trapped in difficulty, so the iron suture has become faster and closer to being correct for work, God willing.
I have arranged this chapter on sutures in sections that are organized from the head to the foot, so that it is easier for the student to find what he wants, God willing.
Chapter 1.
Sutures of the head, one suture.
This suture is useful for the excessive moisture and cold on the brain, which are causes of headache, frequent colds from the forehead to the eyes and ears, and frequent sleep, tooth pain, and neck pain. For every disease that arises from cold, such as fever, convulsions, and paralysis, and similar diseases.
This image, if the patient is a child, should first be given an easy-to-digest purgative medicine for three nights or four, according to the strength, age, and constitution of the child.
Then, he should be ordered to have his head shaved with a razor, then place him between your hands, lying down, with his hands placed on his chest.
Then, place the tip of your finger on the tip of his nose between his eyes where the middle finger ends, and teach him that position with the mudra.
Then, massage the olive oil that looks like this:
If it is possible, remove from the bone as much as the size of the head of a needle or a grain of mustard, and raise your hand, otherwise, prepare your hand with a needle itself or another one if it is sharp. Until you see what you told him from the bone, then take something from salt and dissolve it in water and drink a cloth of it and place it on the position and leave him for three days.
Then, place a wet cloth on him and leave it on him until the pus from the fire goes away, then treat him with the four-pronged forceps until he is clean, God willing.
They say that the wound, as long as it remains open, benefits from being continually dressed with a poultice.
Some of them mentioned that the skin should be drawn towards the bone and the poultice held until a part of the bone's ridge burns, then the burnt part of the bone is removed, and then it is treated.
Others said that one should excessively use the knife until it affects the bone strongly enough to cause the bone to fall off like a quill or a small fish, and they claimed that from this, the head would sweat and the wound would remain open for a long time.
Then it is treated until it rots, and I do not see this type of knife except in some people and on the way of deceit, and if it is left, it is better and safer, as the head will sweat whenever its natural connection is severed, as we have seen in all other parts.
Especially when the head of the patient is weak by nature and the first type of knife is suitable and better for me, use it as you wish, may Allah help you.
Chapter 2.
In the head also.
If there is a chronic headache and it has lasted for a long time, and if the patient has tried all the remedies mentioned previously, such as cupping, cauterization, leeches, bandages, and plasters, but nothing has helped him, then look. If the neck of the patient is strong in structure and not weak, and he finds severe cold, then give him another cupping over the previous ones, but slightly. Then give him cupping on each side of his head until the skin becomes thin and the bone opens up as described previously. And give him cupping in the front of his head at the place known as the "fas," and lessen your hand in this, but do not expose the bone, because the patient will find it very painful unlike the other cuppings on the head which are all described previously. I will mention this cupping in its place.
The cup should be softer than the one used for the sides of the head and the front, and this is its shape.
The Third Chapter.
On intermittent headaches.
If there is a headache in the temple and it is accompanied by a headache that spreads to the eye, then the patient should use remedies that clear the head and all the treatments mentioned in the divisions of diseases, but if none of these work, then the cupping in this case has two faces. Either by the sharp knife or by iron.
And as for the sharp knife, take one clove of garlic and crush it, cut off its ends from both sides, then make a wide opening at the place of pain between the ribs with a broad-bladed knife until it becomes a space under the skin where the knife can be inserted.
Then insert the knife under the skin until it disappears, then apply strong pressure on it for about fifteen minutes, then remove the garlic and leave the wound open for two days or three, then bandage.
Then apply a moistened cotton pad soaked in oil until the area is cleaned, then treat it with the warm mudra until it heals, God willing.
And as for the sharp knife made of iron, it is like this:
It is called the 'needle-like' knife because its head resembles a needle with some teeth in the middle.
Then place it on the place of pain and hold your hand while you slightly move the iron back and forth, so that the amount of burning is like half of the skin. Raise your hand so as not to burn the artery that is below, which would cause bleeding, then moisten a cotton with salt water and place it on the wound and leave it for three days. Then lift the cotton with oil and treat it with the probe until it is clean, God willing.
And if you want to remove this brother with a thin, pointed needle from the syringe and prevent cutting the artery in this brother who is not chronic, especially.
Chapter Four.
The chronic brother.
If you treated the brother with what we mentioned about advanced treatment and what we mentioned in the divisions of diseases, but it did not work, and you saw that there is no cause for this except what we mentioned from the first cautery or the second with fire. It is appropriate to protect the thin needle until it becomes white after you place it on the painful spot with a line of length half a finger or near that, and leave your hand once and while as you suture it until it cuts the artery and reaches the bone.
Unless you should prevent contact with the jaw that moves at the mouth, so it burns the muscle or nerve that moves it and causes constipation.
Be cautious and gentle when dealing with the bleeding vessel that you have cut, for there is danger in its cut end. Especially be careful with those who are ignorant of what should be done and have not been well-practiced, as they often leave the work incomplete.
There will be mentioned the method for controlling bleeding from a vessel that has been cut on its face in its original position from the book, if Allah wills, as you will not perform this action.
If you see the body of the patient possibly having a fracture in the middle of the head as we have described and treat the wound until it is healed, if Allah wills.
If you wish, you can use the clamp that we mentioned in the chapter of stopping bleeding from a vessel with tweezers, as it is better and more effective than this.
The fifth chapter.
On the treatment of ear aches.
If there is pain in the ear due to a cold and it was treated with the medications and other treatments that we mentioned in the division and the pain did not go away, then crush the clamp that is called the dot, its image is shown.
Then apply it around the ear completely as it wraps or around both of them if the pain is in both. The distance from the base of the ear to the point of insertion is a little, after learning the position with the needle and the needle is about ten points in each ear or near it, then treat the points until it becomes clear, God willing.
The Sixth Chapter
In the needle of the puncture.
The needle that is used in the puncture is only of the kind that causes from the saliva, as mentioned in the divisions of diseases.
Avoid the kind of needle that causes from the punctures and nerve damage.
When this kind of needle was used with iron and copper and brass, it did not heal your treatment, then it is necessary to replace the needle with three needles. One at the base of the ear and the second a little below the shoulder and the third at the junction of the lips.
Make the needle from the opposite side of the sick person because relaxation only occurs in the side that appears correct.
The shape of the needle is to make a needle with the tip of the ear under the crown of the head a little and another in the shoulder and its length is on the level of the eyebrows.
Lower the needle with your hand until you burn half of the skin's curve, and this is the image of the marrow and it is a type of steel that has its image except that it is slightly softer than it as you see. It is important that the knife has a slight sharpness, then treat the site as previously mentioned until it is cleaned, God willing.
Chapter Seven.
On Chronic Tetanus.
If the tetanus has persisted and was treated as mentioned earlier, but did not improve, and it is not due to an evil eye, then give him four kiyats. On each horn of his head, give one kiyat and two kiyats in the middle of his head as mentioned earlier, and one kiyat on the back of his head as previously mentioned.
The recipe for Makawi as mentioned earlier, and it may also be given one kiyat on the mouth of the stomach, then treat as mentioned earlier.
Chapter Eight.
On Forgetfulness.
The one who is forgetful due to phlegm, it is important that he should first drink the evil eye from large ayrges and brain-cleaning grains.
Then he should shave his entire head and tie a collodion bandage written about in the article of Al-Azmudah, tying it multiple times, as it is a remedy from the kiyat.
And do that on the back of his head with the eye as mentioned earlier, if it is cleaned by that, otherwise give him three kiyats on the back of his head, which should be applied from the top of his head to the bottom of his neck.
Create a gap between each finger and then make the thickest possible callus on the thumb, then treat the finger as previously mentioned. If you desire to increase further and the possibility of the finger becoming deformed is likely, then remove the middle callus.
If you wish to increase further, then make calluses on the knuckles and treat them until they become free, and the bandage should be of the same type as previously mentioned.
Chapter Nine.
Treatment of the Foot and Relaxation of the Entire Body.
It is recommended to start with the purification of the head using irrigation and what was previously mentioned, then shave the hair of the patient's head, then make calluses in the middle of the head and on each knuckle of the head and at the front of the head.
And three on the nape of the neck, if there is a reason for relaxing the body further and the patient was likely to have such a strong and severe disease, then make four calluses on the back of his neck. Inform the patient to apply the callus until it burns more than the skin and lift your hand, then treat him as previously mentioned until he becomes free, God willing, and the bandage should be of the same type as previously mentioned.
Chapter 10.
The chapter on Stroke (Cerebrovascular Accident).
The stroke that occurs before the onset of saliva is treated first by cleansing the brain, especially the larger vessels and other treatments mentioned in the previous section if the patient is large and there is a possibility of taking medications.
If the patient is a child who does not tolerate medications, then the Gargar and Mamledagh (purgatives) for the brain should be used before that for many days with improvement in nutrition.
Then, his head is shaved and a leech is applied to the middle of the head as mentioned in the previous section and another one at the back of the head. And a leech on each corner of the head, if the patient is strong and there is a possibility of using the leeches mentioned in the book of Falaj and relaxation of the body on the backbends and backbends, and the ointment is oil-based on the method mentioned before.
If the patient is a child, then make the ointment mild on this pattern.
The 11th Chapter.
The chapter on Malnutrition (Marasmus).
If the cause of malnutrition is spoiled liquids and thick saliva, then use the leeches mentioned in the book of Falaj.
If the cause of the fainting is a slight inclination towards blackness and the body of the patient is moist, then do not wash his brain as mentioned in the previous chapter on division.
Then cut the head of the patient and make a tight cake from flour like a circle, then place it in the middle of his head. The patient should be lying down with his head elevated, holding onto each side. Then take one handful of fresh mutton fat.
Then heat it on the fire to a moderate temperature that is just bearable for the finger if placed in it, then pour it in the middle of his head in the circle and leave it until it cools down. Do this with the patient once a week along with all other good treatments, God willing, until he is cured.
If you want to wash his brain, do it in small amounts frequently without holding a cloth, but rather let it be cooling. This type of oil moistens the brain evenly.
Then apply a moist cotton cloth on him with the oil or chicken fat.
The twelfth chapter.
On the use of water in the eye.
If you notice the beginning of water in the eye as mentioned in the previous chapter, then immediately wash the patient's head and keep him away from all moisture, and sweat him in the steam room for several days.
Then, pass a cord around the head and tie a knot in the middle of the forehead, then tie two knots on the temples if the beginning is the flow of water in both eyes at once or from one side only if it is in one eye.
Then, cut the underlying veins and arteries with a knife and make the knots in them long in the width of the temples to prevent bleeding from the blood flow.
If you see anything from it, cut it on the spot with any treatment possible, and we will rely on wisdom in stopping the veins and cutting them to prevent bleeding.
And sometimes, two tight knots are tied under the bones.
The thirteenth chapter.
On chronic eye discharge.
If the eye discharge is constant and comes from the veins and arteries in the visible part of the head from outside the head, and it is confirmed that it is due to a cold, thick, viscous humor, then tie the knot that was described in the beginning of the water flow. A knot in the middle of the forehead, two knots on the temples, and two knots under the bones, and if it is necessary to increase the knot, tie a small knot on each side of the eye's corner on the eyelid with a thin cord.
Chapter Fourteen:
In the treatment of the nose.
If treatment with what was mentioned in the division did not succeed, then first apply a poultice of linseed oil to the forehead and then shave the middle of the nose. Then apply a poultice of mustard to the eyebrows just under the hair, but do not cut the vein, and this is the image of mustard.
Chapter Fifteen:
In the treatment of a sty in the eye.
If the sty in the eye is due to a disease or moisture, then apply a poultice of henna to the sty.
And if you wish, apply a poultice of two henna to each eyebrow and keep it away from the temples, and the length of each poultice should be equal to the length of the eyebrow.
And do not apply too much henna, but only enough to burn a third of the skin, and the image of the poultice should be in this manner.
Chapter Sixteen:
In the treatment of a black eye.
If the eyelids turn inward, first apply a poultice to the eye. Either the knife by fire or the drug that burns, as for the knife by fire, the skilled surgeon orders beforehand that he leaves his incisions if he is one who can bear it until it lengthens and equals.
If the first is at its root when it sprouts, he rubs his eyes with a probe so that it does not move until it sprouts, then when it sprouts and equals, put the head of the skilled surgeon on your stone, then learn by the tip of the eye with the adze mark of the shape of the leaf ash.
And the beginning of the mark near the incisions, then put under the eyelid a cotton soaked in white of egg or in ink of cuttlefish, then heat this shape.
Then you repeat the shape a little at many times until the surface of the skin which is like the shape of the leaf ash all appears, especially and the mark of health of your work that you see the eyelid has shrunk and the hair has risen from the flesh of the eye.
Then raise your hand at that time and leave it for three days, then lift a cotton with oil until the crust peels off, then treat him with the adze until he is clean, God willing, if something of the hair returns after time and the eyelid relaxes.
The author advises to repeat the procedure as previously done, if the hair is in the lower eyebrow, remove it until it returns to its natural position without damaging the eyelashes. As for the upper eyebrow, it is recommended to instruct the patient to stop plucking until the eyebrows grow longer and even.
Then, a piece of paper is made from the kaigd (a type of cloth), and soap and unwashed jir (a type of fabric) are taken, weighing about a dirham or more each. They are all ground together thoroughly and quickly to prevent them from drying out. Then, the mixture is spread on the kaigd (paper) made from the kaigd (cloth), and it is applied to the eyebrow or both eyebrows. A moist cotton swab soaked in whitened egg yolk is placed under the eye, and the patient's head is positioned on the stone.
And place your finger (sabbaba) on the medicine and press it slightly while moving it as the patient feels the burning sensation of the medicine, as it is like fire. As long as the patient feels the burning sensation, do not remove the medicine and continue to move it with your finger. Once the burning sensation subsides, remove the medicine and wash the eye with water.
Look, if you see that the wound has risen as it does when smoking with fire or cutting, and if not, then apply the medicine again on the place where the medicine has not affected and has not worked until you complete your work and smoke the eye. Then put linen soaked in fat on it until the bandage of burning is removed.
Then treat it with the nux vomica or other until it is clean, and it is necessary for you to work so that the goal of caution is that nothing from the medicine falls into the eye after days and if the eyelash has something in the eye.
Then prepare the medicine on that place where the wound has relaxed especially as you did first, then treat it until it is clean, and this is a picture of the leaf of acacia.
And know that the eyes of people differ in size and large, so your smoking should be according to that, and it is not a secret way of the correct method for those who had a practice in this craft.
Chapter Seventeen
On the eyelash that is exposed in the eye.
If the eyelash has been treated with what we mentioned in the divisions of diseases, but it did not heal your treatment, then it is necessary to squeeze on this property.
Order the assistant to place his head on your stone and hold his head firmly between your hands as a grip that does not move or shake.
Then, place a cotton ball soaked in egg white or honey on his eyes, then cover the affected area with this shape.
It should be made in the shape of a hollow tube like a swan's beak from one end, which is the part with the kiy and if you wish, it can be expanded at the other end, but if it were made like a rod, this would not be as good for your work, God willing.
Then, if the bone is open, you grind it and remove the matter from it or if it is not open, you open it and extract its pus, then place the bandage on it, which is very tight, and hold it with your hand until you reach the bone.
And move your hand slightly towards the eye away from the nose so that your hand does not slip or disturb the patient, so that the bandage does not get into the eyelid and spoil it, if it reaches the first bone to the bone, otherwise, prepare the bandage again if necessary.
And leave him for three days, then apply a cotton pad with oil and treat him with the dry gauze until he is cleansed, if it has passed forty days and has not been cleansed, then apply a strong drug until the bone is dissolved and shave it on what will be mentioned in its chapter, God willing.
This is a section title in the original textbook, and as such, it does not require translation.
Pour a specific amount and weight of dissolved lead into the incision, then hold the forceps firmly but gently to prevent the lead solution from leaking into the eye. It is recommended to place a piece of cotton wool soaked in milk or water on the eye.
Lead can burn the area of the naevus and cleanse it in a remarkable way, but if the naevus is cleaned as mentioned earlier with cauterization and other treatments, then there is no alternative but to use a needle to pierce the nostril and insert the naevus back into its original location.
Chapter Eighteen
In the incision of the lip.
Frequently, a laceration occurs in the lip, which is called a split lip, especially in young men. If this laceration is treated as mentioned earlier in the division, but the treatment did not work, then apply a small piece of silk sutures on this wound.
Its needle should be as thin as a needle, then it is placed in a forceps holder and inserted into the incision until the suture reaches the depth of the laceration, then it is treated with sutures until it is cleansed, God willing.
The Ninth Chapter: Treatment of Fractures and Dislocations
In the case of a broken jaw.
If a fracture appears at the chin, or in the lower jaw, or in the roots of the teeth, and it becomes swollen and then suppurates and turns into a continuous open wound, it is necessary to apply a dressing on the fracture as much as possible.
Then, introduce a probe into the fractured jaw and hold your hand until the iron (probe) reaches the back and front of the fracture, and do this several times. Then treat it with the treatments mentioned earlier until it heals, God willing.
If the matter (fracture) has healed and become whole, otherwise, it is necessary to examine the place and remove the decayed bone according to what will be mentioned in its chapter, God willing.
The Twentieth Chapter: Treatment of Fractures and Dislocations
In the treatment of fractured teeth and relaxed jaws.
If the jaw has relaxed before becoming moist and the teeth have moved and were treated with medications but did not heal, place the head of the nail in your stone (mortar) and then apply the dressing in its shape after this, after placing the probe on the fracture.
The incision is made in the area of the tumor, and a heated instrument is inserted until the patient feels the heat of the fire, indicating that the instrument has reached the base of the tumor. Then, the instrument is removed, and the incision is repeated according to the desired number of times. Finally, the patient drinks water mixed with salt.
He holds it for an hour and then pours water on it. If the movable tumor is fixed, the relaxed tissue becomes tense and the bad moisture evaporates.
Chapter 20.
When the pain of the tumor is severe.
If the pain of the tumor is severe before a cold or if it has pus and does not respond to medication, there are two options: either to apply smen (a type of fat) or to apply heat.
The application of smen involves taking cow fat, melting it in an iron pot or on a griddle, then soaking a piece of cotton in the melted fat and placing it on the affected area with the hand, and holding it until it cools.
Then, repeat the process until the heat of the fire reaches the base of the tumor. If desired, soak a piece of cloth or cotton in cold smen and place it on the affected area, then cover it with an iron plate until the heat reaches the bottom of the skin.
As for cauterizing with fire, it is done by approaching a brass or iron tube and placing some of its weight on the affected area to prevent the heat of the fire from reaching the mouth of the patient. Then, the cautery iron in the shape of its image is placed on the same spot and held firmly with your hand until the cautery iron cools down. This is done repeatedly.
If the pain goes away within a day or two, it is recommended to fill the patient's mouth with good grease and hold it for a while before spitting it out. This is the shape of the cautery iron.
Cauterize with any part you wish, according to what is possible, and this is the shape of the tube.
Chapter 22.
In cauterizing with the knife.
If the knife is used for cough and cold with no medication to induce maturation and you want quick maturation, then apply the blunt cautery iron in the shape of its image, which is open at both ends.
Let smoke escape from the other end and place it protected on the same tumor, one or two times if necessary, until it reaches the depth of the tumor. If the tumor is small, make the cautery iron equal to the size of the tumor.
Then leave it for three days and apply a poultice soaked in fat until all the burnt parts are removed, then treat it with the marcham and faldh (surgical instruments) until it is cleansed, God willing.
The Twenty-Third Chapter.
In the case of a cough due to phlegm and difficulty in breathing.
If moisture has overcome the lung and especially if it is accompanied by cold weather, it is appropriate to first use easy remedies, then apply a poultice in the hollow of the neck at the base of the throat in the lower position.
Be careful not to apply the poultice to the throat and do not burn any part of the skin, but only half of it, then apply another poultice at the shoulder joint in the last fold by the side of the previous one, and the poultice should be made from a mixture of ingredients that were mentioned earlier.
Then treat it with what was mentioned earlier until it is cleansed, God willing.
The Twenty-Fourth Chapter.
In the case of a lung disease and cough.
If the cough and lung disease are due to cold moisture and the patient is not feverish or hot, and the disease is chronic, then apply two poultices above the diaphragm in the lower positions on the flat sides of the chest, and another poultice in the middle of the breast between the breasts.
The bandage should be like a suture, as shown in the picture, and if you wish, it can be made of silk thread called 'Naqqa' and its image has been shown in suturing ear pains and the Naqqa is thirty to forty in number.
Then treat it as mentioned before until it is clean, and a bandage with three threads can be made on this picture and it is quicker for the Kii to use it in one time to make three Kiis, and this is the image of the bandage.
The twenty-fifth chapter.
In the Kii of the Abde.
If the head of the muscle is torn due to moisture or if it was not properly fixed before removing it, it usually returns and then tears again at the lowest movement as we have seen, so it should be repaired first. Then the patient should lie on his back or on the correct side, then the skin inside the Abde is lifted up with your left hand fingers if the joint was torn inside.
Then bandage the bandage with two threads which is this image of it.
Then cover the skin with it until it reaches the other side and the shape of the Kii becomes four Kiis, and it can be covered with a bandage with three threads so the shape of the Kii then becomes six Kiis and the threads are on the level of the wound.
This is the image of the three-pronged forceps.
This can be added to the number, making it eight, then carrying the catgut on the needle with salt, then applying the suture, and the body should not be moved until it heals, although sometimes it may need to be removed from above.
If a catgut suture is placed above the meniscus, a good quality single one or many, it will cause the joint to harden and the moisture to be lost and the suture to loosen.
Chapter 26.
In the sutures of the intestines.
If there is much moisture and heat in the stomach, causing it to be expelled from its place and many vomiting occurs and treated with various remedies but did not improve, it is recommended that the patient lie on his back and extend his legs and arms, then three sutures are applied. A suture under the breastbone with the width of a finger using a good quality needle, and two below each side of the single suture until the shape of the sutures is triangular and separated from each other so that they do not touch if stitched and the depth of the needle is one-third of the thickness of the skin and the shape of the sutures.
On this picture and on this vessel without further addition.
If you wish, a single large kidney in the middle of the abdomen on this picture.
And the ureter that drains this single kidney is in the shape of a circle on this picture.
And the abdomen may be sutured for someone who has ruptured from this kidney, and that is to learn on the abdomen a point on the vessel that you want to remove, then sew it with a point suture, then treat it with the treatment until it heals.
Chapter 22.
In the cold kidney.
If a kidney is exposed from the cold and wetness or from a chill that has caused it to leave its natural condition excessively, and the doctor treated it as mentioned in the section, but it did not improve. Then the doctor should lie on his side and learn to remove three kidneys in this shape and this amount is specifically on the liver below the ribs where it ends.
And after each kidney and kidney, it should be at the thickness of a finger, and the kidney should be straight along the body, and do not tie your hand with the suture.
Let the extent of burning be half of the back, no more, and if he is standing on his feet, if not, then he will be lying down with his legs spread and arms raised, this is the position of the patient.
It is possible to soften these knots with a sharp knife if you have skill and experience in the craft, and preserve from burning the whole skin, so that it does not burn the belly and reach the intestines, for the skin there is thin, so be aware of it.
Chapter 28.
In the liver tumor with a knife.
If a protrusion appears in the liver and you want to know if it is that tumor in the liver flesh or in its membrane, then if it is in the liver flesh, it will cause the patient pain without severity.
And if it is in the liver membrane, it will cause severe pain and you see that doctors have treated it, then it is necessary for the patient to lie on his back then learn on the position of the tumor with the probe.
Then heat the knife in the fire, this is the knife that resembles a needle and this is its image. Treatment of a single burn that causes the entire skin to burn and ends in scarring until all the matter comes out, then treat it with the treatment of wounds until it heals.
This type of scar should not be used except by those who have studied medicine and experienced this disease many times, then they can perform this operation and leave it to me.
Chapter 29.
In the scar of the shaving.
Mentioned the elders about the origin of the zircon for the cold scar on this matter, that it should take from the flat and long zircon origin, as long as you can find, and it should be like a fingernail thickness, then soak it in oil and heat it in fire. Then make one scar between the attachment of the earlobe and the neck, two small scars without the earlobe slightly inclined towards the side under the armpit, and two large scars above the chest between the third and fourth rib.
And two scars between the fifth and sixth ribs slightly inclined towards the back, another scar in the middle of the chest, one above the stomach, and three scars from behind one between the shoulders and two on each side of the ribcage below the scar between the fingers.
It is not appropriate to penetrate deeply with the knife, but rather it should be on the surface of the skin as a probe. Some of the early ones mentioned that some people used an iron needle-like instrument, which they would use to protect it and insert it between the tendons until it reaches the same tumor.
And the duration, as we mentioned in the liver tumor, is with the knife from the damage, which may cause the patient to die within an hour or expose him to a disfigured state with no cure.
Chapter 30.
In the tumor of the throat.
If you treated the throat disease with what we mentioned in the treatment of the division, but it did not work, then the knife has three correct points: one is to make three or four probes along the length of the throat.
In the shape of liver probes that have a form and there is between each probe and probe a thickness equal to the thickness of the finger or slightly less, and the property of the probe is the same as we mentioned in the liver probe, do not penetrate deeply with the knife, and the patient is lying on his back.
The other face is in the fold and lift the skin that is opposite the throat where the patient's fold ends, and lift the skin that is opposite the throat where the patient's left fold ends, and your lift of the skin should be on the surface of the body so that the probes are along the length of the body.
Then the incisions are made by the surgeons, heavily protected on the other side until the skin is penetrated from the other side, then the probe is removed and there will be four glands, and if you wish to make more with the other probe with three smooth incisions.
Then the gland position is treated after leaving it for many days with the bandage, as it is the best of all that has been mentioned for treatment.
Chapter 23.
In the gland of the armpit.
The gland is only beneficial in the armpit sweat, especially if the person who sweats has been treated with the treatment mentioned in the division, then your treatment did not work, it is recommended to make four glands around the neck and one gland on the stomach.
And a gland on the liver and a gland on the spleen and two glands behind his back between the ribs and one in front of his chest and one in front of his stomach, and the depth of the gland is close to the thickness of the skin, then the gland is left open for many days with the bandage.
And do not delay the treatment after the gland with what is appropriate to gather for him the means so that he will quickly recover, and the shape of the probe that is made for the back is like the one shown earlier and the one made for the back is olive-shaped.
2nd and 30th Chapter.
On the treatment of feet and legs.
If there is a swelling and it is filled with yellowish water, it is appropriate to drain it on the back of the foot in the area between the ankle bone and the heel.
Then place your hand on the affected area and do not press it too hard, then lift your hand and do not put it back immediately. This will prevent the yellowish water from spreading and the bandage will be in this shape.
Then apply two bandages on each leg, one at the back of the thigh and one under the kneecap, and one in the middle of the thigh.
Leave the bandages open for a long time to allow the yellowish water to drain out, then treat them with all the methods mentioned earlier.
3rd and 30th Chapter.
On the treatment of diarrhea.
If the diarrhea is due to cold and wetness that weakened the digestive powers in the stomach and intestines, and it was treated with medication but did not improve, and you see signs of the disease returning, and if the patient has strong constitution, then apply a large bandage on his abdomen. Upon what was previously mentioned about the stomach with a round probe and four grooves around the wound, he would gently apply the fine pointed probe made of metal and a groove on the cotton above the large bones or two grooves.
If you see that the humors are abundant and the inflammation is likely, then apply a groove on the navel and a groove on each incision, and perhaps add two small grooves on the stomach near the large ones, for this treatment is successful and does not fail if God wills.
Chapter 43.
In the grooves of the incisions.
If there are many persistent grooves in the incisions or one groove that was mixed with thick, cold humors or bad humors and was treated as mentioned in the division, but the treatment did not succeed, then apply three grooves on the bottom of the spine under the plate, slightly like a triangle.
And a groove under the wound like two fingers, and if it was thought that his stomach had cooled and his food does not digest and his face is swollen, then apply a large groove on what was previously mentioned and a groove on his liver. On the crown with a spoon-shaped instrument, leave the hole open for some time then treat it until it heals, God willing.
Chapter Five and Thirty.
In the third molar.
After cutting it, if the molar is cut, heat the spoon-shaped instrument then insert it into the same cut molar and press your finger until the instrument reaches the neck from which blood comes out, do this once or twice.
If the molars are many, treat each one as described above then treat them with what matches them from the remedies until they heal, and if the root is also large on the cotton it was more beneficial.
Chapter Six and Thirty.
In the wisdom tooth that is in the jaw and its surroundings.
If the tooth does not come out to the side and the treatment described in its place does not work, it may have healed with the tooth, if one of the wisdom teeth has erupted and become infected and the bad exudates occurred, then the first thing you should do is to measure it with a thin spoon.
Then know the size of its opening with the spoon then heat the spoon-shaped instrument then insert it into the same wisdom tooth on the stability of the wisdom tooth and the size that entered the spoon and prepare the tooth until all those bad exudates are burned once or twice or three times according to your need.
If the burn is extensive and there is a great deal of heat, the surgeon should direct the incision towards the bulb of the penis or towards the bulb of the bladder.
If you make an incision in all of these places, but only if the surgeon is in a position to reach the affected area and has determined that it is not easily accessible, then treat the area until it is clear, and if the area becomes closed and the materials are cut off and remain like this for some time, then know that it has been cleared completely.
If the materials are not cut off, then know that it is easily accessible or in a position where the bone is badly damaged or something similar to what is mentioned in its place.
Chapter 73.
In the kidney.
If a pain occurs in the kidney due to cold or a heavy wind and there is a lack of urination, then it is recommended to make an incision on both sides of the same kidney with the same needle as mentioned before, possibly adding a third one in the same dish, so that three needles are made, which is more beneficial for healing.
Chapter 83.
In the bulb of the penis.
If there is a weakness and relaxation in the urethra due to cold and moisture, so that the urine does not hold, place three fingers below the urethra on the perineum, where the hair of the anus begins, and one finger on the right side of the urethra and another on the left.
And after the fingers on each side, they should be at the level of the knuckle of the thumb and the fingers should be curved below the back, or two fingers if necessary, and the grip should be like a mace as mentioned earlier.
Chapter 93.
In the palm of the hand.
If there is a substance in the palm of the hand due to cold and moisture, avoid it from the cord and let it dry, or if it occurs when he comes and there is pain, it is necessary to place three fingers around the perineum as mentioned earlier in the palm of the urethra. And one finger below the back or two fingers, and the grip should be like a mace.
Chapter 40.
In the palm of the hand where the ring finger is removed.
There may be moisture near the ring finger that can cause it to come out of its place and a sign of this is that one leg becomes longer than the other if part of it is swollen and there is an empty space where it should be, so it is necessary to place three fingers on the ring finger itself in a nearly circular shape.
After learning the method for determining the center of a circle, if the center does not appear in the middle of the circle and the instrument that represents its image is not available, then take three large olive-oil jars.
Pour the oil into the jar until it reaches the depth of a skillet, then treat it until it is clean, God willing.
Chapter 40.
In the jar of women's blood.
If there is pain in the back and the cause is coldness and moisture, and if the treatment mentioned in the division did not work, then it is appropriate for the patient to apply a thick grease made from frankincense or honey and so on.
Then take it and face the jar with two strikes, either a jar of burning drugs or a jar of fire, and if the jar is of fire, it should be placed on the back itself, three jars in a triangular shape like this:
And it should have a depth that is appropriate, and there should be a space between each jar and the next jar equal to the thickness of a finger, and the instrument should be olive oil, and if you want, take one jar and place it on top of the back bone itself, making four jars.
The circle should encompass the entire penis and burn the glans completely, this is the property of the Kayy in women if the pain is specific to the penis itself and does not extend to the buttocks and legs.
If it extends to the buttocks and legs, then two Kayy are applied on the buttock at the place where the pain is indicated by the patient, and one Kayy is placed above the pubic bone with four fingers towards the abdominal side, slightly, and the bandage should be smooth and the depth of the Kayy should only be as deep as the glans.
If he indicates that the pain extends to the fingers of the foot, then apply bandages at the place where he pointed out, three or four or more if necessary, and if he points to the pain under the ankle towards the leg, then apply one smooth Kayy there.
And avoid applying the bandage so that it does not reach the nerve or a large vessel, as this would cause harm to the patient.
I have seen one and two cases where the bandage was applied above the pubic bone and it was too tight in the Kayy, causing the leg to swell up to the ankle, and all of the skin was punctured, and the entire leg rotted, then diarrhea and death followed. If the pain is in both sides, apply both bandages in this manner.
Some scholars among the wise men mentioned that the property of the cupping glass is that it is made from iron and its diameter is half a span (about 10 cm) and its thickness is as thick as the core of a date or slightly less. Inside this cupping glass, there is another cupping glass and a third one.
After the space between each cupping glass is as thick as the eyebrow, and the cupping glasses are open from both sides, and their height is about an eyebrow or two eyebrows, and it has a handle made of iron that is well-made in the cupping glasses.
Then it is dipped in the fire until it becomes red and the dirt is thrown off, then it is placed on the cupping site and the wound is leaned on the correct side, three cupping glasses are pressed in one time, then it is left for three days and it is wrapped with cotton and the wound is left open for days.
Then it is treated with the marrow until it is clean, said the writer of this book, this type of cupping glass is rarely used due to its sharpness and its ugly appearance and lack of many handles, but it is a good cupping glass for those who can bear it and have the right position.
The preparation of the burning drugs is as follows: Make two cylindrical cups resembling a ring, into which the bell-shaped mouth of the bottle is placed. These are made of brass or iron.
The height of the cups should be about two fingers or more, and the distance between them should be as thick as a thumb. They should be open at the bottom and closed at the top, and they should be connected to each other in this manner.
Then, place the cups on the back and belly of the patient who is lying on his side, with your hand supporting them. Pour boiling water between the two cups and let it stand for a quarter of an hour. The patient will feel as if he is being burned by fire.
Then, remove your hand with the tool and wash the back with warm water. Leave it for three days and apply ointment to it until the blackness of the burn disappears. If pus comes out from it, it is a sign of healing.
Then, treat him with the marsh-mallow until he is cured. If the pain extends to the buttocks or thighs, make a cup for him according to the method used for the back, and this is the method of using boiling water, which has been proven in the article on the restoration of drugs.
Take from the salt of the eye and from the jir (a type of medicinal powder) that is not extinguished, an equal part from each, and grind them together and place them in a new pot with a small hole at the bottom for the urine to pass through. Place another pot underneath to collect the mixed liquid.
Then pour the sweet water over the salt and jir, enough to cover them by the length of your little finger after grinding them well with your hand. Leave the pot until the harsh water flows out at the bottom of the sieve. Then collect all that water and pour it over another jir and salt, also repeating this process.
Then, it becomes very sharp and effective in many medical treatments and for all body parts because it acts like fire on its own. Some of the remedies that can remove cataracts include thafslya, honey of baldaria, jir with soap, all heated.
It is said that Galenus told a story about an ancient man who treated pain in the eye and rheum in women and emphasized the importance of this matter greatly, claiming that it does not need any other treatment and can cure in one application.
Until perhaps the bath attendant might have brought him in carried, and he emerged from it cured, which is that he should take from the fresh green sharirah if it exists, or if not, then the dry one, and he grinds it with a little bit of fat and applies it on the back where the pain is, or in the leg, or in the buttock.
And it is pressed and left for three hours or as much as the patient feels the burning has subsided, then he is brought back into the bath, and if his body perspires, then he is brought back into the bath, and the pain goes away and he is cured by the will of Allah. If he is not cured, then after ten days, repeat the plaster again.
And he will be cured by the will of Allah, and know that it is not appropriate to use any of these medicines except after the body has rested, and Diacus mentioned that if a donkey has been shaved and its hair is used, it is beneficial.
And the plaster should be of this nature, take hair and drink it in old oil and apply it on the deepest place between the thumb and the little finger, which is closest to the little finger, then take a dry donkey's hair.
Then heat it in the fire until it becomes like a red dot, then put it on the hair and leave it until it melts, then take another one and do not stop doing this until the sense reaches the back and the pain goes away by the will of Allah, and this plaster is called the donkey's plaster.
Chapter 2 and 40.
In the treatment of back pain.
Back pain may be caused by many reasons, such as a fall or blow or excessive strain and the like. It is often due to inflammation of cold, wet matter, which is only found in this type alone.
If the pain is due to inflammation of cold, wet matter, it is recommended after strain that the patient lie on his back where the pain is, on a table of the same size as the patient's body, after determining the position with the meddad in each row, five or more cloths according to the likelihood and strength of the patient.
The cloth should be made of cotton and if you wish, three or four cotton cloths with a medium-sized sponge on this picture.
Chapter 3 and 49.
In the treatment of beginning hernia.
This disease often affects small children and the sign of its beginning in a child is that he experiences difficulty breathing when standing and moving, and finds at the end of his abdomen a swelling that has risen and appears on all other swellings.
If you see this and wish to stop it, then apply a compress that is circular in shape on this image. To obtain the curvature on all sides of the foreskin by keeping it even and if you wish, apply a compress around the foreskin with two or three dots and let the dots be close to each other, then treat the area until it becomes clear as mentioned before.
And be careful not to use the curvature in the area where it is from tightening of the nerve,
The fourth and fortieth section.
In the curvature of gout and joint pains.
If the joint pains are due to cold moisture that settles on any part of the body, and if the pain occurs in both legs, then it is the usual practice of physicians to call this gout specifically.
If the cold gout is treated by the methods of treatment mentioned in the division and the pain does not go away, then the curvature should be used to remove it, which is to apply a compress around both knees with many curvatures and let the compress be olive oil-based medium on this image.
And if it is necessary to remove it from the face of the leg, then apply a compress with dots, and if the pain goes up to the ankles or other joints, and this often happens, then apply a compress of three or four curvatures on each foot from every direction with this olive oil-based compress.
If you need more than this, do not press hard with the knife, but rather let your hand rest on the skin, not deeper, but rather like a chisel, if the pain has reached the waist or the back, use what we mentioned about the knife in its chapter.
If the pain is only in the hands, puncture around the fingers as they are arranged in two rows, if the pain remains in the fingers, puncture each finger at every joint and on the palm of the hand, if it ascends after days to the elbows or the knees.
Puncture them from all sides and do not neglect the good management and taking of medicines, for if he improves his diet and expels phlegm, he may be cured with this knife, God willing.
The fifth chapter and forty.
In the knife of Fatooq.
If a Fatooq knife appears in the armpit and some of the meat and fat descends to the pubic area, and this is recent, it is appropriate for the patient to be ordered to fast his food on that day and to use some of the clysters to evacuate the feces from his anus.
Then he should lie on his back with you behind him and order him to hold himself until the fat or meat protrudes, then push it back with your finger, then learn how to scrape under the Fatooq knife on the thigh bone, a sign resembling half of a circle, upwards on the body.
Then, protect this wound with its own form.
Until white sulfur is thrown to remove the impurity, then the intestine or the thighbone is put back into its place, and a servant places his hand on the wound to prevent the intestine from protruding. He has placed a cloth between his legs and another servant ties his legs together.
Then, another servant holds his hands on his chest, and the bandage is placed back on its original position, standing upright and firmly held until it reaches the bone or is replaced again if it does not reach the bone in the first attempt.
And guard against the intestine protruding at that moment, as if you were cooking it to prevent it from burning the patient, which may result in either death or a severe injury. Know that if you do not reach the bone with the cooking, your work will not be successful. The bandage for children should be gentle on their bodies, and for adults according to their bodies.
Then, treat the wound with honey for three days until the heat of the fire disappears, then treat it with other ointments until it heals. The patient should be lying on his back for forty days until the wound is completely healed.
It is essential to make his food duration equal to the period of treatment in order to ease his abdomen so that the intestines do not protrude during defecation and urination. Then, if he wishes to stand after forty days, use a tight bandage for forty more days, and reduce his physical exertion, overeating, and excessive drinking of water and alcohol, as well as loud and harsh vocalizations.
If he uses this regimen, he will be completely free from the condition, God willing. I will mention the treatment of fistula in its place, God willing. However, if the fistula occurs in other parts of the abdomen and is newly formed, you should not increase it by more than a finger's width on its size. If a third of the skin is burned, then treat him with what was mentioned earlier, it will not increase, God willing. Some ancients mentioned that the fistula should be filled with a triangular-shaped cauterizing agent in this manner.
After learning about the fistula, draw a line on the upper side of the fistula and another line going downwards, then place your finger in the middle with a single, small, pointed cauterizing agent. The first one is easier and better, God willing.
The Sixty-Fourth Chapter:
In the treatment of fractures.
If a fracture occurs in certain body parts due to a fall or blow, and the pain lasts for a long time and does not improve with medication, it is recommended to apply a bandage at the site of the fracture, according to the size, smallness, weakness, and strength of each body part.
If the pain and fracture are not relieved by the first bandage, it is recommended to apply another one, as it is common for such pains to spread from the affected body part to nearby areas, so it is necessary to follow up with additional bandages until the injury heals.
The Seventy-Fourth Chapter:
In the treatment of dislocations.
Patients with dislocations can greatly benefit from bandages, especially those of the type that occur due to swelling and darkness in the mouth and throat.
If you want to apply a bandage to a new dislocation that has been treated as mentioned in the previous chapter and has not worsened or stabilized, it is recommended to apply five bandages on the head to prevent the injury from becoming infected throughout its entire area. The first bandage should be applied in the middle of the forehead, the second one below it towards the temple at the end of the hair, two on the ears, and one behind on the back of the ear. Gently apply a small amount of bandage to the bone to create a gentle effect.
The excerpt should be translated as follows: "It is necessary to remove the skin from it in order to facilitate the passage of thick steam from it and to cover the wound on the same joint, as previously mentioned. However, if the inflammation has persisted on the bone and a clear sign appears, it is advisable to cover these wounds mentioned in the head. The excerpt should be translated as follows: "A covering on the tip of the nose, two coverings on the cheeks, two coverings on the collarbones, and six on the lower back, one large covering on the coccyx when the sin is weak, and another above it in the same plate, and two coverings on each shoulder. The excerpt should be translated as follows: "Two coverings on each knee, one covering on each knee, two coverings on the elbows, two coverings on the collarbones, and two coverings on the breastbone, covering each joint of his fingers and legs with a covering.
The excerpt should be translated as follows: "And preserve the nerve that is on the front of the knees so that they are not burned, and it may cover a covering on the bone of the ankle, another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver, and know that every time you add a covering, it is more beneficial and beneficial.
Know that the invalid, who has a pain in his leg, does not feel it as much as the healthy person because his body is paralyzed. It is appropriate to apply heat or cold according to the size of the body parts and joints, as previously mentioned regarding the properties of the humors.
Then, treat the invalid with great care using the carrot, honey, and other treatments until he is cured, if God wills.
Chapter 84.
When an extremity is paralyzed and treated with medicines, bandages, and compresses, but does not recover, then treat the same extremity with moxibustion according to the size of the bone or its smallness. The invalid should be placed on his side and the skin slightly burned.
Then, treat him with moxibustion until he recovers. For some paralyses that are exposed to the hand and leg in the hollows of the back at the exit of the nerve that moves that extremity, the paralysis goes away.
And he should not do so unless he is knowledgeable about the anatomy of the body parts and the outlets of the nerves that move the body.
Chapter 94.
In paralysis of the trunk.
If the paralysis of the trunk has not improved despite all medical treatments, then apply moxibustion on it with a slight depth according to the size of the skin burn until the whiteness disappears and its color changes.
Then, treat it with great precision using the lens of waxed red lead, the tongue of the elephant, and the blood of a pigeon or a hare from each part, mixing them all together, and apply it to the wound, fixing the position until it is completely healed.
The chapter fifty.
On cancer.
If the cancer is in its early stages and you wish to prevent it, apply a bandage around it as it grows, as some scholars suggest applying a clean cloth in the middle of it, but I do not see this as effective as I expect it to ulcerate, and I have seen this happen many times.
The correct method is to apply a bandage around it as we mentioned, or with many cloths.
The chapter fifty-two.
On the hernia.
If a hernia has occurred and it has slowed in its maturation, this could be due to the cause that made it happen before, or due to old age if it is an elderly person with little blood, or due to time, and if you wish to speed up the maturation of the hernia, apply many small cloths around it, stitching them together.
Then, leave it as it will speed up the maturation, but if you wish to soften it, apply the cloth that has this shape.
Then place it in the middle of the incision until it reaches the skin and let the suture be from what follows below to facilitate the flow of pus, then treat it with what is appropriate until it is clean.
Chapter 25.
In eating ulcers.
Eating ulcers are merely a rot in the body that consumes it like fire consumes dry wood. If you see an eating ulcer in a place where cauterization with fire is possible, apply many thin or thick burning needles according to what is appropriate for that place where the eating ulcer is.
Then remove it from all sides until the rot is completely removed and nothing remains of it, then leave it for three days and apply to the infected areas borax powder mixed with oil until all the maggots and all the rot are removed.
Then treat it with the healing balms for wounds, as if after three days you see that the flesh has grown a healthy plant with no rot in it, otherwise, reapply the suture to what remains of the infected areas. The eating ulcer can be treated with strong medication.
As it stands, it is more beneficial to use fire faster. You mentioned treating it with strong medication in the section on cauterization, so take it from there when needed.
Section 35: "The Treatment of Fractures and Dislocations
In the treatment of fractured and unfractured bones.
This affliction often occurs in the soles of the feet, which is a hard thing that causes the leg to turn, and the treatment in it is either boiling or very hot water.
As for the treatment with fire, it is to wrap the broken bone fragments that resemble a bird's tail made of iron around a pot and heat it from all sides until it becomes thin-skinned, then pour it over the fracture, then use your hand to wrap the bone fragments around the fracture until the bone fragments reach the depth of the fracture.
And leave it for three days, being careful not to wash it, then soak it in salted flour dough and leave the cloth on it overnight, as it will come out of its roots, then treat the wound with a plaster made of animal fat until it heals, if the bones are not fractured.
And often, this affliction occurs on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, it is necessary to take a copper or iron or bird's tail tube and pour it over the fracture or dislocation, then pour hot water into the tube.
Gently grasp your hand and gently press it against the side of the catheter to feel the tip of the needle at the base of the opening, then guide the sharp water path towards the base of the opening and wait a little while for the sharp water to soften the base of the opening.
Then leave it, as the needle will withdraw from its base, so do one at a time until you reach all of it in the body, then treat its locations after it has withdrawn what grows flesh from the wounds.
Chapter 45.
In the nostril.
If it occurs in one of the nostrils due to cold or inflammation or something else, it is recommended to apply four or five cups on the back between each fold, and in the chest, a cup. And on his stomach, a cup of olive oil, as the nostril will calm and quickly cure the cold disease.
Chapter 55.
In the broken rib in the body.
It may break in the body with a foul, thick, decayed cold material, it is recommended to apply the first appearance of it on the head of each rib, a soft cup with asafetida that has been burned by fire or the long end of the drill or olive oil.
Al-Damamil excelled in the first instance of this virtue, so that the merit of her action does not increase and dissipate, and the one who is injured is relieved from it, except that it is necessary for that to be after the one who is injured has been treated with cauterization.
The sixty-sixth chapter.
In the case of severe bleeding that occurs during the cutting of a vessel.
Often, bleeding of blood from a cut vessel occurs when it is severed from outside or when a tumor or other organ is being cut into, and so on, making it difficult to cut.
If any of these happens, quickly place your finger on the vessel's mouth and press hard until blood stops flowing from it and nothing else comes out, then place a small and large cotton ball soaked in olive oil on it and blow on them until it becomes a very hot cauterizing agent.
Then take one, whether small or large, according to the wound and the place where the vessel was cut, and lower the cotton ball on the same spot after quickly removing your finger and holding the cotton ball until the bleeding stops.
If blood rushes out when you raise your finger from the vessel's mouth and blow on the cotton ball, quickly take another cotton ball from the prepared cotton balls in the fire and continue doing so one after another until the bleeding stops.
Do not cauterize the nerve, as it will cause another injury, and know that if the artery bleeds from it, it cannot be cut off or especially if the artery is large, except by one of four methods: either by ligation as we mentioned, or by amputation if it has not already been amputated. If it contracts and shortens its tip, and the blood stops flowing, either by being tied tightly with sutures or by applying drugs that stop bleeding and coagulate strongly.
And whoever tries to cut it with a needle or by burning or similar methods, it will not stop bleeding by that, except in rare cases. If one of them has no doctor or medicine available, he should apply pressure with his thumb on the wound itself as we mentioned.
And he should tie it tightly until the blood is contained and stops flowing from above the wound and on the artery and the finger, do not remove it with cold water always until the blood freezes and thickens and stops bleeding, and during this time, look for what medicine or sutures he needs.
The Second Chapter
On wounds, abscesses, and surgical procedures and the like.
He mentioned in the first chapter all diseases that can be treated with cauterization, the cautery drug, its reasons, causes, instruments, and drawings of the cautery iron, making it a chapter from the beginning to the end.
And I follow this path in this chapter, so that the student can easily find what he needs.
Before I begin, you should know that this chapter contains matters that are not found in the first chapter on wounds in the first book.
For this reason, the warning should be stronger because many operations in this chapter involve bleeding from which life depends when opening a vein or incising an abscess or boil or treating a surgical wound or extracting a splinter or incising a sinus and so on, all of which involves danger and fear, and many of them result in death.
And I advise you to avoid matters that involve doubt, for there may be people with various misconceptions in this profession who have been overcome by their illness and died.
Due to the severity of his illness, the length of his sickness, and the nature of his disease, as determined by diagnosis, which indicates death, among them are those who spend their wealth on you in hope of your recovery, but their disease is chronic, so it is not appropriate for you to rely on them.
And be cautious of your desires and concerns, and do not proceed with anything from that until you have certain knowledge that will benefit you in the end, and use all treatments for your diseases with the advancement of knowledge and caution regarding what leads to safety.
For in that, you have assistance for acquiring praise, honor, and remembrance, may Allah guide you, O my son, and grant you correctness and success, for that is in His hand, there is no deity but He.
And I have arranged this chapter into sections according to what was mentioned in the previous book regarding the knowledge of surgery, so that you may find what you seek from it, if Allah wills.
The first section.
In the treatment of water that accumulates in the heads of children.
Indeed, this illness often presents in children at birth if the midwife presses the baby's head with force and without mercy, and it may also present due to a hidden cause that is not known.
I have not seen this phenomenon in other children, and all of those I have observed among them died more quickly. For this reason, I stopped performing the operation on them. I have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and the head is the most important part of the body every day. The child did not sit up due to the weight of his head, and the moisture increased until he died.
This moisture may accumulate between the skin and the bone or under the bone on the sagittal suture, and if the moisture is between the skin and the bone and the tumor is small, it is recommended to make a single incision in the middle of the head with a wide opening and the length of the incision should be about two fingers until the moisture drains and this is the appearance of a hydrocephalus.
If the moisture increases and the tumor is larger, make two incisions intersecting at this shape.
If the moisture is under the bone and the sign of this is that you see the hairs of the head open from all sides and the water decreases when squeezed by your hand into the inside and not hidden from you, it is recommended to make three incisions in the middle of the head at this shape.
After incision, all the moisture comes out, then the wound edges are stitched with sutures and benefits, then it is moistened from above with drink and oil until the fifth day, then the dressing is changed and the wound is treated with tension and counter-tension, and do not leave the head dressing loose and feed the patient with all dry food low in moisture.
Until the limb becomes strong and heals, another method of incision is to look for where the tumor bone appears and gather the water, as it may be more at the back or front or right or left or north.
Therefore, incise where the tumor appears to you and gather the water as much as possible, and be careful not to cut a blood vessel that causes bleeding leading to the patient's death due to loss of moisture.
The second section.
Cut the two blood vessels behind the ears known as the auricularis.
When a severe infection appears in the eyes or chest and does not respond to medication, inform the treatment that in such cases, cutting these two blood vessels is recommended.
If you want to cut them, it is recommended to shave the patient's head with a sharp knife to make the blood vessel visible, then cover the patient's neck with a cloth, and look for the place where the pulse is and the two hidden places behind the ears.
Then, they should learn about the medulla and then cut it with a sharp knife until it reaches the bone. This is done by placing the knife on the forehead and if you wish, you can insert the knife from under the artery and turn it upwards with the cut, and the length of the cut should be about two fingers wide.
If the blood is cut, it will flow out in a pulsating manner and will spread on the front and back, and if the artery does not appear for inspection, then you should estimate from the ear by measuring three fingers, then learn about the medulla and cut until it reaches the bone.
You should send a certain amount of blood on the gauze, and sometimes more or less, depending on what appears to you from the strength of the artery and the filling of its vessels, then examine the wound, if it remains on the bone, then cut it.
So that it does not expose a hot inflammation, then suture the wound with a thread of silk, then treat it with ointment until it heals.
The third chapter.
About the arteries in the neck.
If a person has chronic or severe acute coughs, fever in the neck muscles, or persistent and severe headache, and after treating with medical remedies, it did not help, then we have tried in these diseases to cut the arteries in the neck or their branches as described.
Translation: The operation in this case is to shave the hair on the forehead where the prominent artery in the forehead is located, as it becomes apparent to you from its pulse. However, what is hidden can only be known by examining individuals.
Translation: If it is hidden from you in severe cold, then the physician should press his neck with a warm cloth and then locate the position by palpation or heat the position with hot water until the artery becomes apparent and clear. Translation: Then take the stethoscope of this shape. Translation: Then shave the skin with a sharp instrument until you reach the artery, then insert a needle into it and pull it upwards until it exits from the skin and remove any clots that may be underneath from all sides. If the artery is thin, then tie it with the tip of the needle. Translation: Then cut a piece from it according to the distance between its ends and ligate it, but do not cause bleeding to occur. If it has not decayed and has not been cut, then the blood has not clotted at all. Then remove the blood from six or three places.
Translation: If the artery is large, then it should be tied in two places with a strong doubled thread, and the thread should be either from silk or from the strings of the lute to prevent the pus from reaching the wound before it heals and causes bleeding.
Then, cut the flap between the stitches. Do this at that time or after a while. If you wish, you can nail it to the bone with a thin, sharp needle until its ends become entangled, thus achieving the desired outcome of this operation.
However, if the patient has fever or is weak due to the loss of vital fluids, it is beneficial to apply a poultice made from the mentioned herbs, as it helps to absorb moisture and promote healing. After the veins have been sealed, the wound should be covered with a clean bandage, and then treated with appropriate medicines that promote tissue growth and healing until it is completely healed, God willing.
If, during your operation, bleeding occurs from the vein, immediately cut it off with a thin needle or fill the wound with powder and press firmly on it until the bleeding stops. If you do not have any of these materials, place your finger over the wound to stop the bleeding.
Then, rinse the wound with very cold water until the inflammation subsides and it is healed properly. It is easier and more effective to sew the veins with this thin needle after learning the correct technique for suturing.
The incision is made very sharply until it reaches the bone, and the blood flows in two directions to separate what is between its ends, for this does not adhere to this type of wound, and this is the appearance of a laceration.
The knife should be very sharp, like two small sickles, but it should not be as sharp as a sickle, for if they were as sharp as a sickle, the cold would reach them quickly and the flesh would not separate easily. If there are some thick parts, hold the knife in the fire.
The flesh is cut quickly, and this work is better than all other works, easier and faster. There should be a space between the two knives equal to the thickness of a finger.
Chapter 4.
In the treatment of constant, hot, tearing bleeding to the eyes.
If the tears are constant and the bleeding comes from the veins on the outside of the skull and nothing has helped with medical treatment, and you see that the patient's face has become red. He feels a lump on his forehead like an ant's hill and his eyes are swollen, wet, and eaten by their lashes, and their eyelids are stuck together due to the tears. The first doctors forced them to perform this treatment, which they called "the treatment with the sword," which is to order the patient to shave the hair on his forehead.
Then, make three parallel incisions along the length of the face, each about two fingers' width long. The first incision should be in the middle of the face, aligned with the length of the nose. The second incision should be slightly away from the movement of the neck muscle. The third incision should be on the other side.
Then, spare the two arteries on the sides and keep your hand away from connecting the jaws. After each incision, leave a distance of three fingers' width. Have ready a piece of absorbent cotton or a large number of cotton swabs to stop the bleeding.
Then, insert the sharp instrument with this shape into both ends. From the incision following the sternum to the middle incision, scrape off all the skin between the two incisions along with the periosteum on the bone, then do the same from the middle incision to the third incision, then remove this sharp instrument. Also, insert a sharp instrument called a chisel from one side and a blunt instrument from the other side. This is its shape:
Its sharp side should go up towards the flesh attached to the skin, and its blunt side towards the bone. Push it until it reaches the middle incision, then cut all the vessels coming from the head to the eyes without cutting into the surface of the skin.
Then, you do that in the middle section to the other section. After blood flows out moderately, scrape off the locations of the solidified blood, then soak each section with a linen cloth dipped in wine, oil, or vinegar and oil.
Lest a hot abscess occur, and on the third day, apply a poultice with vinegar water, then treat it with basilicum oil, rubbing with rose and other things used for surgeries until it heals, God willing.
The fifth chapter.
In the treatment of tears and nasal discharges from under the head.
When one has frequent severe, chronic nasal discharges and sees two small, shrunken pupils from his eyes, and his eyebrows are cracked, and the eyelashes fall out from them. And it is deep in the head and severe pain and constant snoring, know from these symptoms that those materials and discharges only come from many deep veins, and the best treatment for this is this treatment, which is to order the patient to shave his beard, then cut one incision in the middle of the beard.
And it is deep in the head and severe pain and constant snoring, know from these symptoms that those materials and discharges only come from many deep veins, and the best treatment for this is this treatment, which is to order the patient to shave his beard, then cut one incision in the middle of the beard. Raise it slightly with the exposure and begin from the right costal margin to the left, towards the ribs and extend your hand away from the moving muscles at the sternum until the ribs are exposed and all the blood has been cleaned with sponges.
Separate the incision between the ribs with cotton or a strip of cloth, then suture from above with stitches and soak the stitches with water and oil to prevent the occurrence of a hot abscess. When it is broken down and you see that the hot tumor has disappeared, it is appropriate to stitch the bone so that the flesh can grow in it.
Then treat it with the drying method that promotes flesh growth, such as taking from wheat flour a handful and four parts of quince, arrange them in layers, and use it in the flesh growth in such surgeries.
Chapter Six.
In the treatment of what falls into the ear.
All that falls into the ear is one of four types: either a metallic stone or a quasi-stone like iron and glass, or a plant substance like rice and beans, or something wet like water and oil.
If it is an animal, and a horn or type of horn that does not grow in the ear has fallen into the ear, then receive it with the ear towards the sun. If you see the horn, try to remove something from it with beeswax or serge, then attempt to extract it by moving the head or using a spoon. If the earwax is blocked by the arrival of the earwax, then place a ring of cloth or silk around the ear and extend the ear upwards. This treatment often removes it, but if it does not, then attempt to extract it with a soft spatula like this one.
If it does not come out with the spatula, then try to extract it with a thin, smooth, almost non-slippery blind needle. If it does not come out with that, then make an instrument of copper and insert the tip of the tube into the ear hole.
Seal around the tube with beeswax to prevent wind from entering other than through the tube, then pull it out strongly and repeatedly, often it comes out this way. If not, then take a needle or a sharp-pointed tool like one used by birds to catch small things, place it at the end of the tube.
After you have applied a tight bandage to the ear, then insert it into the ear canal with gentle pressure after the ear has dried from moisture, if all that was described does not work, then proceed to incision before the occurrence of heat inflammation or swelling.
The method of incision is to first cut the cotton in half and remove as much blood as possible from it, then place the cotton between your fingers and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the base of the ear near the cartilage in the lowest part of it.
The incision should be halal (permissible) until it reaches the cartilage, then remove as much of it as you can with the available tools, then quickly stitch the incision and treat it until it is healed.
If the object fallen into the ear is one of the types of grains that grow and inflate, try to remove it as described earlier, if you cannot get it out and only, then take a thin, delicate needle like this picture.
And try to cut that type of grain fallen into the ear with it, but only do so if you are sure that that grain has softened by ear moisture until it becomes small pieces many times, then remove it with a blind needle or a delicate tweezers or a spoon.
It is mentioned that it is easy to remove it, and as for the water inside the ear, it is appropriate to use a spoon with a curved end first, and if he has filled his ear with cotton, and it is lying on that ear from which the water comes out.
Unless, he takes many needles of long length, thin and smooth, and he heats them with fire slightly, and the doctor puts one of them into the hole of his ear, and he presses it on his leg from that side, and he strikes with another stone on the stone in the ear.
Then he continues doing so with a needle until all the water comes out, and the water may come out by taking one from the cotton or the feather, and he puts its tip into the ear, and he burns the other end with fire until most of it burns, then he replaces another feather.
Then he repeats it until all the water comes out or attracts it with a tube as mentioned in the needle, and as for extracting the animal inside it, if it is small like the frog and similar to it, then treat it as mentioned in the division, and if.
If its body is large and visible to the touch, then try to extract it with a spoon and scissors, and his extraction is easier than all that happens in the ear, and as for extracting the snake produced in the ear if you treated it as mentioned in the division of snakes in the article of the frogs, and your treatment did not succeed.
It is necessary to examine the ear in the sunlight, for if something from the wax appears to you, remove it with a cotton swab or a soft spatula. If nothing appears to you from it, take this-shaped tube.
Narrow at the bottom and wide at the top, and insert the thin end into the ear to the extent that it can bear it, then suck out strongly with a strong suction device. Repeat this until all the wax comes out. If it does not come out, seal around the tube with fire as you were told in the handbook.
If it does not come out as mentioned, use the syringes that were mentioned and tried by the early ones to kill the wax. You can find this in the article on syringes. It is a device that injects oil or medicine into the ear.
As you see, they are made of silver or copper, narrow at the bottom with a small hole and wide at the top. If you want, the piston inside the tube can be made of firm copper. If you want, you can take a piece of cloth and tie it firmly to the end of the piston.
Then, put the oil or medicine you want from these drugs into the tube and it is in the ear. Then, insert the piston with the cloth from above and press it gently until the oil or medicine goes into the ear canal and you feel it.
When introducing a probe into the ear, be cautious that what has been burned in fire is not too cold or extremely hot, as the ear does not tolerate such extremes.
Chapter Seven.
In the treatment of a plugged ear.
Some children may be born from their mothers' wombs with ears that are not perforated.
Also, some people may present with a plug in the ear canal due to injury or an abscess within it, and this blockage may be deep within the ear hole, not visible to the naked eye.
And some may present with a blockage that is slightly protruding and visible to the naked eye, while those that are deep within the ear hole and not visible to the naked eye are more difficult to remove, and those that are visible should be placed in sunlight. And look at it, if you see the blockage visible, then open it gently with a thin probe, this is its appearance:
Its tip is slightly sharp and limited on one side to avoid damaging the ear, if the blockage is due to an abscess within the ear canal, then grasp it gently with a thin forceps and cut it off forcefully until all the tissue is removed.
If the plug is deep in the ear, take a thin, soft silk thread and heat it slightly in fire, then insert it into the ear canal. If she feels the plug along with the sensation of heaviness from deafness, gently strike its end.
To prevent damaging the auditory nerve, first puncture the ear according to the size of the hole, then insert a thread into it that has been soaked in the Egyptian mummia for several days until it is safe from injury or take a clean thread and dip it in boiled water mixed with powdered salt.
If you see that the ear is swollen and hot, it is necessary to remove the thread and replace it with another one that has been soaked in a mixture of rose oil until the inflammation subsides, then treat it until it heals.
If bleeding occurs, soak a sponge or cotton in cold water and place it on the ear, then use the treatments mentioned in the article on the tortoises to stop the bleeding.
Chapter 8.
On the treatment of warts that appear in the ears.
These warts that appear in the ears may be moist or dry, so it is necessary to hold them with a tweezers or forceps and cut them off from their roots, then apply boiled water mixed with powdered salt to the area.
If there is bleeding from it, cover it with a soft, thin, eye-shaped pad and compress it well after cutting. Often, if something remains of its roots, it will grow back. If you burn it with fire, the roots will be destroyed and it will not grow back.
Chapter Nine.
In the treatment of red eye caused by cold in the eyelids.
Often, something similar to a cold appears in the eyelids, which is as severe and rigid as a cold.
And therefore, it is called a cold because it is an accumulation of thick moisture in the upper and lower eyelids, and the treatment for this is to look at it. If the coldness is prominent on the surface of the eyelid and moves to all sides, then make it easy by moving it in all directions.
Then, squeeze it from all sides with gentleness until it is expelled, then attach it with a needle and cut it. If you cannot cut it unless after the eyelid has been cut, it will not harm the patient. If the squeezing is large, stitch it together and treat it until it heals.
And if it is small, there is no harm in leaving it alone as the mire will force it and squeeze it. If the coldness is inclined towards the inside of the eyelid towards the inner surface, then turn the eyelid and attach the coldness with a needle without needing to squeeze and expel it from all sides.
If the splinter is removed by cutting, it does not cause harm, then wash the eye with salted water after removing the foreign body and treat the affected area with what heals until it becomes clean.
Chapter Ten.
In the treatment of the splinter that appears in the eye's cornea.
The splinter is a substance that appears in the upper layers of the cornea and is most commonly found in children, causing them to squint and exposing them to blindness during the night and not being able to see light from the sun. Because tears quickly reach them.
And for this reason, you will see them leaning on their faces all the time and sleeping with their eyelids wet under the eyebrows, and when the splinter is visible to the eyes and you feel it between your fingers, the work is to place the patient's head on your stone.
Then take a thin thread and prepare a loop from it, then make a circle from that loop as large as possible to cover the splinter from all sides, then place it on it and press with your fingers from all sides to gather the splinter in the middle of the circle.
Then cut in the middle of that moisture with a lancet, a groove as wide as possible and not wider than the groove in the fingernail, and if it is deep, it is necessary to cut the skin entirely until you reach the splinter.
In most cases, the splinter from a cut resembles a piece of white chalk. It should be removed by piercing it with a sharp instrument and then pulling it out with tweezers, carefully grasping it between your fingers on your right and left hands until it is completely removed, being cautious not to push the splinter deeper into the wound, as it may cause injury to the eye.
If the splinter does not appear at first, you should slightly increase the incision and gently probe until the splinter appears, then remove it as previously described, and soak the wound in saltwater and apply a dressing to the affected area and bandage it. Some people use salt as an antiseptic.
Then place it in the wound to dissolve any remaining moisture, and then treat the wound until it is completely healed. If a hot spot develops at the affected area, treat it with a cooling compress until it heals.
Chapter 10.
In the treatment of eye injuries.
If extra eyelashes grow abnormally beneath the natural eyelashes, they can cause injury to the eye and lead to various diseases such as constant tearing, ptosis of the eyelids, edema, and glandular swelling, which may result in visual impairment.
Treatment of the eye on four aspects: either with cauterization by fire or with a severe drug as mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, or it may be treatment by cutting and sewing or with burdock as mentioned.
It is recommended to place the head of the needle in your stone and then rotate the eyelid with your left hand, if it turns, otherwise insert a needle from below the eyelid and let the needle pass through the thread from above and it should be close to the hair itself and pull the thread up with the eyelid.
Then rotate it with the cotton swab and sharpen it from below the eyelid without the excess hair by the needle from the larger to the smaller canal then pull the thread and place a small amount of cotton or silk under the eyelid and apply it on the eyelid with the ointment.
Like the shape of a leaf, but it should be shaped according to the amount you want to raise the eyelid because people may differ in that, some may need to cut from the eyelid an appropriate amount according to the amount the eyelid relaxes.
And some may need less, all of that according to the amount the eyelid relaxes, then sharpen with the cotton swab on the two lines you taught and start from the larger canal to the smaller canal and the sharpness of one should be close to the natural hair like the thickness of the cotton swab.
Then the surgeon enters one of the skin folds and scrapes it all, then gathers the lips with a needle and silk thread fine, wiping the blood and attaching any excess to the eyelids with some remaining things.
If you wish, do this, otherwise it does not matter, then the stitching and threads remain for about three or four days, then treat it, and if you wish to leave the wound without stitching and treat it with what dries and absorbs, then the swelling rises at the end of the scar and its joining and stitching is better.
This face from the suturing mentioned by the ancients, except that there is a suture on the eyelid and it is good work without danger, and another face in suturing is also to teach the swelling a shape like the shape of paper as we described. Then the eyelid is raised with three sutures, which are divided or grouped on this image:
Then cut any excess of the eyelid with a small scissors on this image, cutting evenly:
If you cannot hold the sutures and have not stitched, take a needle with a thread in it and insert it in the middle of the shape and insert another thread near the larger hole and a third thread near the smaller hole, gather the threads between your fingers evenly, then raise it with your hand at a moderate level.
Raise the skin that has been taught on it all, as we described, then gather both sides of the wound with stitches and treat it until it heals. If a hot mass appears at the site where you cut or pierced, soak it with the cauter and similar remedies from the mildly soothing drugs.
It may also be necessary to turn down the wound at the bottom, in which case you should use what we mentioned about cutting, stitching, and burning with fire or using harsh drugs, and then cover it with a bandage and apply what we mentioned about cutting, stitching, and cutting and stitching in both of them.
Burning with bread dough is done in this way, that you turn down the wound and pierce the part that is inside as we described, then make two or three thin bread dough pieces of the same length as the wound and narrower than a finger.
They have been sutured at both ends where the stitches hold, then gently gathered together on what is preferred from the eyelid wound and tightly tied the bread dough pieces from both sides, and leave it for some days, because the stitched skin dies, rots, and putrefies.
Until it falls off by itself, if it becomes slower, then prop it up with a splint and then treat it until it is clean. If it swells, the eyelid rises and the eyebrows do not decay, and this is the shape of the cotton that is made on this form and this is the measure in length and width with an eye:
Chapter Twelve.
In raising the eyelid from the eye with a needle.
If it is a single eyelid or two eyelids, then take a thin needle and insert a fine thread of silk into it, then tie its ends together with a delicate, small knot, and let the length of the thread be about an inch.
Then, tie another fine thread in the groove and tie its ends together if desired, then place the eyelid on a stone and let it be near the sun to see the work, for it is a delicate operation, then insert the needle into the excess eyelid.
And push it into the eyelid with a spoon until it comes out above the natural eyelash, then pull the thread over the groove and insert it into the groove that eyelash or two or three, but not more.
Then pull your hand with it until the hair emerges from the follicle along with its natural hair, if the hairs do not emerge with it, then pull the hairs downwards with the thread that you tied in them until the hairs emerge from the highest pore.
Then replace the hair in it and pull them together, do this until they rise to the highest pore and appear to the eye, then when that happens, cut the hairs and the thread and remove them, tighten the eye and leave it tightened for two or three days until the hair settles in its place and grows flesh on it.
If the hair is short, either add a long natural hair to it so that it rises with it, or leave it until it grows longer after some time, then when that happens, raise it.
Chapter 13.
In the treatment of the mole that occurs in the upper eyelid.
The person who has this mole is called "Arnabee" and this mole is either natural or acquired, the acquired ones are from the decay of a cut, a sharp object, etc.
And the work in it is that you should cut that decay and separate its lips and place a thread between them so that it becomes free, and one should not use in its treatment things that dry up and contract.
If you do that, the wound will return with greater severity than before, and you will use things that swell like barley and tannins mixed with water that has been boiled with honey and vinegar, and a cloth soaked in it, and apply it.
And if you want to treat it, try every possible way not to stick to the original form that was on it, and this work that we mentioned is only some restoration of the wound, not that the form of the place will return as it was before.
Chapter 14.
For the treatment of wounds that are in the lower eyelid.
This wound that is from the eyelashes is called a "truth" wound and is natural and is superficial, and the superficial ones are from a cut or a tear or similar things.
The way to treat it is to take a needle with a double thread and insert it into the flesh and push it from the inner eyelid to the outer eyelid until the thread comes out at both ends of the flesh, then extend the flesh up with the needle and cut it with a wide pair of scissors.
If the shape of the eyelid returns to what is appropriate, otherwise, take a plaster and put it on the place of the tear and turn the eyelid and make two cuts in the inner side of the eyelid and the ends of the cuts are from the angles of the scissors that were cut until they meet and form an angle. Until it reaches its final form, which resembles this shape.
This is the Greek letter 'lambda', then remove that piece of flesh to the extent that the sharp side of it is below what follows the jaw, then gather the separated parts with two stitches using a thread of silk, and then treat it with the remedies we mentioned for relaxing and lengthening until it becomes clear.
If the scar is from a cut or stitch or a knot, it should be incised with a simple incision without the hair of the eyebrows, as mentioned earlier, then the lips should be separated by lengthening as mentioned.
The saying in the treatment of scars is that if it is from above or from below, the work should be done according to what is available to you from the appearance of the scar, as there may be many differences in its shape, and the skilled craftsman manages the matter in whatever way is possible.
Until its shape returns to its natural appearance or approaches it, and the same disease requires rubbing on what is appropriate for him from work and tools in most cases.
Chapter Fifteen.
On touching the eyelid with the mallet or the cornea.
Translation: Many people may consider it as a disfigurement if the upper eyelid is fused with the whiteness of the eye, which hinders its movement and prevents it from performing natural actions. Therefore, it is necessary to insert a probe under the eyelid.
Translation: Then, it should be lifted up or extended with a thin, sharp instrument, and the adhesion should be cut with a delicate, fine needle that is not too thick to cause pain during the procedure. If the needle is too thick, it may cause damage to the eye due to its sharpness.
Translation: If the eyelid returns to its natural form and the adhesion is completely released, then salt water or a solution of zinc oxide in water should be applied to the eye. Then, a piece of cotton should be used to separate the eyelid from the eye.
Translation: Then, a piece of lint soaked in the whiteness of egg should be placed over the eye. On the third day, the bandages can be removed until it is completely healed.
Title: The Sixteenth Chapter
Title: On Cutting the Eyebrows and Removing the Superfluous Hair from the Eyelids
Translation: The eyebrows consist of two parts, either they are nervous and resemble a hard, thin rope, or they are not nervous and resemble dried mucus that is white when touched by iron or cut with a sharp instrument.
If there is no surgeon present, and both types of patches only begin from the largest caul and gradually grow until they cover the viewer and block light and eye movement, the work involves placing the patient's head on your stone.
Then, he opens his eyes and raises the eyelid with your hand, then he takes a small patch with little adhesive and extends it over, then he takes a needle and inserts a hair from a horse or cow, strong thread, and slightly twists the end of the needle into the center of the patch.
Then, he pushes it with the needle and ties the hair with the thread and extends it over, then he shaves the side of the eyelid that follows the eyebrow as if you are spreading it with the hair to the other, then he cuts the rest at the base of the caul with a fine scissors or small knife and leaves the natural flesh of the caul.
So that the cut does not expose constant lacrimation, and the eyelid has been extended with the patch alone or with the thread as we said, then he shaves the side with a smooth scissors.
So that the scissors does not touch the conjunctiva, which causes a fissure in the eyebrow, then after cutting, he receives something salty or Zanjabar in the eye and leaves it until another day, then treats it with what is appropriate for it to be clean.
If the wound is not sinewy and cannot be pierced by a needle nor held together by a suture, then often this type of wound is treated with medication as described in the previous section, and if you wish to excise it, open the eye of the healthy side.
Take a soft, fine-toothed probe and place it gently on this image. Gently scrape the wound from above with a gentle scraping, and if you see that it is breaking down and spreading, and the scraping has affected it, apply a powdered mixture of senna root or red ochre or finely ground salt to the eye for several days.
Then, perform the procedure again until all of it is removed, except if a hot, thin scab forms in the eye, leave it and treat the hot, thin scab until it heals, then perform the procedure again with scraping until it heals. As for the meat of the matzoon,
If the matzoon is causing damage to the eye, then secure that matzoon with a suture and cut off some of it without over-tightening the sutures so as not to cause bleeding, then apply a powdered mixture of red ochre or senna root until it heals.
Chapter Seventeen
The Seventeenth Chapter: On the Excision of the Womb and Removal of Excess Flesh from the Eye.
In some people, red flesh may grow in the eyes to such an extent that it covers the gazer or approaches his eyeballs and sometimes the eyelids turn outwards, resembling a wart.
The treatment is that the patient places his head on your stone, then opens his eyes and you remove all of that red flesh with the appropriate forceps.
Or you grasp it with a pair of pliers or a hook, then cut the first piece until all of it is cut and removed from the eye to avoid damaging it during the procedure. Your cutting may be done with a sharp scalpel as described in the excision of the thorn or with a small knife. Like the one that is used to remove thorns, as shown in the introduction to this chapter.
If you have finished cutting and all the wart has been removed, fill the eye with finely ground salt or drop some red mercuric ointment and other caustic drugs into it and place a piece of white egg shell on the outside of the eye to protect the raw surface.
If any of the wart remains and blood covers it and you fear that the raw surface will become inflamed, leave the eye and treat it with what soothes the inflammation, then return to cutting it until it is clean, and do the same for excess flesh that appears in the eye of this kind.
It is not appropriate for you to treat every weak eye through the method of printing or through the method of demonstration by using iron and do not insert your hand into any of these works until you see that that organ is likely for that work.
Chapter Eighteen.
In the removal of specks from the eye.
Specks are red veins that grow on the eye, preventing sight and weakening the eye over time. Firstly, you should look at it, if the eye with specks is strong and there is no other disease except the specks.
Then, when removing the specks, you should command the patient to place their head on your stone and then fix those veins with one or two needles according to your skill and the needles should be thin and sharp.
Or two needles in one body according to this image:
Then, you should remove those veins gently with a thin, sharp knife and wipe the blood gradually until you see that the eye is free from them and the blood has disappeared, and do not harm the eye with the tips of the knife and make your work half a day facing the sun.
In your surgical work, it is crucial to be very careful not to cut any nerves other than those of the eye. After you have finished, apply a green or red onion bulb to the affected area, so that its juice can help heal what remains of the wound. If you cannot remove all of it at once, then dress the eye with something that will alleviate its pain.
Let it remain for a few days until the pain subsides and the hot mass is secure, then perform the surgery again on this area with your eye, until that wound image is removed from it.
Let it remain [and the swelling will be in a stone of the apprentice and another will drain the tears and the nose will emerge at the front of the eye and behind, and you] in the original work, to open the eye with fixed or triangular grips that hold it tightly.
He will have swelling in a stone of the apprentice and another will drain the tears and the nose will emerge at the front and behind of the eye, and you [in the choice] to begin by cutting from above the eye or from below it, and first to drain two sinuses in the upper eyelid, one at the end and the other at the beginning.
Then hold it between the middle and the sutures, then attach sinuses from under their eyelids, then hold it between the crescent and the spoon and gently scrape your hand until you see all the wounds have risen, cutting from the smallest western part, whether with a scalpel or a delicate hook.
The surgeon should wash his hands on the iron and exhaust all means until it rises above the threshold, and do not cut the cotton, for the tears and blood will soak into you.
Then cut with the knife only as much as exceeds the eyelid from above and below until there remains nothing but in the corner of the eye, for if possible, lift it from the corner of the eye with the washcloth, for it is better and may be necessary in some people.
If it is cut, it will be painful for a few days, then soothe its pain and remove the hot tumor, then repeat the operation on it.
Chapter 13.
On the return of the nose to the nose.
Surgeons call the nose "Nasura", if they treated it with clay or with a harsh drug as previously described and did not cleanse it, then there is no remedy for it but to cut into the tumor when it is ripe and extract all the moisture in it or the pus.
Until the bone is exposed, if the bone is exposed and you see in it decay or blackness, then cleanse it with this instrument of its shape:
And the iron hook is called "Ras" and its head is smooth like a crow's beak, with the inscription of the cooler or the scalpel engraved lightly, then place it on the position of the decay in the bone, then move it between your fingers while you slightly move your hand until you know that that decay has been cleaned.
He does this repeatedly, then applies medicated, dry, holding dressings to the wound. If the wound closes and flesh grows in it, the scar remains for forty days without recurrence or suppuration or complication.
Therefore, it is known that he has been cured, unless there is no hope but to return the surgeon to the nose puncture on this condition, which is to expose the bone again with a sharp iron or a severe drug. If the bone is exposed, take a cauterizing agent of this nature:
The tip of the iron is triangular and its curve is directed towards the tip, as you see, then place it on the bone itself and this should be close to the eyelid but not too close, then rub your finger with the cauterizing agent until the bone is exposed and feels hot.
If the wind blows out from him when he holds his hand on his nose, then forcefully apply medicated, dry, holding dressings to the wound as you previously mentioned. If flesh grows and the place solidifies, then the material that was attached outside will return to the nose, which would be less noticeable to the patient, God willing.
Chapter Ten.
For injuries to the eye.
If the eyelid is injured without causing any defect in sight or loss of vision, it is recommended to gently lift it, then examine it in a mirror, and then place a small piece of cotton over it without any pressure.
Then, apply a poultice made of linen, gum, milk, and frankincense to the eye, which has many benefits. The recipe for the benefits is to take a large amount of fine flour, then grind it into four thin sheets.
Then, place one sheet over the other according to the eye's need, then secure it with a strong, thick bandage, and replace the cotton without any pressure. Then, remove the cotton and leave the eye closed for a day and night.
If the bandage becomes loose during that time, it is recommended to tighten it again, then remove it after a day and night as we mentioned earlier. If the eye has returned to its normal state, then repeat the bandage, poultice, and other treatments until it heals.
Chapter 22.
For cutting the umbilical cord.
If a fracture occurs in the rib cage and then heals, protruding outwards like a grape and disfiguring the human form, it is necessary to remove it as described below.
Then, insert a needle from the bottom upwards into the grape, and then insert another needle with a doubled thread from the side of the wound, pierce it, and leave the first needle in its place.
Then, cut the position of the doubled thread and tie it around the grape with some of it, tighten it well, then remove the needle and place a piece of cotton soaked in egg white on the eye, leave it until the thread falls off along with the grape, then treat the eye as needed to strengthen it.
Until the wound is cleared, and the grape has been tightened around all sides by a circle of sutures until the eye becomes more round, then it is smeared with a thin paste that reaches the corner of the eye, allowing the egg white to drip into the eye and it falls off, then it is strengthened until it heals completely.
Chapter 22.
In the treatment of cataracts.
This condition, which is called cataracts, is nothing but a collection of water in the eye that does not exist, and the work in this case is to make the patient sit on a chair raised, then take his head from both sides with your hands.
Move it until you see the duration descending below your sight, then fix it and do not let it go, the light goes out and sees the objects as they were seen before, if it does not descend, we know that it is water, if it does not settle, as mentioned earlier.
Otherwise, make the patient sit in front of you then take a thin, sharp needle and insert it slightly above the tympanic membrane near its attachment to the tympanic membrane in the eardrum until the material comes out.
If it comes out, rinse the eye with warm water mixed with honey or boiled water and herbs and honey, then treat with other treatments until it is cleansed.
Chapter 22.
We mentioned the types of water in the section and which one is suitable for the cup, explained clearly, so take it from there on the basis of health, then when this happens, the patient should sit in front of you with their back to the sun near the sun.
Then close the healthy eye and squeeze it well, then raise the eyelid of the eye with your left hand if the water is in the left eye or with your right hand if it is in the right eye.
Then, place the tip of the instrument near the cornea with a force equal to the whiteness of the eye from the smaller conjunctiva side. Then, push the instrument with force while controlling it with your hand until it penetrates the whiteness of the eye and you feel the instrument has reached an empty space.
The depth to which the instrument should penetrate into the eye is equal to the distance from the edge of the eyelid to the center of the cornea, which is the clear part of the eye. Then, the instrument should be withdrawn to the position where there is water.
Then, gently lift the instrument up and down if water comes out of its eye. The patient will see what is in front of him from his eye, and the instrument will be in his eye. Then, gently lower it again if the water rises, without removing the instrument.
If it has stabilized and the water has not risen, gently remove the instrument with your hand, little by little, then dissolve a small amount of pure, fine salt in water and wash the eye from inside out, then apply all of it, whether it is cotton or soft, wet cloth outside the eye.
Then, apply gauze and white of egg whites and secure it with the correct eye. As for us and our time, we place a piece of cotton wool soaked in freshly prepared lime juice and egg whites on it, because if the instrument cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, it is because some people have very hard eyes. The instrument called the 'Bread' should be taken, which has this appearance:.
Pierce it with the same mallet, but do not hammer it, only to make a gentle mark on the spot where the cauterizer will be applied, as previously mentioned. When your work is complete, prepare a firm bed for the patient to lie on his back in a dark room.
He should avoid all movements and coughing, and make his food as soft as possible without moving his head to the left or right. The bandage should remain on him until the third day, then he should be exposed to the dark room again.
Then, on the seventh day, remove the bandage. It is not recommended to do this during treatment or immediately after taking your medication, but rather avoid it before the water rises quickly due to intense gaze.
If the appearance of the tumor is hot, it is recommended to expose the eye before the seventh day and treat it with something that soothes the tumor until it subsides. Then, when it subsides, you should remove the bandage and place a turban on his face that diverts his gaze from underneath for several days while he is in the dark room.
The patient gradually leaves the house and engages in his activities, knowing that the cupping instrument cannot be used without the learner observing it repeatedly. In this case, he proceeds to the operation, as I have been informed by some Iraqis that they mentioned that he makes a wide-mouthed cupping instrument in Iraq that absorbs water.
I have not seen anyone in our country make that or read about it in any of the early books, and it may be a recent innovation. This is an image showing various types of cupping instruments to stand on them due to ignorance of them:
It is made of brass specifically, and its tip is pointed like a triangle, sharp:
Chapter 22.
In the treatment of a swollen nasal membrane in the nose.
It may swell in the nose due to different types of flesh, one of which resembles many-legged spiders and another is cancerous tumor, red in color, and another is smooth, not red in color:
If any of these flesh was not cancerous or harmful, then it is appropriate to sit the patient in front of you facing the sun and open his mouth and place the scraper on those flesh then draw it out and cut what you have reached from it with a sharp, thin knife from one side:
Until you learn that the flesh is all gone, if anything remains of it that you cannot cut, remove it with a sharp instrument until nothing remains. If blood or heat and inflammation overcome you, stop.
Treat it as appropriate or if it was a foul tumor, cut it off until the blood stops and all the flesh is removed, then place in the nose after cutting, some water or drink. If the nose opens and moisture from it goes to the throat.
Know that it has been cleared, but if the moisture does not reach as appropriate, know that there is decayed flesh inside the bones that have disintegrated, and the instrument could not reach it. Then, it is appropriate to take a thread from linen with some thickness.
Tie many knots in it and put between each knot a quantity of an inch or less, and the injured person should insert the tip of the thread into his nose with a probe or what is available after making it like a hook to attract the smell until it reaches the nostrils.
And he should pull on the neck and often, like this action in the books, it is easy for whoever wants to do it, then gather both ends of the thread, one that came out of the mouth and the other that remained in the nose.
Then, you use the method of ligating the flesh with a knot in the thread until you learn that the flesh has been cut by the knot. Then, you remove the thread and insert it into the nose after wiping the blood. She drinks water from the Masr well three days or more.
Then, the Masr drinks all that remains of the flesh. Then, you insert the last thing in the nose, a copper tube, for days until it is cleansed. If he needs treatment, you use this.
This is the image of the nasal speculum with which you squeeze the sinuses and medicines in the nose:
He places a small, open-ended, copper or silver nasal speculum in it.
And if you wish, you can make the tube closed like a gourd and smooth the nasal speculum.
It has a handle at the end as you see, he holds it with his hand if he heats the fat or whatever you want from the secretions or the discharges.
Chapter 25.
In the nasal septum at the tip of the nose.
Often, a large fungus grows at the tip of the nose, it increases and becomes worse with the days until it spoils its appearance.
Therefore, it is necessary to cut it at its first appearance and extract all of it, then apply the remedy which either is the cauterizing agent or is equivalent to it, for if it is not cut completely until it becomes large, look for it as it has a slight sensation.
Do not expose it to iron as it is a cancerous tumor and I have rarely seen such great relief from cutting this tumor for its owner, and if the tumor is smooth and not red, I have seen that complete cutting is possible. Then loosen it and cut it without hesitation or delay, and treat the area with what dries and absorbs until it is completely cleaned.
Chapter 26.
In the sewing of the nose, mouth, and ear. If the connection of the nose, mouth, or ear is torn away from a wound or something similar, know that when such tearing occurs in any of these areas, the only work that can be done is in some people.
If any of these is exposed, look for it if the wound is a sharp one with blood, then gather the lips of the wound by sewing and then treat it until it is completely cleaned, and if the connection has torn apart and both sides have become separate, it is necessary to scrape off all the sides with a sharp knife until the skin becomes red.
Then, gather the lips with sutures and tighten them, remove the pus and milk from them, grind them into a powder and apply it to the wounds with a paste made from date molasses or other types of sweetened molasses, leave it for two or three days, then cleanse it.
Then, change the medication and leave it until the sutures dissolve by themselves, then treat them with the molasses until they are completely clean. The method of suturing is to gather the tissues together either with needles as we described in intestinal suturing or with thread as you were taught here.
Chapter 22.
In the extraction of the stone that is exposed in the lips.
Many people may have small hard lumps inside their cheeks that resemble the shape of a cherry and vary in size, so it is appropriate to turn the lip and cut each stone and remove it with pliers.
Then, cut it from all sides, then apply a powdered poultice to the site after cutting to stop the bleeding, and then rinse with salt water, and treat the sites until the wounds heal.
Chapter 23.
On Removing Excess Flesh from the Jawbone
Often, excess flesh grows on the jawbone, which was formerly called 'abuluss.' It is recommended to tie it with a suture or hold it with a needle and cut it at its root, leaving the wound to drain blood, then apply a poultice made of mashed herbs to the affected area.
Or one of the drying agents, if that flesh recurs after treatment, often it must be cut again and cauterized, as it does not recur after that.
Chapter 19
On Extracting Teeth with Iron Instruments
Hard, rough, and foul-smelling tartar may gather on the surfaces of teeth from both inside and outside, as well as between them, which may cause decay to the jawbone and tooth loss due to that.
It is recommended to place the patient between your knees, with their head on your stone, and apply pressure and scraping to the tooth and surrounding areas where tartar has appeared, using a substance similar to sand until nothing remains of it, and do the same for black, green, yellow, and other colors until they are clean.
If the first extraction has removed all tartar, repeat the process on another day, and perhaps a third time until you achieve your desired outcome. Know that the scraping tool requires various shapes and sizes depending on what is available for your work.
For the purpose of removing a splinter that is inside, not one that is outside or one that is between the ribs in the form of another, there are several forms of splinters that you will have with you all prepared.
Chapter Thirty.
On the Extraction of Teeth.
It is necessary to treat the splinter with all possible means and refrain from extracting it unless absolutely necessary, as it is a precious treasure until there is no other option but to extract it.
If the patient insists on extraction, then it is necessary to strengthen oneself until the splinter is ready for extraction. Often, the patient is deceived by the pain and believes that it is in the correct splinter, so he extracts it, but then the pain does not disappear until the sick splinter is extracted, as we have seen this happen many times by dentists.
If the painful splinter is in its entirety, then it is necessary to encircle it with a strong thread and pull it from all sides until the tooth is loose, then gently move it with your fingers or with forceps very slowly until it becomes loose.
Then, when you have extracted it well with the large forceps, place the patient's head between your knees and hold it still so that the splinter does not break. If it does not come out, then use one of those instruments and insert it underneath from all sides gently and move it as you did before.
If the fracture is punctured or decayed, it is appropriate to fill that puncture with a counter-opening and seal it with a good stopper made of fine, smooth silk, so that it does not tear at the time of pressure application with bandages. It is also appropriate to probe around the jaw from all sides carefully.
And preserve your effort so that some of it remains, and it returns to the original state with ease, which is better than the initial pain. And do not do what foolish people do in their bridges and rushing into a siege without using what we have prescribed.
Often, they cause great harm to people by breaking the fracture and all of its roots remain or some of them. Or sometimes some of the jawbones may be displaced as we have often seen, then they are rinsed with drink or with salt and vinegar, if bleeding occurs from the site, often this happens, then apply a piece of cotton and press it on the site.
Or if the cotton does not help you, use soft bandages that move with the fracture first, long ends and short handles, thick so that they do not slip when you press them on the fracture, this is the shape of large bandages:
The handles of the instruments should be thick enough so that when gripped, they do not slip or shorten, and should be made of Indian iron or tightly woven metal that allows the fingers to interlock securely.
The ends of the instruments can also be made in the shape of a mace, which will also be strong and well-controlled.
Chapter 21.
On the extraction of splinters and the removal of broken fragments of the maxilla.
If a splinter remains lodged at the site, it is recommended to apply a cotton pad soaked in oil or grease for one or two days until the area relaxes, then insert the forceps or pincers. These resemble the beak of a bird called the parrot, and this is the image of the pincers.
If they were made from the inside or like a scalpel, and if they do not grip well with these pincers, it is recommended to scrape at the site and remove all the flesh with a probe, then insert the tool that resembles a small saw, like this image:
Short and thick, but not too tightly woven so as not to break when the fragment is extracted, otherwise use these other tools, like this image: a triangular-shaped tool with some sharpness.
Image of another beautiful triangle.
We also rely on this machine with two handles, whose image is also shown:
Besides those machines and instruments mentioned in the chapter on bones, we also rely on this machine that resembles a large smith's hammer, whose image is as follows:
A triangle with a sharp angle in it, which has some thickness to prevent breaking, and is not serrated, and know that the instruments of bones are many, and so too are all other instruments. The skilled craftsman who is familiar with his craft may invent for himself instruments according to what he learns from the work and the diseases themselves.
Because some diseases have instruments not mentioned by the first author due to their different types, if a bone from the jaw or one of the bones of the mouth rots, then examine it in its place with whatever is suitable from among these instruments and the hooks mentioned in extracting the roots.
And we rely on this tool's image:
It has some thickness to hold the bone so that it does not slip and fall out, and we apply medications suitable for that, if the bone has rot, then remove its rottenness and blackness until it is cleaned, then treat it until it is healed.
The Second Section and the Thirty-Second Chapter.
On grafting grafts onto other plants.
If grafts grow on other than their natural host, they are deformed in appearance, especially if this happens to women and the delicate, it is recommended that one should examine, as the graft has grown from behind another graft.
If it is not successful in its grafting or pruning, remove it, and if it is grafted onto another graft, cut it with this tool, whose appearance is as follows:
And it resembles a small hook and should be made of Indian hard steel, sharp at the tip, and your cutting should be done in many days for the strength of the graft and so as not to damage the other grafts, and if it is a mature and strong graft for its pruning, prune it with a heated iron of Indian origin.
And it should all be made of Indian and its handle should be thin and sharp, like the heated iron used to make needles, it is cooled down a little at a time in many days with care so as not to damage the graft and cause it to fall off, then it is wrapped around another graft and pruned with some manure.
And if a graft has broken off some of it and caused pain to the tongue when speaking, it should also be pruned until the sharpness of that break disappears and it becomes smooth and does not cause pain to the tongue or distort speech.
Chapter Three and Thirty:
In the interlocking of moveable ribs with silver wires or gold wires.
If the upper ribs, when exposed, move and shift from a blow or fall, and the patient cannot bear anything that could make them fall again, and treatment with restraining medicines did not help, then the treatment was unsuccessful.
The solution is to use a gold or silver wire, but gold is better because silver tarnishes and rots after some days, while gold remains the same forever, not exposed to such things, and the wire should be medium in thickness and tightened to the extent that it can fit between the ribs.
The pattern of interlocking is to take the wire and insert its end between the correct ribs, then tie both ends of the wire between the moveable ribs, one or more, until the stitch reaches the correct rib from the other side.
Then, the stitch is repeated from the side it started from, and your hand is gently tied with wisdom so that the bone does not move, and the wire should be tightened at the roots of the ribs so that it does not slip, then the excess ends of the silver wire are cut off with scissors, gathered together, and folded over and hidden between the correct rib and the moveable rib.
If the tongue is fractured, then it should be left as it is tied up, if it breaks or becomes displaced, reinforce it with another thread, and this is how life continues, and this is the image of the teeth and their arrangement in two fixed teeth and two mobile teeth as you see:
One or two teeth may return to their original position and be tied up as described and remain, but only a skilled craftsman can do this, for example, a piece of bone from a cow can be shaped into the form of a tooth and placed in the position where the tooth was lost. And it should be tied up as we said, and it will remain and enjoy that way.
Chapter 43.
In the removal of the lingual frenulum that prevents speech in those who cannot speak.
This lingual frenulum may be either congenital, born with the human, or acquired from a wound that has healed.
The procedure is to open the mouth and head of the patient on your stone, raise his tongue, then cut the nerve frenulum with a sharp instrument until the tongue is free from its restraint, if there is some stiffness and complexity due to healing of a wound, then a skilled craftsman should make a groove in it with a sharp instrument until the frenulum becomes loose and the knot dissolves.
Be cautious if the wound is deep into the flesh, as cutting a blood vessel there may cause bleeding, then clean the area with rose water or diluted vinegar and cold water, then place under the tongue a piece of cloth held by a thread every night.
So that it does not stick again, if bleeding occurs, apply powdered alum to the area, and if blood overcomes you, wipe the place with a cotton swab suitable for this. Then treat it with all other treatments until it heals.
Chapter Five and Thirty.
In the extraction of the tooth under the tongue.
Under the tongue, a small lump may form that resembles a tooth and prevents the tongue from performing its natural function, and sometimes bone until it fills the mouth, and the action is to open the mouth of the patient facing the sun and examine the lump.
If you see it as a white or hard black lump that the patient cannot feel, do not expose it to him, for it is cancer, and if it is slightly yellow with moisture, cut it with a sharp instrument and remove it from all sides.
If blood overpowers you at the time of your work, place a pounded, soft lump of zaj' on it until the blood clots, then return to your work until you extract it in its entirety, then rinse it with water and salt.
Then treat it with all appropriate treatments until it is healed.
Chapter sixty-three.
In the treatment of lumps on the breast.
And whatever grows in the throat from other tumors may reveal glands inside the throat that resemble the glands that appear from outside, which are called lumps of lentils, if treated with what was mentioned in the division, it did not heal.
If the tumor is hard and has a slight sensation, do not expose it to iron if it is red in color and its root is thick, also do not expose it to iron, fear of blood gushing, but leave it until it rots, either cut it off or it will burst from itself.
If it is white and mushy, and its root is thin, this should be cut off, and the work is to examine before the work if it has settled and the hot tumor has complete healing or some shortage.
Then, sit the patient with his face to the sun and his head on your stone, and open his mouth and take a servant between your hands and press his tongue down with this tool of its shape:
If it is made of silver or copper, it should be thin like a knife. If you place your tongue on it and the tumor becomes visible to your sight, take a probe and insert it into the lentil, and it will extract it without taking anything else with it except perhaps some fragments of the tumor.
Then cut it with this tool, its shape resembling a saw, except that the tips of both are sharp and set at an angle to each other, like the teeth of a saw made of Damascus steel or folded iron.
If you do not have this tool, then cut it with a hook of this shape.
Sharp on one side and not sharp on the other, so after cutting one lentil, cut the other in this way with great care, then after cutting, rinse the instrument in cold water or with vinegar and water.
If the instrument has a bleeding wound, rinse it in water that has been boiled with herbs such as ram's horn or asafetida or similar, until the bleeding stops, then clean it until it is clean. It may also have other tumors in the throat besides the lentils, which should be cut as described for cutting the lentils.
The woman had a tumor that had grown inside her throat, causing difficulty in breathing and swallowing. She was unable to eat or drink.
She was on the verge of death if she had lived for another day or two. The tumor had grown so large that it protruded from her nostrils. She immediately used a sharp instrument to cut it, then extracted a piece of it successfully.
Then she cut it where she could reach from the nostril. She did the same with what protruded from the other nostril. She opened her mouth and held down her tongue. She then used the sharp instrument to cut more of the tumor, but only blood flowed out.
The woman's throat was relieved and she immediately started drinking water. She also resumed eating. They did not cut any more of the tumor for a long time, as it would keep growing back. This continued for a long time.
The tumor inside her throat eventually stopped growing, and she traveled away from that place. I do not know what happened to her afterwards.
Chapter 73: On the Treatment of Fractures and Dislocations
In the fracture and dislocation of the jaw.
If a piece of bone falls into the jaw and becomes dislocated and is white and long, it is called a pillar. If it is thick at the bottom and straight, it is called a grape, but if treated as mentioned in the section on fractures, it does not heal.
If you see a hot mass that has settled from it and was thin, it should be cut off. If there is no part of it that is joined straight and long and was not red or the color of blood or black or had no sensation, it should be avoided being cut off.
There is danger in the jaw, so if you see it on the condition of whiteness and length mentioned, the jaw should be held with a sun shoe and the tongue pushed forward with the tool mentioned, then the surgeon should enter the grape.
And she should be drawn down and cut with one of the tools mentioned in fracture of the almonds, but it is not recommended to cut from it except what exceeds the natural condition without addition, because if you cut more than that, you will damage the voice and speech.
Then, after the cutting, you use what we described in the cutting of the two lozenges and treat them until they are clean. If the wound is bleeding from its cutting, it is appropriate to use the ligature in its cavity without fear or caution, and the direction of the cavity is simply due to the severe medicine, which is to place the tip of the ligature on your stone.
Then, you squeeze his tongue with the tool that we mentioned, then take from the sharp water that was mentioned in the chapter of the cavity and mix it with him without wiping, and make it neither too thick nor too thin. Then, fill this tool with this mixture and its image is as follows:
Its tip that you put the medicine in it has a size like the size of a teaspoon of myrrh, and you place the tool with the medicine on its own lip and the ligature lying on its side so that saliva from inside its throat does not fall into its throat and cause him harm.
Then, you hold your hand with the medicine as you grind it on its lip for half an hour until you see that it has turned black and the medicine has settled. If you want to take cotton, then dip it in myrrh and mix it with the medicine.
The cotton is introduced into a tube from above until the cotton adheres to the wound. This is done repeatedly until the desired amount of swelling is achieved, then it is left for three or four days. If necessary, the remedy can be repeated.
After the swelling, wipe around the wound with a cotton ball soaked in oil and remove any remaining remedy. Then rinse with cold water, treat from the outside with massages, and from the inside with gentle pressure until it is clean. This type of treatment is safer and less frightening than surgery.
The wound can also be treated with a milder form of cauterization using incense. Various herbs such as frankincense, zofa, suture, soda, shih, and others are gathered and soaked in water.
The pot is then heated and placed in the middle of a covering with an opening. On top of this, the instrument used for cauterization is made from silver or copper.
The end of the tube with the ram's horn is inserted into the mouth of the patient until the steam rises to the wound through the tube. Then it is repeated until the wound is healed. However, this treatment should not be performed until the beginning of the tumor.
If often increases in the tumor, and it is only appropriate to do this at the time of its hot burning, if you do not have this tool, take a spoon and break off a piece of egg white and put it on its tip to prevent it from burning the mouth of the patient.
Because the egg white shell prevents the heat of the steam from burning the mouth, and this is a good treatment with safety.
Chapter Eighteen.
In the removal of thorns and other things that may occur in the throat.
Often, something like bone, thorn, or large thorn, or other things may occur in the throat, and it is appropriate to remove what is visible that falls on it after pressing the tongue with a tool at noon.
So that you can see what is in the throat, and what has not been visible to you and has disappeared in the throat, it is appropriate to warm the patient before he swallows his food in his stomach, because maybe the thing that causes trouble comes out with vomiting or the patient swallows a piece of food stuck in his throat, or a sharp object.
Or he swallows a piece of dry bread or takes a piece of soft sea sponge and ties it in a thread, then swallows it, if it reaches the place of the thorn, pull the thread quickly and do this repeatedly.
Frequently, the arrow or bone sticks in it and comes out. If it does not come out as mentioned earlier, then use a tool made of copper on this image:
It should be thinner than the tube and at its tip there is a tapering part that enters the wound with gentle pressure, while he raises his head above and avoids touching his stomach to prevent vomiting, or the doctor inserts it with his hand.
And the insertion of the tube is better for his knowledge of the position of the thing that is absorbed, and he pushes it down or pulls it up with the tool until it comes out, as much as possible.
Chapter 93.
In the extraction of the absorbed bone in the throat.
If the bone was treated as mentioned earlier with medications and did not improve, then look at the tip of the tube in the sun after he bites his tongue with the tool that you were told about.
If your sight falls on the bone, then pull it with a small hook or a sharp and secure tool, if it cannot be removed, then take a copper tube and insert it into the tip of the tube near the bone, then insert a heated iron into the tube.
The patient should do this repeatedly and abstain from water on that day entirely, then take a basin filled with cold water and open his mouth in it and rinse it, not swallowing any of it, and move the water around with his hand at intervals.
If the clot falls on the bed, then if it has not been treated as described, the throat will excrete urine and feces through the instrument mentioned in the book of Bakhoor Al-Lehah, do this repeatedly, for it will fall off.
The work in the book of Bakhoor is to take a pot with a hole in its lid, heated by fire and covered with a cloth in the middle of which there is an opening, then insert the tip of the instrument into this opening, then pour the bakhoor and place the patient's mouth on the end of the tube and close his mouth so that the bakhoor does not come out until he knows that it has reached his throat.
If the clot does not fall on the bed, then if it does not, repeat the bakhoor and make the patient thirsty and eat salt and garlic and do not drink water, for there is no other way to remove it by this method, and this is a picture of the instrument that attracts the clot from the throat when it falls on it.
It resembles the canines, as you see, except that it has this cleaning process that enters into the throat and its tip resembles the beak of a bird in it, with roughness on the cooled part. If it touches something, it does not leave it.
Another device is used to clamp the tongue, which is a wide iron ring that covers the mouth above the tongue. It enters the mouth standing on one side, leaving the mouth open without the will of the patient and he cannot remove it until it is pushed back.
The method for opening the mouth with this device according to this measurement by eye.
Chapter Forty.
In it, they make a hole in the tumor and cut it.
The tumors have many types, varied according to what is mentioned in this book one by one, and they differ in their size and cutting from two aspects: one of them is the type of tumor itself and what it contains of moisture.
The second type is the location where it occurs in the body, because the tumor that occurs in the head is not the same as the tumor that occurs in the chest, and the tumor that occurs in a meaty place is not the same as the tumor that occurs in a joint, and for each one there is a different rule for treatment.
From among the tumors, those that should not be excised unless they have matured and reached their peak, and from which it is appropriate to excise, are those that have not fully matured but are intended to be near joints.
Because if the tumor occurs near a joint and prolongs its condition until it matures, it may have damaged tendons or nerves of that joint, causing damage to that limb or the tumor is near a major organ.
Because if you delay excising it until it matures, you may have damaged that major organ or if it is near the brain, it should be excised as a potential tumor that is not fully matured and near the brain to prevent it from maturing and spreading inside the brain, becoming cancerous.
And it may reach a point where it cannot be removed, and you should know the time to excise tumors that have fully matured when the pain of the tumor has subsided, the fever has gone, there is a lack of redness and swelling, and the size of the tumor has decreased and all other symptoms.
And it is appropriate to excise from the lowest position of the tumor if possible, so that it can be easily drained downwards or from a deeper position of the tumor and more distant, and the excision should be made along the length of the body if the tumors are near the hands and feet.
The locations of muscles, tendons, nerves, and blood vessels should be known in all flat areas that have no flexion, and if the tumor is in fleshy areas, it is best to leave them alone.
Until it ripens as we mentioned for perfection, if you were to scrape it before that, the pus would flow from it and it would cause much harm and inflammation, and perhaps his lips and jaw would harden and become gaping, and some tumors may be scraped off the body when necessary or according to what the organ needs.
In small tumors, a narrow scraper should be used, and in large tumors, a wide or deeply notched scraper according to the size of the tumor, and some tumors may need to be cauterized if they have become like an ulcer.
It has become so severe that it resembles what is shown in many manuscripts and manuscripts, such as those that cut in a zigzag pattern with three angles, and some that are cut like the shape of a leaf of laurel, like the curved Arabic letters.
And in those, the evenly spaced cut and the crescent-shaped cut and others like them should be used, and if it does not have a head like flat tumors, then a simple scraper should be used, and if the tumor is large and has gathered for a long time and was scraped, it should not be done all at once, so that the pus does not come out all at once in that time.
Remove a portion of it, then extract the tumor over several days, removing a portion each time, until the entire mass is extracted.
Especially if the patient is weak or a pregnant woman, a child, or an elderly person with a high fever, the animal spirit often breaks away with the extraction of the tumor in one go, and may cause the patient to die before you realize it.
After extracting these tumors, it is necessary to clean the wound and examine it. If the incision of the tumor is small or the wounds are simple, use a piece of flax or cotton. If the tumor is large and there are many wounds,
you should insert a piece of flax into each wound until they touch each other. If the tumor has been cut from the skin or has been removed, it should be stuffed with cotton or dry linen and extracted over three days.
Then extract and treat it with the appropriate ointments until it is clean. If there is bleeding at the time of your work, use cold water and vinegar after drinking them, and apply a piece of linen soaked in them to the wound repeatedly.
If the duration of the bleeding is long, it is necessary to use the methods of treatment and remedies that we have described in many places of this book and in the chapter on fractures, especially if it is winter and the tumor is located in a place rich in nerves, it is advisable to apply hot drinks and warm oil.
And place it on the affected area, and if it is summer and the areas are fleshy, it is advisable to apply remedies with cold water and oil or cold drinks and oil, all of which should be kept cool until the third day, as we mentioned, when the tumor should be lanced and cleaned.
And use whatever is necessary to remove it, as this is what you need to know about the treatment of tumors in general, and as for the detailed method, we have mentioned the treatment of each type of tumor briefly.
Chapter 24.
On the treatment of tumors that appear on the scalp.
Tumors appear on the scalp that are small and belong to a type of flesh, they have conditions like those of chicken skin, and there are many types of them, some are dry and some contain moisture similar to mucus.
This excerpt is a section title or image caption from the 10th century Arabic textbook on surgery by Albucasis. It does not require translation as it is already in English.
Translation: "And the work in its cavity is to first cleanse it with the tool that has its shape, after that, the one called 'medusa' until you know what it contains. If it contains moisture, then cut it lengthwise, a simple cut on this shape:
Translation: "Start the cut from line ~b~ to line ~j~. If the moisture is released, remove the pouch that contained that moisture and cut it all, leaving nothing of it. Often, if something remains, it will return.
Translation: "Then dip a cotton swab in the pure sulfur, if available, otherwise in salt water and fill the wound with it. Leave it for another day, as it will eat what remains of the pouch. Then prepare it again with the second and third sulfur, if necessary.
Translation: "Until you are sure that nothing remains of the pouch, then treat the wound with the pure sulfur until it is clean. If the tumor contains a fatty substance, then cut it lengthwise on this shape:
Cut a flap from the wound edge and insert it into the wound, removing all the debris from every direction, and exert your effort in extracting the foreign body that is within it, for if a vessel obstructs you, do as was described to you, and similarly, if the tumor is calcified from the cut.
Treat it as described, and cutting into a calcified tumor is easier because it has little blood and moisture, and some of these tumors in the head may not have any moisture with them at all, which is why I cut into a tumor in...
the head of an old woman, and the tumor was as hard as marble, smooth and white, so that it could not be broken even if someone hit it with a hammer, and none of the other tumors occurring in the head were like this except those that appear in the heads of children.
At the base of the ears, cut it all with a simple cut and remove its base so that the material can flow down, then treat it with whatever treatment corresponds to it.
Chapter 2 and 40.
In cutting into the kidneys that often occur in the neck, many of these tumors occur in the neck and under the armpits and in the groins and can also occur throughout the body, and the one that occurs in the neck is usually one and many, and some grow from each other.
Each sow has a separate, specialized compartment within the pen, similar to those used for storing goods and head tumors as described earlier. There are many types of these sows, some of which are fertile, some contain moisture, and some are unfit for treatment.
The appearance of this sow was favorable upon touch, with a color close to that of the skin, moving in all directions, not attached to the neck nerve or udder or blood vessel and not being edematous. It is appropriate to make a simple incision from the top down on the body in this manner, from line ~~ to line ~~.
And to exfoliate it from all sides and extend the skin flaps with a spatula or two or many spatulas, as needed, as described earlier for head tumors, and remove it little by little, ensuring that no nerve or tendon is cut and that the spatula is not too sharp.
To avoid cutting too much or causing the patient to bleed excessively, only remove what is necessary to cut, as if you were to cut a nerve or blood vessel and cause the patient to bleed profusely, apply gauze or some thrombolytic agents to the wound.
If the wound is large, leave it until the intensity of the tumor subsides and the wound relaxes, then apply a bandage to prevent putrefaction as blood clots at that time. Then examine with your little finger if any remains, then cut off other smaller glands and clean them.
If there is a large amount of pus in the glands, it is better not to cut those glands from their origin but rather to tie them with a strong double thread and leave them until they drop out on their own without harm. Then stuff the wound with cotton soaked in the Egyptian mummy and treat it.
If all the glands are cut, it is better to bring together the edges of the wound and stitch them from their own side after knowing that none remains. If you see that there is a small amount of gland tissue left, then stitch it to the bone.
It is better to cut at their origin, squeeze them out, and use stitching as mentioned earlier. And for those glands that contain moisture, squeeze them out with a simple sponge where the position of their ripeness appears to you and place the sponge below as we said.
Then use the Egyptian mummy and similar substances to absorb any remaining decay until you see that the wound is clean, then treat it with fresh manure until it is healed.
Chapter 34: Treatment of Fractures in the Leg
In the region of the stomach, a tumor that occurs inside the throat.
The ancients mentioned this region in the stomach, and I have not seen anyone in our country perform it, and this is their talk. As for those who practice butchery, it is appropriate for them to avoid this region, since they do not benefit from it.
Since all the veins and lungs are damaged, and those who have a hot tumor in the mouth or throat or both, if there is no cause in the gallbladder, it is necessary to use the region of the stomach to escape from the trouble that results from suffocation.
It is appropriate if we want to do this that we cut the region of the stomach under three rings from the rings of the gallbladder or four small incisions in between two rings, as much as the incision in the skin and not in the sinew, and this position is suitable for the incision.
Because it is without meat and blood vessels are far from it, if the surgeon is careful, he should extend the skin of the throat with a suture, then cut the skin until he reaches the gallbladder, avoiding blood vessels if he sees anything from them.
Then, he cuts the incision that we described, and he deduces the location of the sinus from the saliva that comes out of it along with what is torn and from the interruption of the voice and leaving the wound open for a time until the time when the fear of choking subsides, then he gathers the edges of the wound from the skin.
He cuts it alone without the pad, then the medicines that make the flesh grow are used until he is cleansed, said the one who wrote this book, interpretation of the sentence of this speech that we mentioned is only if they see the foreign body has closed its hole with one of these tumors that they mentioned.
The foreign body died and they thought that they would interrupt, went to the location of the hilum in order for the foreign body to breathe some air at the place of the wound and leave from death, but only ordered to leave the wound open until the surgery is completed and its duration is three days and more.
Then they ordered to suture the wound and treat it until he is cleansed, which I saw myself that a servant girl took a knife and sent it on her neck, cut some of the lung lobes with it then she called for treatment of her and found him like a slaughtered animal so she uncovered the wound.
The blood that flowed from the wound was thin, and I confirmed that it did not come from an artery or a vein. The wind came out of the wound, so I cleaned the wound and treated it until it healed, without any other symptoms except for a slight sound in the voice.
She recovered after several days and returned to her best condition, from which we can conclude that there is no danger in puncturing the diaphragm.
Chapter 40.
Regarding the incision on the tumor that appears in the throat from the outside and is called the tumor of the throat.
This tumor, called the tumor of the throat, is a large tumor in color and is common in women and exists in two types.
Either it is a natural tumor or an external one, so the natural one has no remedy, and the external one consists of two parts, one of which is similar to the warts, and the other is similar to the tumor that occurs due to the complexity of the vein, and there is danger in its incision. It is not appropriate to incise it with a knife except for a small part of it if it is squeezed and examined with a probe, then it is filled like the wart, and it is not connected to any vein, so it can be incised like the warts. The excerpt is a section title or an image caption from the Arabic textbook on surgery by Albucasis, and it translates to: "And if it has what is inside it from the pus, if it is in a pus, then extract it all, otherwise investigate all of it, then treat the affected area with what is appropriate for treatment.
The excerpt translates to: "Chapter 45.
The excerpt translates to: "On the classification of types of goods.
The excerpt translates to: "Goods are of many types and all types of goods have been mentioned in the classification, so it is appropriate to teach here the difference between a commodity and a product. Since it is a matter of controversy, I say that a product has heat, hardness, and severe pains until the glowing of the merit is extinguished. The excerpt translates to: "And the pus, in that case, has fever and hardness, and a commodity does not have heat, hardness, or pain with it, and it is contained in a bag of silk, which has a special covering and its color is like the body, and its beginning is like a lentil and becomes like a bean, and larger and smaller.
The excerpt translates to: "And it is of two types, either dry or that it contains moisture, and the colors of moisture are many as mentioned in the classification, so if you come to treat the commodity, it is appropriate to sieve it and examine it first with the tool called the masher according to its shape as mentioned in the following section.
Remove the tumor, then extract the pus and observe what comes out in its wake. If it yields moisture of any color, split it open as previously mentioned for all other tumors. But if no moisture comes out with the pus, know that it is a scab.
Split it open with a sharp, blunt knife as mentioned in the image, then suspend it by the string and peel off the skin from all sides gently, preserving the contents if possible to remove it intact with the cyst.
If the cyst breaks during the operation and you cannot remove it intact, often it is shown to have a lot remaining. Therefore, remove it piece by piece until nothing remains of it, for if anything remains, it is likely to recur as before.
If it overpowers you and some remains, dress the wound at intervals with sharp-edged, caustic substances, tighten the wound, place something over it that will soothe the hot tumor, and treat it with all other remedies until it is healed. If the cyst is large, cut its mouth and treat it with what binds.
If a hard, inflamed or non-inflamed spicule appears and shows bleeding, immediately dress the place with powdered zaj and leave it tightened for two or three days until the wound heals and the blood coagulates, then return to cutting what remains of the cyst.
Chapter Sixty-Four: Treatment of Wounds in the Head
In the Tools Section
Of the tools that are used in the head and neck, there are three types of them: large ones, medium-sized ones, and small ones.
Image of a Large Mortar
Image of a Medium-Sized Mortar
Image of a Small Mortar
Made of iron and folded at the ends, it is strong to quickly enter into the tumors. These are images of spoons and they are called 'Bard'. There are also three types of them: large ones, medium-sized ones, and small ones. Image of a Large Spoon:
Image of a Medium-Sized Spoon
Image of a Small Spoon
It is used to probe tumors, surgeries, and cavities from what is inside them of bones and other things. It is made of a bent, threaded, and smooth spoon like the ones made of Chinese silver, or spatula, or copper, or iron, or silver. The best one is the one made of spatula.
Also, spoons can be made of lead and used to probe cavities that have a slope in them so that the probe bends with it. However, this also has three types: long ones, medium-sized ones, and short ones.
The amount of pressure applied to a wound should be according to the size and capacity of the wound, and it should be tightened as much as possible without causing harm. The image of a spearhead made of large shot.
The image of a spearhead made of medium-sized shot.
The image of a spearhead made of small shot.
The images of spearheads are many types because they vary in their simplicity and complexity. Simple ones have one prong, and there are three main types: large, medium, and small. There are also blind spearheads, which are three types. There are also spearheads with multiple prongs, which are three types. And there are three types of spearheads with three prongs, and there are three types. All of these need to be in their respective places. The image of a simple large spearhead. The image of a simple medium-sized spearhead. The image of a simple small spearhead.
The image of a blind large spearhead. The image of a blind medium-sized spearhead.
The image of a blind small spearhead.
The image of a large spearhead with prongs. The image of a medium-sized spearhead with prongs. Image of a small surgeon with the mustache.
Image of a large surgeon with three mustaches.
Image of a medium-sized surgeon with three mustaches. Image of a small surgeon with three mustaches.
These are the three types of lancets that incise and lance wounds and tumors, as there are large ones, medium-sized ones, and small ones. Image of a large lancet.
Image of a medium-sized lancet.
Image of a small lancet.
Their incisions are limited and the other parts are not limited, but only made to be used in lancing wounds when there is fear of cutting nerves or tendons, and to relieve a little of the pain felt during lancing tumors.
These are the three types of needles, as there are large ones, medium-sized ones, and small ones. Image of a large needle.
They are made of brass, similar to the red metal, and in one end is a wide spoon-like shape with two layers, in which the barb of the needle is hidden, resembling a bird's tongue, running inside and outside as desired.
Images of the stitches that are placed between the fingers at the base of the tumors, the patient does not feel them and they are three types: large, medium, and small, an image of a large stitch:
Images of the bandages that are used to stop bleeding, they are three types: large, medium, and small, an image of a large bandage:
They are made of copper or porcelain, turned to a short length as you see, and they should be of these types of bandages: large and small, to stop the bleeding quickly when necessary, and when there is no medicine available for you.
But do not use them to stop bleeding in every part of the body, but only in the fleshy parts such as the thigh muscle, buttock muscle, arm muscle, chest muscle, abdominal muscle, and other similar fleshy organs.
And they can be made into other small instruments that resemble the scales of a date palm, like this image:
They can be used to stop bleeding from a wound or when cutting a vein or artery, and they can be made into turned instruments like this image:
Translation: "Chapter 74.
On the treatment of male breasts.
Which resembles the breasts of women may swell some people's breasts to the extent of resembling women's breasts, remaining and becoming an ugly deformity. If one dislikes this, it is recommended to cut open the breast with a crescent-shaped incision in this manner.
From the line ~b~ to the line ~j~: Then remove all the scar tissue, then fill the wound with the saltplaster, then bring together the edges of the wound by stitching and treat it until it heals, if the breast moves downwards and relaxes for the bone as it is exposed to women.
It is recommended to cut open the upper sides with two crescent-shaped incisions that resemble each other, connecting both at their ends so that the larger one encircles the smaller one in this manner: Then remove the skin that is between the two incisions, remove the scar tissue, and use what was mentioned about stitching and dressings and whatever is needed for treatment until it heals.
If you do not understand what should be cut, it is recommended to stuff the wound with cotton soaked in honey and leave it until it eats away the remaining scar tissue, then treat it until it heals.
84th Section: The Treatment of Wounds and Ulcers
In the treatment of wounds that are exposed to the foot.
These wounds that are exposed to the foot are of the type of hard calluses, which contain a pouch and some of which contain moisture, while others do not. If it contains moisture, it is appropriate to make an incision in the shape of a crescent moon on this form.
From the line ~b~ to the line ~g~, if all that is in the wound has come out, smear it with cotton soaked in balm and leave it until another day, then remove the cotton.
And treat it with the appropriate mersham until it is cleansed, if the wound is of the type of hard calluses, cut it as we mentioned in the cutting of the calluses, whether it has spread to the extent that it reaches the thigh, use the kai in it as we mentioned earlier.
94th Section: The Treatment of Wounds and Ulcers
In the cutting of the wound that is exposed before the artery or vein and is called anursima.
If the artery is cut and the skin above it is torn a lot, it often exposes a wound and a scab, and also exposes to the vein that it should expose a pus and a scab.
The signs by which one can recognize whether the tumor and the pus are before or after the artery or vein, if the tumor is before the artery, it is rectangular and united in depth of the body, and when you push the tumor with your finger, it feels like it has a rough surface.
If it is before the vein, the tumor is spread on the surface of the body, and cutting into these tumors is dangerous, especially in the arms, neck, and many places of the body, and if they were very large, it is recommended to avoid treating them with iron.
And if it is not in the limbs or head, it is recommended to avoid, and if it is a swelling of the artery, cut into the skin longwise then open the cut with scissars then remove the artery and free it from the entanglements.
Until it opens, then insert a needle underneath it and pierce it to the other side and tie the artery with a doubled thread in two places as you were taught about the two ends of the artery which are in the sponge, then remove the position between the two knots until all the blood comes out.
Then the tumor is removed, then use the treatment that produces pus until the knots fall off, then treat it with appropriate ointments until it heals.
If the tumor has previously divided the vessel, it is appropriate to hold as much of the tumor and skin as possible with your hand, then insert a needle below the place where you held with your hand and pierce it. In this needle, there is a double-threaded thread until it comes out from the other side. Then, tie the tumor firmly to both sides according to what you were told about tying the grape from both ends with the thread end, if you are afraid that the threads will slip out, then insert another needle with another thread under the whole tumor at the intersection of the first needle.
Tighten your threads in four places, then cut the tumor in the middle until it comes out, then cut the skin flap and leave what was attached to it, then apply a poultice that has been soaked in a drink and oil. Then use the treatment that is by the falta and the marahem until it becomes clean.
Chapter fifty.
In the tumor that is exposed from the meninges.
As the tumor is exposed in the vessel and the vein, so the tumor is exposed in the nerve if a blow or severe fatigue occurs or the like, and it is more common in the positions of the temples and the back of the head.
In every location where the joints move and it is a suppurating tumor resembling the color of the rest of the body, and it is usually painless in most conditions, but if pressed firmly, the patient feels a sensation similar to a fever, and the tumor is not concentrated deep within the body.
Indeed, it is under the skin and moves to all sides, not going towards the front or back, so whatever was in the joints should not be exposed to iron, as it may have caused an injury at some time, and whatever was in the head or forehead.
If the skin is cut with a needle, if the tumor is small, grasp it with forceps and cut it from its source, and if it is large, attach it with a ligature and squeeze it out, then remove it and stitch the wound with thread and treat it until it heals.
Chapter 52.
In the incision of the intestines that are exposed in the abdomen.
Many people have exposed intestines in their abdomens and in other parts of their bodies, which are called the "fetid" due to its resemblance to mold, its original is thin and its head is thick, it has turned into threads and there are small ones and large ones that are very heavy.
The man had two tumors in his abdomen, resembling mushrooms, with a delicate yellowish appearance. Their original form had changed, their surfaces were cracked, and moisture constantly flowed from them. These were cut off and weighed approximately eighteen ounces on one side and sixteen ounces on the other.
When cutting them, look to see if the tumor is moist and if the mushrooms have a delicate yellowish wet appearance. Cut them with a wide, sharp knife and place them in a hot, well-greased pan. Often, much blood will be expelled when cutting them.
If the blood overpowers you, burn them. If the tumor is pale and shriveled, and you see that it fears the cutting of iron, take a strong copper wire and tie the mushrooms with it, leaving them for two days, then add more copper to the wire, continuing to tighten it.
The more you press on the mushrooms until they break and fall off on their own, without force, if the tumor is originally thick, some fear and resistance will remain, especially if it was in the abdomen, but it may be possible to cut half of it or some of it.
Then, bandage it to prevent it from reopening, then treat it until the wound is cleansed, and be cautious not to expose it to cuts of thick, dark blood, which is a sign of cancerous growth, and we will mention the signs of cancer after this.
The second chapter and fifty-fifth.
In the treatment of cancer of the breast.
Cancer of the breast can occur due to many reasons, either from the rupture of the spleen that is on the abdomen and the thorb or mucus escapes from it, as mentioned in other chapters, or from blood that emerges from a vein or artery, as previously mentioned, or from a wind that penetrates into it.
If it occurred before the rupture of the spleen and the escape of the thorb, then the tumor's color will be similar to the skin's color and it will not cause pain, and it will appear in different conditions. And if it occurred before the escape of mucus, then its condition will be more varied. If you press it with your fingers, it will disappear and then return, sometimes accompanied by a rattle and greatly increased pain upon entering the bath and severe fatigue. If it occurred before moisture, then it will not cause pain.
If you have applied pressure with your hand, it should not be too much nor too little, for if the blood is already dark, then the tumor will appear black, and if it is fresh meat, the tumor will be hard, solid, and stick to one surface.
If it was before the wind, its touch was smooth, and in such cases, you should look to see if it is a swelling from blood vessels, veins, or the wind, as I mentioned in the chapter about tumors that occur from blood vessels and veins. If so, avoid treating it as there is fear and harm involved.
If it was a swelling from the membrane or the throat, then it is recommended to advise the patient to hold himself and stand still and stretched out, then learn about the method of cauterization around the swelling entirely. Then, advise him to lie down on his back with his belly facing up, and then apply a wide-mouthed cauterizing iron around the swelling at the place you taught about cauterization, then extend the middle of the tumor above with a large needle, and finally tie the position of the cauterization with a strong silk thread or cotton thread firmly.
And the knot of the tying should be loose, then open the middle of the extended tumor above the tying and insert your little finger into it and remove the membrane if you find it has been taken by the tying, then loosen the knot and push the membrane inside the abdomen, and if you find throat, extend it with a large needle.
Cut his dislocation, if a vessel or nerve resists you, tighten it firmly and return to your work, take two needles and insert two strong threads into them, then insert the needles into the ligature that you have made around the tumor, penetrating it in four places.
If you wish, remove the needles and leave the place until the flesh loosened is rotten and falls from itself or cut it if it has rotten and putrefied, then treat it with whatever is appropriate from ointments until it heals, if there is pus in the flesh.
Or if there is moisture, it is appropriate to squeeze the tumor as we said and extract the blood or moisture that you find in it, then treat it with whatever soothes the wound.
Chapter 35.
In the treatment of cancer.
We have mentioned in the division of types of cancer and how to treat it with drugs and warned against treating it with iron so as not to ulcerate, and we mentioned the tumor that develops in the uterus and warned against treating it.
The ancients said that when the tumor is in a place that can be completely removed, such as the tumor that is in the breast or the buttocks and other organs that can be extracted whole, especially if it is small and new, but if it has spread and become large, it is not appropriate to approach it.
Indeed, I have not been able to remove it from anyone and have not seen any of my predecessors who have achieved this, and if one is proficient in the procedure, as we mentioned earlier, it is recommended to advance the flap from the beginning of the incision, then gradually reduce it if it is full of blood in the artery.
Then, the flap is fixed in a position where it can be worked on, then it receives the sinuses that are suitable for it, then it is sealed from all sides with the skin, and it is probed until nothing of its roots remains and the blood flows out, and do not cut it off quickly.
Rather, squeeze the position and remove all the thick blood with your hand or with what tools you have available, for if it obstructs during the work, there will be a great deal of bleeding from cutting an artery or vein until the blood stops flowing, then treat it with the rest of the treatment until it is removed.
Chapter 45.
In the treatment of boils.
We have already informed you in the division of types of suppuration and how to combine water, and the marks of each type and its treatment with drugs, which is only treated with iron, the zagziy boil alone, and does not approach the iron tablai boil nor the fleshy boil.
If it is a fracture, and if you have treated this type of bone fracture with medication and it did not heal, then look, for if the cause is that the fracture has become weakened or if there is another disease present besides the fracture, such as.
If it is a cough or diarrhea and the like, then you should not treat it with iron, for it is harmful. If you see that the cause is not another disease besides the fracture alone, and if the patient is neither a child nor an elderly person, then the course of action is to make the patient stand between your hands. And a servant should be behind him, pressing his belly with his hands and pushing the water down towards the side of the pain, then you take a sharp instrument of this shape:.
with two flat sides and a long, pointed tip like a lancet, but with a slight amount of curvature so that it does not pierce the intestines during use and cause harm. Then look to see if the fracture is coming from the side of the intestines.
It is recommended to make a cut from the ribs downwards, about three fingers' width above the pain, if the fracture is coming from a previous liver disease, then your cut should be on the right side of the ribs, about three fingers' width. If it is coming from a previous kidney disease, then make the cut on the left side of the ribs, about three fingers' width.
It is also important that the cut should not be on the side where the patient wishes to lie, lest the fold of skin fold over that weak spot, then use the skinning knife to cut all the skin, then insert the tool into that cut and lift your hand.
Between the skin and the sinew, as if you are scraping it, and the amount you scrape is the size of a thorn or similar, then cut the sinew until the scraped area reaches an empty spot, which is the water spot, then extract it and insert the tool with this shape into the cut.
It is similar to a tube made of fine copper, silver, or porcelain, which is smooth and polished, with a small hole at the bottom and three holes on the sides, two from one side and one from the other, as you see.
He may place its tip on a flat surface, like the shape of a pen, in this manner.
At the top of its tip, there is a ring. If the tool reaches the water, he should let it fall from his hand onto the tool, so that it splashes some water in an average amount at that time, because if you splash more than necessary, it may cause the patient to die due to animalistic instincts.
He exposes a vein that is close to causing death, but he should exert himself to the extent of his strength and what is indicated by the patient's appearance, such as the force of his pulse and the goodness of his complexion, then the instrument is removed and the water is stopped, and this is because it is retained for a certain time.
Because of the skin that holds the puncture on the vein that you advised to be made on that method, then the instrument is used again on another day if the patient seems likely for that.
Also, you should also remove a small amount of water each day while you are on his back and stop the bleeding until only a small amount of water remains, if the patient seems weak and you left a large amount of water, then treat him by burying him in hot sand.
And excessive sweating in the bath and sun, and patience with thirst and treat him with dry medicines until he is cured, and feed him on the stomach, liver and spleen after removing the water as you mentioned earlier.
Chapter 50.
In the treatment of children who are born with uncircumcised penises or whose circumcision is narrow or in the wrong place.
Some boys may be born without a foreskin from the penis and the surrounding skin, and it is advisable to make an incision on the penis from the time of birth.
With a very sharp knife, cut along this line.
Then, insert a thin, fine silver wire into the incision and tie it securely for three or four days. When he wishes to urinate, uncover it and then cover it again. If the silver is not used, the urine may leak and cause closure of the incision.
As for those with a narrow incision, it should be treated with silver for a long time until it widens. Those with an incision in the wrong place, such as those born with the incision at the end of the penis, cannot urinate forward.
Until he can raise the penis with his hand to the top and not be born with it, as it is a serious problem if the urine cannot reach the urethra due to instability. The solution is for him to lie on his back.
Then, extend the foreskin with your left hand to a great length and clean the head of the penis with a comb or a sharp knife like a large quill, or as if you are carving something so that the incision is in the middle, like a furrow.
When performing your surgery, if there is excessive bleeding, treat it with what cuts the blood and heals the wound until it is clean.
The sixty-fifth chapter.
In the breast that appears in the pus, the ulcer, and the blackness, and the corruption, and the contact of the pus with the ulcer.
This breast often appears in the suppuration and it is a sign of fever, and it can be either dirty or clean, so if it is not dirty, it should be attached to a fine silk thread.
Then cut it until it is completely clean, then apply a cotton soaked in the Egyptian mummy on it, then treat it with the Nkhil mummy after that until it is clean. And if the breast is dirty and has a bad smell, it should be treated with the Kayy after cutting and stretching it.
If the breast is in the suppuration and has not been cleaned, and some of the breasts are inside the suppuration and some outside, it is recommended to remove the breast inside first until it melts, then treat it from outside.
Because if you treat them together, the suppuration may not be drained, and it can also appear in women and in the suppuration blackness and corruption, so it is recommended to remove all that has turned black and think that it will corrupt or has already corrupted.
Then, apply honey on it after that, with powdered pomegranate peel that is pounded and sifted, and carnelian, then treat him with all the treatments until he is purified. If there is an opening of blood flow, use the Kiyah with a halalya cloth on this figure:.
The Kiyah is beneficial for both conditions, meaning blood flow and the wound if it has rotted, but if the cloth has eaten away and its thread has disappeared in a certain time, it is necessary to insert an iron pipe into the urethra.
This only happens in those whose cloth was correct and he was not ordered to change it, and if the wound or tumor was previously exposed, it is necessary to scrape it with a sharp knife until the thread dissolves and the cloth is removed from all sides.
If it is difficult to distinguish it from the inspection, it is necessary to scrape a little from the cloth and the wrapper, because the wrapper is thin so that it may have been pierced for its thinness, then separate between the wrapper and the cloth with a fine silk thread that has been boiled in cold water so that it does not stick together.
Then he treats with a drink that causes the wound to soften until it dissolves.
Chapter 75.
In the purification of boys and the treatment of what is exposed to them of sins.
The circumcision is not something other than the separation of the foreskin like other surgeries, except that when we do it with our will and use it in boys especially, it is necessary to draw the best work on it.
The easiest way to safety, I say that the earliest did not mention circumcision in anything of their books because it was not used in their rituals, but rather it is what we have acquired.
By experiment, and that I found the majority of craftsmen and circumcisers using purification with Musa (Moses) and the probe, and using the clamp and the needle and cutting with a sharp instrument, I have tried all these ways.
I did not find better than purification with the probe and clamping with the needle because circumcision with Musa (Moses) often caused the skin to peel off because the skin of the glans is doubled, so if you cut the upper layer, the lower layer remains.
So he is forced to cut again and it causes pain, and purification with the clamp does not match cutting the tip of the prepuce because it may have entered its hole, and as for purification with a sharp instrument, sometimes the skin was torn and your work spoiled or the boy's skin was short by nature.
The text reads: "Often, such cases do not require purification, and I have seen this to be true. As for the purification by scraping with a knife and tying with a thread, experience has shown me its benefit because the incision from above is like the incision from below.
The text reads: "When you scrape with a knife, matching the incisions, cutting on one measurement and in one time, it will result in the thread being almost like a wall for the skin of the eyelid from all sides, without any mistake of the thread's end. The work then begins by imagining the child.
The text reads: "Especially if he understands a little that you only tie the thread in his eyelid and bring him back on another day, then delight and please him with all possible ways that his mind accepts, then stop him between your hands, raised.
The text reads: "He should not be sitting, and hide the knife in your pocket or under your foot, so that the child's eyelid does not fall on it or on any of the machines, then insert your hand into his eyelid and blow on the skin and push it up until the eyelid comes out.
The text reads: "Then clean him from what gathers in it, then tie the taught position with a double thread, then tie below it a little second tie, then hold your thumb and the lower position of the tie firmly and cut between the ties. Then lift the skin quickly and extract the head of the abscess, then leave a little blood to flow as it is better and less likely to cause the abscess to recur. Then cleanse it with a moist cloth, and sprinkle some burnt yarrow powder on it, for it is the best that I have tried or heard of. It is also beneficial.
Then lift the skin quickly and extract the head of the abscess, then leave a little blood to flow as it is better and less likely to cause the abscess to recur. Then cleanse it with a moist cloth, and sprinkle some burnt yarrow powder on it, for it is the best that I have tried or heard of. It is also beneficial. Then apply a poultice of a boiled egg mixed with the juice of red rose petals and olive oil on top of it, and leave it on for another day, then treat it with all other remedies until it is fully healed.
This is the image of the lancet that is suitable for puncturing:
The ideal lancet should be sharp and straight, with a smooth groove for the needle, and the length of the grooves should be equal to the length of the handles. However, if the lancet is used for puncturing, it may pierce through the skin entirely or partially during cutting. In such cases, it is recommended to extend it with your finger before making the incision to prevent pain.
Cut it horizontally, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, use a pair of forceps to grasp it and cut it. If three days have passed and the pus under the abscess remains inflamed and hard, leave it until the heat of the infection subsides and then lance it gently.
Cut it according to what is available to you, and preserve from the head of the tumor as much as possible, for if something is cut from the head of the tumor, it will not harm, so treat it with the ointments that we have described in the article on ointments.
And if some skin is cut above the limit and becomes thin, it will not harm much either, so treat it with what we have mentioned until it heals.
Chapter Eighty-Five.
In the treatment of suppressed urine in the bladder.
Suppressed urine in the bladder is due to a blockage from scab, clotted blood, or pus, or bloody matter and so on, so if it is treated with what we have mentioned in the chapter on treatment, the cure will be established.
And if urine did not come out and you saw that its previous blockage was due to scab, which had harmed the neck of the bladder, then it is appropriate for him to lie on his back with his legs extended, then he should sit on his buttocks and bend his knees, and extend his belly towards his back, and hold himself as much as possible.
Then the neck of the bladder is forced to push the scab backwards, so that urine comes out. If it does not come out as we have mentioned and the situation becomes severe for the patient, then it is appropriate to use a device called a catheter, which looks like this:
The instrument is made of silver and is smooth, polished like a bird's quill in softness, with a length of about one and a half inches. It has a fine thread at its tip, and its face is designed to grasp the pus with a doubled thread and tie it firmly with silk or cotton.
The thread's tip is inserted into the abscess and tilted with a probe if something from silk is needed to plug the pipe like a stopper, then the abscess is anointed with oil or butter or egg white, and the patient sits on a chair.
Then, the thread is moistened and anointed with warm oil or butter and water, then it is inserted into the incision gently until it reaches the bottom of the incision, then the incision is pulled upwards towards the back side, and finally, the thread is pushed inside.
Until the incision is fully pulled upwards, then the thread is pushed inside until it is close to the rectum, and the patient feels the urge to defecate, indicating that the cavity is empty.
However, this procedure is only done on this occasion because the passage through which the pus flows has narrowed, then the thread is extended with silk gently but firmly, as the pus follows the silk, then it is extracted and the pus is expelled, and the abscess is repeated.
It is essential that you do not perform this until the urethra is completely emptied, and then the patient will find relief.
Chapter Ninety-Eight.
How to inject the urethra with a syringe.
The tools that are suitable for this are made of silver or horn with a long tube on the end, which is used to squirt water and medicine through it. This is called a syringe, and here is its image:
It is made of silver or horn with a long tube on the end, which is shaped like a millet seed, except for one end, which is fitted with three holes, two from one side and one from the other, as you see.
The hollow place where the piston is located should be filled to the extent that it does not allow any more, even if it absorbs some moisture. If it is pulled back, it will draw in, and if it is pushed forward, it will expel the oil as in the case of the syringe used in naval battles.
If you want to inject moisture into the urethra, insert the tip of the syringe into the moisture and pull back the piston to the top. The moisture will be drawn into the syringe's hollow place, then insert its tip into the urethra as described in the previous chapter, and then push the moisture out with the piston.
Indeed, that moisture reaches the urethra on its own accord, until the patient feels it, and this is also a beautiful image of a needle that inoculates the urethra.
It is made of silver or spade, its head is small and resembles a small pickaxe, below which there is a hole in which the suture is placed, then it takes the urethra and places the moisture that you want to inoculate into the urethra, then it ties them together firmly with a double thread.
Then that moisture is slightly heated on the fire, then the tip of the needle is inserted into the urethra, then your hand is pressed firmly on the urethra with the moisture, until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the urethra.
If you do not have a urethra, take a piece of linen and make it into a circle, pierce it from all its corners, then insert a strong thread through those holes as the thread winds around, then gather the circle as the group gathers after placing in it whatever moisture, powders, or water you want.
Then tie it to the machine and make it as you made the urethra from your hand, until the moisture reaches the urethra.
The Sixtieth Chapter
In Extracting the Tooth
We have previously mentioned in the section on division the types of toothache and their treatment with medicines, and we have differentiated between toothache that occurs in the jaw and toothache that occurs in the gums, and all their signs, and we have mentioned the type of toothache that requires work with the hand and the saw.
This is particularly the toothache that occurs in the gums, especially that which erupts during the mastication process, and I describe it with a detailed and concise explanation.
I say that toothache in the gums is more common among young boys, and one of its signs is that urine comes out of the urethra like water in its flow.
And it appears in him with gravel, and causes pain in the groin, and disturbs him greatly, and often it spreads and appears with it in many of them, and it is easy for boys to be free from it until they reach fourteen years old, and it is difficult for the elderly, and as for young men, it is moderate in degree.
And those who have larger teeth have an easier treatment, and the smaller ones are the opposite of that, so if we come to the treatment, it is first necessary to inject the vein with a dose that removes all the debris in its cavity, for it may prevent the appearance of toothache when examining.
Then, the patient is taken by his legs and raised upwards until the scrotum is positioned over the neck of the penis or repeatedly lifted from a higher position. Then, he is placed between your hands, inclined, with his hands under his buttocks. Then, examine him.
Then, examine him from outside. If he feels the scrotum in the space, immediately apply pressure to it from your watch if it does not fall under your touch, then it is necessary to wipe the little finger of your left hand with oil if the patient is a boy or the middle finger.
If he is a young boy, insert it into his rectum and search for the scrotum until it falls under your finger, then slightly lift it to the neck of the penis, then grasp it with your finger and push it outwards towards the desired place.
And order a servant to scrape the penis with his hand and order another servant to extend his right hand above and his left hand to extend the skin under the testicles away from the place where the incision will be made, then take the sharp instrument which is its image:
And incise between the rectum and the testicles not in the middle but to the side of the left ureter, and the incision will be on the same scrotum and your finger in the rectum, and you press it outwards until it is wide outside and narrow inside to the extent that the scrotum can come out from it.
The finger in the cavity at the angle of the jaw, if pressed, will come out without difficulty, but know that there may be angles and letters in the cavity that make it difficult for it to come out.
Among them are those that resemble the bone of a ram and are straightened, so it is easier for them to come out, but if they have angles and letters, they will increase the difficulty in the angle a little. If they do not come out like this, it is advisable to press on them with a sharp pointed instrument like a scalpel.
To fix the bone in the cavity, do not let it slip away from it, and if you cannot do so, insert a delicate instrument with a sharp point underneath it. If you cannot do so, slightly widen the angle. If something blocks you, cut it with a scalpel.
If there are more than one, first push the largest one to the mouth of the anus, then widen it, then push the smaller ones afterwards and do the same if there are more than two. If it is very large, it is not advisable to widen it greatly because it exposes the anal opening to two things.
Either he dies or it causes continuous dribbling of urine because the position of the bone does not allow it to come out, but try to push it until it comes out or break it with your fingers until it comes out completely.
If you have finished your work, treat the wound with kandur, patience, and silence, tighten it, and apply a poultain made of oil and drink or oil and red wine and cold water to cool the hot tumor. Then, let the patient lie on his back and do not bind the bandage until the third day.
If the bandage has become loose, wash the area with plenty of water and oil, then treat it with the marham of Nakhl and the marham of Basilicum until it is clean. If there is a hot, thick, yellow, or similar discharge in the wound, like freezing blood in the bladder and obstructing urine, which is known by the exit of blood with urine.
Insert your finger into the wound and remove that blood, as it can cause damage to the bladder and its infection. Then, wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and apply each type of remedy according to its suitability until it is clean.
In all cases of treatment, it is necessary to support the buttocks and bring them together to stabilize the medications applied to the wound, as if the fistula is small and has become in the urethra and inflamed in it and obstructed urine from exiting, then treat it with what I mentioned before it becomes hardened.
Often, this treatment has spared the need for incision as I have tried it and found that taking a piece of iron from folded metal and shaping it thus:
A triangular piece of hard, sharp iron is inserted into the urethra, then a thread is tied to the glans to prevent it from returning to the bladder. Then, the iron piece is inserted into the urethra with gentle pressure until it reaches the same spot.
Then, you rotate the iron piece gently in the same spot until it pierces through from the other side. As soon as the urine comes out, place your hand on the remaining part of the urethra outside the glans, as it will swell and the urine will come out along with it, thus clearing the urethra.
If it is not possible for you to perform this treatment, tie a thread under the urethra and another thread above it, then cut through the urethra in the same spot between the two threads, and extract it.
Then, you remove the sutures and clean the clotted blood that has accumulated in the wound. It is only necessary to tie a thread under the urethra to prevent it from returning to the bladder and tying another one from above so that when the thread is removed after the urethra is extracted, the skin returns to its place and covers the wound.
Therefore, if you tie the top thread, it is necessary for you to lift the skin above so that it may return to its place when you are free and cover the wound as we have said.
Chapter six.
In the extraction of the bone for women.
Little does the bone grow in women, so if one of them has a bone, it is difficult to treat her and many faces refuse because either she was a virgin or you cannot find a woman who allows herself to the doctor.
If she is a virgin or from those with forbidden relationships, the third is that you cannot find a woman who improves this craft and especially the work by hand, and the fourth is that the position of the cut on the bone in women is far from the position of the bone underneath, so you need a deep cut.
And in that case, there is a risk, so if necessity calls for it, then a skilled female doctor should be taken, and little does she exist, then ask a pure, trustworthy male doctor or prepare a woman who is suitable and skilled in this matter or a woman who indicates in this craft.
Prepare her and order her to do all that you order her to do in this matter first, that is to examine if the woman is a virgin, then it is necessary for her to insert her finger into her vagina and examine the bone if she finds it and presses it under her finger.
When she commands the cutting of it, if she is not a virgin and has a thick hymen, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the vaginal opening and examine the hymen after placing her left hand on the clitoris and gently rubbing it.
If she finds it, it is appropriate to gradually pull it out from the mouth of the vagina downwards until she reaches its base at the root of the buttocks, then cut it off in front of her at the midpoint of the vaginal opening from whichever side it extends and feels the hymen in that direction.
Her finger should not leave the hymen, pressing it down, and initially the cut should be small, then insert the spoon into that small cut if she feels the hymen, increase the cut to the extent of what she knows the hymen can extend from, and know that there are many types of hymens.
Among them are small and large, smooth and rough, long and fimbriated, and those with a pubic hair. Know their types so that you can determine what you want, for if blood prevails, smear the area with a moistened cotton swab and hold it until the blood stops flowing, then return to your work.
Until the bone is fully exposed, and you prepare for yourself from among the instruments mentioned in the extraction of bones for men to assist you in your work, if bleeding occurs and you know that the blood pulse comes from a severed vessel, apply pressure to the wound.
Tighten the bandage firmly and leave it, do not repeat it, and leave the bone, do not extract it, for perhaps the wound may have killed the patient. Then treat the wound. If the inflammation subsides after days and the wound heals, then return to your work until the bone is fully exposed.
Chapter 2 and Chapter 6.
On the incision of the soft parts.
The soft parts are merely a collection of moisture in the white firmness that is under the skin of the glans, which is called the prepuce, and it may have a special membrane that prepares it naturally in one direction from the glans.
So that he may think it is another egg and it is between the skin of the glans and the white firmness that we mentioned, and this is only in rare cases. This soft part is produced from weakness that exposes it to females, so they are attached to it and it may be exposed to injury.
This moisture has many colors, sometimes it is white and sometimes red, sometimes black and sometimes yellow, and it is most often recognized by its signs.
Where the water meets, if it is in white foam as we mentioned earlier, then the tumor is even and short like the shape of an egg, and the defect does not appear because the moisture surrounds it from all sides.
And if the moisture is in a thin membrane, then the tumor is even on one side like an egg white.
And for this reason, people think it is another egg white, and if the moisture is between the skin of the defect and the white foam, then it is felt under the touch, but if you want to know the color of the moisture, press the tumor with the square spatula that we showed its picture, whatever comes out of the imprint is judged by what is inside.
And if we come to the treatment with iron, it is appropriate to command the patient to lie on his back if possible and then he lies on his stomach on something slightly high and place a lot of cushions under him, then you sit on his left side.
The servant is commanded to sit on the patient's right side, extending his foreskin towards one of the sides of the scrotum and towards the direction of the navel. Then, a wide blister is taken and the scrotum is cut from the middle to the length, close to the anus.
The cut should be made in a straight line parallel to the line that divides the scrotum into two parts until it reaches the white, swollen area of the epididymis. It is then scraped and protected from being cut further. Your scraping should be done from the side that adheres to the testicle, as much as possible without overdoing it.
Then, the swollen area is filled with warm water and all the water is drained out. Then, spread open the cut using forceps and extend the swollen area above without touching the scrotum. Cut the swollen area as much as possible, either in one piece or in pieces.
Especially if the testicle is not completely scraped, you must ensure that all the water does not return. If the egg emerges from its skin during your work, and once you have finished cutting the swollen area, push it back and then sew up the sides of the scrotum using sutures.
Then he treats the rest of surgical procedures until he is completely cured. If the egg has rotten due to another disease, it is necessary to suture the veins in the affected area to prevent bleeding, then cut the incision from the affected area and remove the egg, then treat him as mentioned earlier.
If the water is collected in both sides together, know that it is two and split the other side as you did in the first one, whether it is balanced or not, then do one work, then wipe the blood.
And he inserts into the incisions cotton that has been soaked in oil or in the fat of a rose, and it comes out from another cotton that has been soaked in water and oil and smeared on the incisions and the belly and places it above a sewn opening and it is the benefits. And he sutures it from above with a stitch that is six-sided on this figure:
Then two incisions are taken and folded and filled with the soaked cotton on this example and the sides that are attached to it from cotton or wet cotton are gathered in a silk bandage and one of the sides is attached to the back.
And the second one is attached to the waist and the sides on the buttocks from below and the remaining sides on the hips and all the thread is gathered in a silk bandage, and these stitches can also be made with silk instead of cutting with iron.
Take a sharp, delicate scalpel and incise the skin of the scrotum. Continue until the white, thick sac containing the testicles is exposed.
It resembles the Greek eye, then pull that sac and continue until all moisture is exposed. Extend the sac with scissors and scrape it with the scalpel, cutting off the entire inner layer until all of it is removed and save the whites, do not let them touch the fire.
Know that this work is safer and better than incising the skin, if something obstructs you in the incision or at the edge of the skin and causes heat, bleeding, or anything else, then treat it as appropriate for the condition previously mentioned.
If the patient is anxious and does not tolerate this work due to its pain, then use the probe as previously described if it is available.
The bed should be moist, so the patient should sit on a high chair and place the tumor underneath with a wide-mouthed vessel. Place a cloth over the wound and bandage it.
Leave him to suck the remaining water, then treat him until the wound is cleansed. If the exit of water is delayed due to his sucking, it is only because the white membrane obstructs the wound's mouth, preventing the exit of water.
Then, it is necessary to insert a probe or the tool that extracts the wound's water, which has been shown its image or increase slightly in opening the wound.
And know that the water may return and gather after six months or near it, so if it gathers, suck on the same method and expel the impurities for several days.
Chapter 36.
In the treatment of soft tissue injuries and their healing.
Know that the treatment of these soft tissues is one of the most dangerous, leading to death in many cases. Therefore, they are left alone and their safety is prioritized. I will remember the work done on them and the types of tumors.
I say that many tumors have occurred in bodies composed of females, and this is due to various reasons, either from a habitual cause that is implanted in females or from a blow, and the color of the tumor is like the body's color and there is no water for it.
The tumor is soft and sometimes it may be calcified, having a color like mud and no feeling to it. It could also be due to the complication of veins and their inflation, as mentioned before, or from the inflation of arteries. If it is due to the inflation of veins, it can be recognized by the disappearance of the tumor.
If you press it with your fingers and it should not be exposed to the air, and as for the one that is due to the inflation of arteries, it does not disappear when pressed with the fingers, and this type may cause damage to itself and other muscles.
And it is that you pierce the skin of the glans, then extend the white matter above and extract it from the white veins and remove the adhesions from the veins and tie the veins and cut the adhesions after having removed them from all sides of the white matter, if the white matter has been infected with those muscles.
And it is necessary to extract the white matter and cut it, and if there is adhesion between some of the veins or in what is between the veins, it is necessary to remove all that adhesion and cut it evenly.
If the infected muscle is in the position of adhesion that is behind, it is necessary to cut all of it and extract the white matter as we said, then if you have finished your work, wash the wound with soaked sawdust in rose water and drink, then treat it with other treatments until it becomes clean.
Chapter 4 and 60.
In the treatment of fractures accompanied by dislocation.
Dislocation is a tumor that has melted some of the bones, resembling a hook, and causes stiffness in the limbs, hindering movement, exercise, and walking. In treating this malady, the method mentioned earlier is similar.
However, we should mention the treatment as done by the pioneers, so I say that it is appropriate to make the affected person sit on a high chair, then push the hook of the dislocation downwards, and then hold the skin of the penis with your fingers and the vessels that are close to the penis.
And a servant other than you holds it and stretches it greatly, then cuts it widely with a wide, sharp knife along the vessels until the vessels are exposed, then scrapes from all sides as mentioned in the chapter on arteries in the book of anatomy, then inserts a needle into it with a double-threaded thread.
Then tie it at the first place that the dislocation appeared and also at the last place, then cut it in the middle horizontally along the length of the body and extract what gathered in it of corrupted fluids.
Then, the hernia is treated with the same methods used in other surgeries that you wish to perform. A period of time is left for the intestines to drop out, so there is no harm in that. If all the intestines are exposed, it is recommended to remove one of the females along with the intestines to prevent the egg from being harmed. Before cutting the intestines, they rot and are of no use, so there is no benefit in that.
Chapter five and six.
In the treatment of uterine hernias.
The occurrence of these hernias happens from a gap that is exposed in the abdominal wall, near the navel, and the uterus is pushed into one of the females through that opening.
This gap can be from a tear in the abdominal wall or an extension of it, and both of these types occur due to many reasons such as a blow, a jolt, a scream, or lifting something heavy, etc. Its sign, if it is from the extension of the abdominal wall, is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time.
It does not occur suddenly and the tumor is level with the depth before the abdominal wall tears, and its sign, if it is from a tear in the abdominal wall, is that it occurs at first with a great painful jolt, and the tumor appears differently under the skin nearby.
And that is by the emergence of the meatus and its exit from the urethra, and it may emerge with the meatus and the glans, and this operation is called 'meatotomy' and 'glansectomy', and it may occur with an ejaculation. And it may emerge with the zibla and remain there, in which case it is called 'ziblectomy' and 'halel'.
Because it causes severe pain and shaking, especially if it occurs during intercourse, and the treatment of these types of injury with iron is dangerous, so one should be cautious about falling into it. The method of operation is to order the patient to push the meatus back inside his urethra if it comes out for return.
Then he lies on his back between your hands and raises his legs, then extends the skin that follows the glans to above and cuts the entire skin of the penis in length, then inserts spatulas into the opening of the wound according to the amount needed to open the wound with them.
The wound should be of a size that can come out of it, then scrape the glans under the skin of the penis until the white hard glans is exposed from all sides, then insert your little finger into what follows the egg.
In the white laceration between the egg white and the second laceration, from which the connection is released from behind the egg white, then move your right hand into the laceration of the yolk and simultaneously extend the white laceration above with your left hand and lift the egg white with the white laceration to the side.
The servant is commanded to pour the egg white over and you release the complete connection from behind, then examine with your finger to ensure there is nothing of the yolk stuck in the hard white laceration. If you find something, push it down to the abdomen below.
Then take a needle in it, a thick thread that has been twisted from ten threads and insert it at the end of the white laceration under the yolk that follows the side, then cut the ends of the thread's strands until there are four threads. Then tie some of them together in a tight knot and tie the white laceration, which we said is under the yolk, a very tight knot from both sides, then also tie the ends of the thread in a tight knot so that nothing of the vessels that feed it can reach it. So that nothing of the hot inflammation and also tie a second knot outside the first knot, away from it less than two fingers, then from the white laceration under the yolk, take an amount equal to the size of a finger bone.
So that nothing of the hot inflammation and also tie a second knot outside the first knot, away from it less than two fingers, then from the white laceration under the yolk, take an amount equal to the size of a finger bone. Cut the rest of it (the tumor) on a sharp instrument and extract it along with the egg, then cut below the skin of the scrotum to make a channel through which blood and pus can flow as described earlier, then use moistened cotton soaked in oil and place it in the wound, and use the bandage as described.
The white cotton (bandage) that we mentioned after cutting it should be handled with care to avoid bleeding, and the bandage should not be removed until it falls off on its own; if it takes a long time to fall off, it should be soaked in warm water and wrung out to remove any discharge.
Then treat the wound with all the treatments for surgical wounds until it heals.
Chapter Sixteen.
In these wind-related diseases, none of the early scholars suggested using iron for their treatment, and we mentioned in the treatise on the diseases treated with dalia that after cutting into the veins, they should be tied off below with a fine thread.
Then cut into the middle and treat the tumor with whatever opens it until the veins fall out, and treat the wound as mentioned earlier until it heals.
Chapter Seventeen.
In the incision that is made in the artery.
The incision in the artery may be as we have said, at the site and does not leak any blood into the testicles, and if it does leak, it is minor and returns every time.
However, if the time is prolonged, the wound in the artery becomes so deep that the semen leaks into the urethra and is expelled from the extension of the wound in the artery as we have said. And this is because the wound extends, then relaxes, and returns to its original position, and treatment with the ointment as you have described.
And it may be treated with iron in this manner, that the patient lies on his back between your hands, then make a deep incision along the wound, about three fingers wide, then sew up the wounds under the skin.
Until the white wound that follows is exposed, then take a piece of cloth and place it on the site of the previous wound and insert it into the depth of the abdomen, then sew the two ends of the cloth together at one end of the cloth from the wound.
Then pull the end of the cloth and do not cut the remaining wound, and do not touch the semen or anything else as you have taught me in the treatment of urethral strictures, then treat it with wound healing remedies.
If the sutures are broken, clean them and dress the wound until it heals. For the cicatrix will contract and there will be no excessive scarring.
The best in this matter is that which is closest to safety.
Chapter Eight and Sixty.
In the relaxation of the foreskin.
Often, the foreskin relaxes in some people without relaxing the muscles inside it, which spoils its appearance. Therefore, if someone wishes to treat it, they should lie on their stomach.
Then cut all the skin that has relaxed on the thick skin, and gather the lips together. If you wish, first suture the edge of the relaxed skin with three or four stitches, and then cut between the stitches.
Then treat it with the treatment of all surgeries until it heals and the sutures fall out.
Chapter Nine and Sixty.
In circumcision.
Circumcision is forbidden in our religion.
Therefore, it was appropriate for me not to mention circumcision in this book, but I mentioned it for two reasons: first, so that if asked about it, the physician would know how to treat it; and second, because we often need to circumcise some animals for our benefits.
For the camel, the donkey, the cat, and similar animals, I say that castration is done by either pressing or cutting, depending on the method used. If done by pressing, we place the animal in hot water until it becomes relaxed and limp, then we proceed with the operation.
Then, press it with your hand until it is soft and does not feel hard when touched. If castration is done by cutting, it is recommended to hold the animal and shave the scrotum with your left hand, then tie the sutures and cut each testicle into one piece.
When the testicles emerge, cut them after shaving and do not leave any sutures on them except for the fine suture used on vessels, as this method of castration is better than pressing.
Because pressing may leave some remains of the female, the animal may become infertile, then treat the wound until it heals.
Chapter seventy.
In the treatment of impotence.
Impotence in men can occur in two ways, either it appears in the area below or in the scrotum between the female reproductive organs, resembling a female genitalia with hair and may discharge urine from the scrotum.
In women, there is one type and it is located above the pubic bone like the fingers of a man, extending outwards from one of them like a penis, and the two others are like women, and treatment for the three types.
The two types of men and the one type of women should have those excessive flesh cut off until their effects are removed, then treat them with the treatment of all surgeries until they heal, and as for the second type of men who urinate from which is in the skin of the penis, there is no work or benefit from it.
Chapter 70.
In the amputation of the nipple and flesh from the women's pubic area.
The nipple may have grown too much in the natural way until it becomes flat and disfigured, and in some women it may grow so much that it spreads like men and becomes part of the penis.
It is recommended to hold the nipple with your hand or a forceps and cut it off, do not push too hard in the cutting especially in the depth of the origin so that bleeding does not occur.
Then treat it with the treatment of surgeries until it heals, and as for the flesh that grows is flesh that grows in the womb until it fills it.
Perhaps he went out to the example of the sin. Therefore, some of the early physicians named this disease the sin disease and it is appropriate to cut it off as one would cut a tumor, and treat it until it is purified.
The second chapter of seventy.
In the treatment of hernia.
Hernia is when the vagina is not intact or the opening is small and it can be either natural, born with it, or acquired, which occurs due to a reason that has already happened, and it can be from excessive tissue of the ligament.
Or thin or thick and it can be in the depth of the uterus or its sides, or above or below, and it prevents intercourse and pregnancy and childbirth, and sometimes preventing menstruation, and knowing this is by examination of the vagina.
If the obstruction is visible and near, if it is not visible, examine it with your fingers or a probe. If the obstruction is from thin tissue and is near the sinuses, then first break it and make a shape of the benefit on the sinuses, then place both thumbs from both hands together.
And the woman on her back, spread her legs, then extend the sinuses with force until the thin tissue breaks and the obstruction opens, then take some cotton and dip it in oil and place it on the place, and every day the woman should gather to prevent the place from sticking again.
If the wound is thick and dense, it is appropriate to dilate it with a wide-bladed scalpel resembling a leaf of ashwood. If the plug is made from meat that has been boiled, it should be stuck to the wound using snanir (a type of adhesive) and cut off, so that you have medicines to stop bleeding without causing further damage, such as cauterizing agents like kaqaia, shiyyan, and laban mixed with egg white.
Then, a wide-bore copper tube is used to prevent the wound from closing too quickly, it is held for several days and then treated with other treatments of indwal (a type of medicine) until it heals, and sometimes in the placenta, another piece of meat may be found, which should be cut according to this method.
If it is not a tumor of cancerous nature, then the cancerous tumor that exists in the placenta should not be exposed to iron.
Chapter 37
In the treatment of boils, abscesses, and red pustules that appear in women's genitals.
As for boils, they are a swelling of the pores of the skin until blood flows from them frequently. If boils are left untreated, they become abscesses, and their types, signs, and characteristics have been mentioned in the section on incisions.
What is amenable to treatment and what is not, I say that the belly (umbilicus) and the navels, if they are deep in the uterus and have not emerged for inspection, do not allow treatment with iron, but if they were in the mouth of the uterus where inspection can reach them, then these are the ones that can be treated.
It is appropriate that the woman should enter a cold house, then extend the navels with a needle or a sharp needle and cut them from their roots, then apply a cautery one of the blood-stopping agents at the time of bleeding.
Like the cabbage, the shallot, and the curdled milk, etc., then raise her legs against the wall for an hour, then immerse her in cold water. If bleeding continues, place her in a steam bath of sage, rue, and other herbs, then take wheat flour and mix it with honey and vinegar.
Spread it on her back if the bleeding stops, otherwise use the hard clay and the cushions without condition, then take a cloth and dip it in the essence of tartrate or the essence of the tongue of the camel or the essence of the Allium sativum mixed with vinegar wine and apply the position.
If the tumor has settled, treat the affected area with the murrhine until it is cleansed, and as for the red lumps, they resemble the rough heads of the porcupine. It is appropriate to cut off what has emerged from them according to what was mentioned in the Thalathil, whether or not it is cleansed until it is cleansed.
Chapter 47.
In the tumor that appears in the uterus.
Many types of tumors may appear in the uterus, such as cancer, benign tumors, ulcers, polyps, fistulas, boils, ruptures, Thalathil, and hot tumors. All these diseases and their types and symptoms were mentioned in the classification.
It is appropriate to mention in this article the hot tumor that appears in the uterus if it is one of the tumors that accumulate, how its head should be scraped with iron, so if the pain of the tumor at the beginning is severe with fever and inflammation and heat.
If you saw it red, if it touches the skin do not rush to scrape it and treat it with what promotes maturation until when these symptoms have settled, then it is appropriate for the woman to sit on a chair with two seats and lean on her back.
The man brings together her legs to the side of her abdomen, making her buttocks separate, and her arms are placed under her knees, then they are tied together with a bandage that fits well.
Therefore, the woman sits on the left side and uses the tool that opens the mouth of the uterus, which is shown later, and if you want to use this tool, it is necessary to measure the depth of the woman's womb so that what enters from the tool does not exceed the depth of the uterus.
If the tool is deeper than the depth, it is necessary to place a pad on the opening of the womb to prevent the entire tool from entering the uterus, and it is necessary that the probe in the tool comes from the top side.
And you hold the tool and the servant operates the probe until the mouth of the womb is opened, if the membrane appears and touches with the hand and it is soft and thin, it is necessary to cut it at the head with a wide-bladed scissors, if the entire period has passed.
It should be a thin silk thread soaked in rose oil or green oil with some borax, the thread should come out from the cut and outside of the womb and outside of the cervix, and it should be a clean cotton cloth soaked in boiled flour water.
Then treat after two days with the mercurous which is suitable for that until it purifies.
The wound and the womb may be washed by injecting water and honey, then with boiling water in which sorrel or zaranj has been soaked, then return to the mercurius, if the discharge is inside the womb.
It is preferable to avoid treating him with iron, but treat him as mentioned in the division.
The fifth and seventy chapter.
In teaching the midwives how to treat live fetuses that have come out in a shape other than natural.
The midwife should first know the natural shape of childbirth, and its signs, such as when the woman is pushed downwards and longs to breathe and her breathing becomes easier on her.
And the fetus comes out quickly, know that this birth is in a natural shape and its coming out is on its head and the membranes with it or hanging from its navel, so if you see these signs, it is preferable to cut its belly so that the fetus comes out quickly.
If it comes out on its head, the membranes come out with it and clean it from that filth in a good way, and if not, this birth is not natural and impure because it may come out on its legs and its hands before its head and its legs.
The single or the individual man, or if he extends his hand and his head, or if he extends it twisted and like that from various forms of disgraceful actions, then it is necessary for the surgeon to be sharp in all these matters and to warn against negligence and mistakes.
And I explain all the forms of it and how to determine it and to stop at it, if the child comes out on his head the natural exit and the woman suffers from that and it is difficult for her to give birth and you see her strength has weakened, then make her sit on a chair and order women to control her.
And she should be given a warm poultice and wet cotton, then the surgeon inserts a small sharp knife between her fingers to cut or to cut it with her nails until the moisture in it comes out and scrape the woman's belly until the child comes out.
If it does not come out, it is necessary to inject the woman with a poultice of poppy seeds mixed with shiraj fat then order her after injection to vomit and wipe her mouth and nose, because the child comes out from its place, if the child's hand comes out first, then it is necessary to return them gently.
If you cannot reach the uterus, place the woman on a board and raise her legs above her head, then shake the board on the ground. The woman should hold onto something to prevent falling when the board is shaken. If the hands do not enter and the fetus dies, cut off her hands and extract the rest of the fetus.
Or tie her hands with rope and gently pull them to extract the fetus. If the fetus comes out on her legs, it is necessary to push it upwards then gradually turn the fetus until it is straightened, then grasp one of her legs and gently extend it a little.
If they come out to the buttocks, order her to squat and strike her with a stick. If it does not come out with that, gently pull the fetus little by little until it takes its natural shape, then it will easily come out at that time. If it still does not come out, do all of the above.
Take a piece of the skin of the stomach, the skin of the belly, lard, and a solution of camphor and strike all of them on the anvil well. Then apply it to the woman's genitals and under her belly, then make her sit in warm water until the placenta comes out completely.
If you find that it has become impacted below, make a suppository from a mixture of honey and salt, and let it dissolve in her mouth for an hour. Then place her on a chair, tilt her head back, close her mouth and nose, and gently massage her abdomen with a soft, warm cloth to help expel the fetus. The fetus will emerge from its position, and its exit will be through its legs and arms.
If it exits in this manner, gently insert your fingers a little ways into her vagina, then have the woman lie on her back with her legs extended and elevated, while you support her hands. Then gently massage her abdomen above with a soft, warm cloth. Then remove all the bedding under her legs until it is exposed. If the fetus does not emerge, grasp both of her legs firmly and move them vigorously. Then gently massage her lower abdomen above the pubic bone with a soft, warm cloth. When the fetus rises above, insert your hand and gently press and support it until it is completely expelled.
The woman should bear down until the fetus emerges, often with one of its hands extended. If she is unable to pull back her hand, have her sit up and walk if possible, or lie down if not.
She was laid on her back and her legs were shaken vigorously, then the clyster of the laxative mixture described earlier was administered to her. If she expelled it, she was made to sit on a chair, then the hand was dressed and the uterus was placed in its natural position, the woman was massaged and ordered to bear down until it is expelled.
The head of the fetus should be brought out gently by extending his arms and facing his face towards the mother's back, then the midwife should grasp the fetus's hand and turn it slightly, then place it gently on the mother's abdomen. Then apply the ointment and laxatives as described earlier.
Then she should be made to move a little, if she does so, then make her sit on the chair and order her to lean to the right side, then massage her and apply the candles as described earlier, then it will come out, the fetus comes out tilted to one side.
If it comes out into the vagina in this manner with the afterbirth, then the midwife should tear the membrane with her fingers until the moisture is released. If it sticks to the face and neck of the fetus, cut it from the umbilical cord to prevent choking and dying, then push the fetus back inside until it is in its natural position.
The woman should be dilated multiple times as it facilitates an easy delivery, such as twins or multiple births. Know that twins often give birth to three or four at a time, but this is rare and the fifth is an unnatural occurrence that does not usually survive.
They are surrounded by a membrane and if they are many, they separate into individual compartments with a barrier between each one of them. They can be delivered naturally and easily as a single fetus, or they can be delivered in a defective manner as described earlier.
If some of them are difficult to deliver and become abnormal as described earlier, then treat them as described. The midwife should be gentle, patient, and wise, and adapt to each situation with the available means to ensure a safe delivery.
It is mentioned that the number of fetuses in the womb can vary, ranging from one to ten or more. It is true that some women have delivered seven and others fifteen, all of them being conceived as twins.
Based on the wise estimate, all of this should be in the science of surgery since it might occur to him one day and face him with what is appropriate.
The sixty-seventh chapter.
In the extraction of a dead fetus.
If the dead fetus was treated as mentioned in the division of treatments and it did not come out, then the situation requires you to perform manual extraction. If the woman is strong and there is nothing wrong with her that you fear for from complications, she should lie on a bed on her back.
Her head should be slightly tilted downwards and her legs raised, with a servant holding her from both sides or tying her to the bed to prevent her body from being pulled away when pulling out the fetus.
Then, her mouth should be moistened with a mixture of honey, salt, and flour, and then the surgeon's hands should be anointed with this mixture and salt and honey, and then she should insert her hand into the uterus gently, and look for a place where the midwives can grab from the fetus, and the appropriate locations for that.
If the fetus is facing downwards, then the midwives should grab onto its eyes, ears, mouth, anus, or hair, or under its armpits, or under its ribs, or under its chin.
If it is a fall on his legs, it is in the ankles and the middle joints, and the smith should grasp with his right hand and direct its force between the fingers of his left hand, and insert his hand gently and guide the hammer to those places we mentioned.
Until it reaches an empty space, then insert another hammer or a third one if necessary for the attraction to be equal and not inclined towards one side. Then extend the stroke evenly and not just on stability, but move it to all sides.
To facilitate his exit as it is done by pressing at the top, and between that, the stroke should be rocked if it held in one direction, then the pad should be smeared with some fingers with oil and inserted from that side to manage what was held, if some skin came out, then move the hammers to other places.
She should raise it a little and do this until the fetus comes out completely, if one hand came out before the other and could not be returned due to its swelling, then it is necessary to wrap it with a cloth and pull it until all of it comes out, then cut it.
Either in the wrist or the elbow, and so on, it is necessary to do in the other hand and the legs, if the fetus head is large and there is pressure on its exit or there was water in its head, then it is necessary to insert a hooked needle between the fingers.
Translation: "And if the head is fractured, water or pus may escape, which can be stopped using the instrument called the mashadak, whose image is provided along with the images of other instruments in the following chapter.
Translation: "Similarly, if the fetus has a large head by nature, it is necessary to fracture the skull or crush it with the mashadak as we mentioned earlier, then the bones will come out with the curettes. If the head protrudes and becomes compressed during delivery, it should be fractured until the moisture in the chest is absorbed.
Translation: "Then the chest will join together at that time, so if the chest does not join together and does not come out, then cut it off as much as possible, especially if it is at the lower abdomen or has a tumor, it is necessary to remove it until the moisture comes out of it.
Translation: "If the fetus is on its legs, then its extraction is easy and its positioning towards the mouth of the womb is easy, but if it becomes compressed in the abdomen or chest, it is necessary to pull it out with a hook that has been wrapped around it and fracture the abdomen or chest until what is inside comes out.
Translation: "If all the parts have been extracted and the head has returned, then if the mouth of the womb is open, insert your left hand into the neck of the womb and grasp the head with it, then insert two forceps or forceps into it and grasp the head with them.
If a tumor has become attached to the palate and is hot and red in appearance, it is not advisable to forcefully remove it. Instead, one should use soft, moist substances, apply compresses, and immerse in cool water to soothe and soften it.
However, if the fetus is on one side, it should be gently moved if possible and the aforementioned live remedies for the fetus should be used. If this is not possible, then it should be cut away in pieces and removed. Nothing should be left inside the uterus. Once the treatment is complete, the same remedies should be used for treating hot, exposed tumors in the uterus.
If the bleeding is heavy, immerse in warm water and use all the remedies mentioned. I have seen a woman who had her fetus die inside her womb and then became pregnant again and had it die on top of the first one.
Then the second fetus also died and later a tumor appeared in her breast, it swelled until it burst, and she was diagnosed with mastitis. She was treated for a long time but the wound did not heal, so she applied strong-smelling herbs to it.
Then a bone came out, and after some time another one did. She was surprised because her abdomen had no bones in it. She realized that these were the bones of the dead fetus, so she examined the wound and removed many bones from the head of the fetus.
I have never ceased to follow this method until I extracted from it a large number of bones, and the woman was in the best of conditions, and she lived for a long time, and only now have I come with this rare case.
Because there is knowledge and help in what the physician attempts to do by hand in treatment.
Chapter 70.
It contains images of the tools needed for extracting the fetus.
Image of a forceps that opens by the mouth of the womb.
This forceps that is used in the books, whether it has two forceps at the ends of the wooden handles, except that this forceps should be gentler than the forceps and either made of ivory or of bamboo, and the width of each handle should be the size of two fingers.
And their shape is towards a finger and their length is half a span, and in the middle of the handles, two pieces of wood of the same kind have been inserted into them, so that their length is half a span or slightly less, and their width is towards two fingers or more, and these two pieces.
These are the ones that enter into the mouth of the womb to open it when you use the forceps, another image of a tool like this, gentler and softer.
The manufacturing of the kallab from the wood of the abnus or the baks, in the shape of a spoon, except that at its tip it has two tongues, each about an inch long and as thick as a finger, is made to facilitate opening the womb with it.
Then the woman sits on a bed with her legs spread apart, and the two tongues are inserted into the mouth of the womb while you hold the tip of the instrument between her buttocks. Then open your hand with the instrument as you would with a spoon, as much as you desire to open the womb. Until you make the cradle as desired, a shape like another mentioned by the ancients:
A shape of a pusher that pushes out the fetus:
A shape of a masher that mashes the head of the fetus:
It resembles a scissor with teeth at its tip, as you see, and it can be made straight like a spoon on this shape, with teeth like the teeth of a saw, which cuts with it and is useful:
A pusher shape also:
A saw shape:
This saw has a slight sharpness so that it does not break when pulling the fetus with it, a saw shape with two handles:
Two widespread images for umbilical cord cutting.
All these tools, the more their types increased and were prepared by the maker, the sooner he could do his work and the better they were valued by people, so do not disregard any of them as you might need it.
Chapter 87.
In the extraction of the placenta.
If the placenta remains after the expulsions, it is recommended that the midwife should hold herself and then massage it with a sponge and stretch your hand on its mouth and thighs; if it comes out by this method, otherwise take a spoon.
Make a hole in the cover and place the open fumigants for the uterus mouth like vodka, sulfur, saltpeter, pepper, cloves, cinnamon, and all these medicines or some of them and soak them in water and carry them to the fire then put a silver tube on the hole of the cover and the other end in the uterus mouth.
Hold it until the steam reaches the bottom of the uterus then massage as we said, if the placenta comes out quickly, but if it remains after this treatment and does not come out, order the midwife to dip her right hand in sherg or khamr al-khatami.
Then, insert it into the forehead and examine with it the placenta. If it touches it, grasp it and pull it out a little bit by bit until it comes out. If it is stuck deeply in the uterus, insert the hand as we described until you find the placenta, then grasp it a little bit by bit on the delivery.
To avoid the uterus being crushed under severe traction, it is better to gently move it towards the sides, left and right, then increase the amount of traction. At that time, it will come out and be released from the adhesion. If the mouth of the uterus is fused, we have described the treatment with cauterization, taxis, and herbs.
If it does not come out with all that we described, then use force on it in repeated traction, but tie what comes out from it to the mouth of the uterus and the thigh of the woman, then inject it with four-pronged instruments, as it cleans it after days.
And it will dissolve and come out, unless if it is cleaned, it will cause a foul smell from the stomach and head, which causes harm to the patient, so it is better to use appropriate vapor.
Therefore, some of the early ones experimented with the use of henna and tin, an image of the tool that causes the woman to sweat when she retains semen and menses and so on.
It is made of copper that resembles a mortar or made of brass, placing the narrow end on the fire and the wide end on the smoke, holding it until that smoke disappears and returning the rest.
The ninety-ninth chapter.
In the treatment of the unbroken tooth.
Many young men and their teeth are unbroken, which may be closed by a thin piece of food, it is appropriate for the operator to pierce that piece with his finger, otherwise, he should pull it out with a sharp tool and warn the muscle not to touch it.
Then she places a moist cloth on it with water and oil, then treats it with the mallets until it is clean, if you fear that it will block, put a copper tube in the hole for many days and remove it when the child wants to urinate.
The closure of the tooth may also occur due to a wound or tumor, it is appropriate to cut that wound then treat with what we mentioned about treatment and copper.
The Eightieth Chapter
In the treatment of lesions that occur in the lower part.
The lesions that occur in the lower part are complex and dense, occurring near the sitz bone from outside or in the space from one of the sides, and the nasiwir is one or more.
If that complexity is opened, moisture and thin yellow or mild feces flow from it, and these lesions may extend to the rectum and the intestines, and they are not extended, the extended ones are recognized by what comes out of them of urine and gas when using the Al-ilyl Tibriz.
And maybe the blood comes out of it, and these lesions may be from it if they are in the space extended to the urethra and to the urethral canal, and they may extend to the hip joint and to the ischial spine, and what is recognized by the extended nasiwir that extends to the sitz bone is also not extended.
That you insert your index finger into the sitz bone and insert a thin copper or iron spatula into the nasiwir if there is no rupture in the nasiwir, if there is a rupture in it, then insert a thin lead or hair from horsehair into it.
Until you feel the mosquar or the thorn in your finger, if you do not feel it entirely and nothing has emerged from the hole except blood, wind, or maggots as we mentioned earlier, then know that it is not impacted, so proceed with treatment.
If the thorn is impacted towards the urethra or the urinary tract, a sign of this is the passage of urine from it and its resistance to adhere to the affected area with medications. However, if it is impacted towards the hip joint or the penis, a sign of this is the thorn reaching that place.
If there is no discharge of bone marrow, pain near the affected area, and constant discharge of pus from it, and if it does not heal and does not adhere with medications, then none of these impacted thorns has been removed.
Treatment of these impacted thorns is difficult and ineffective for those who try to remove them without proper knowledge, and as for those that are not impacted and not chronic, I advise trying the removal with iron as follows: place the affected person on their back between your legs and press down on it.
And if it is a copper or lead thorn, insert it into the affected area until you know where the thorn ends. If the patient feels pain near the coccyx, then your little finger should be inserted there.
If you feel that the splinter has entered your finger completely exposed without any feeling between your finger and it, whether by scalpel or flesh, then know for certain that it is completely out, so do not exert yourself in it, as we have said.
They say that it may be expelled in some people in cases of scarcity and in treatments that are hoped to be beneficial, by applying a thin piece of cloth according to the size of the splinter, as previously mentioned, and then inserting it into the splinter until it reaches near the joint, then removing it twice or three times.
Until you know that all those excess flesh that has become like a tube of bird feather has been burned, then treat it with a piece of bread soaked in oil until those burned flesh comes out, then treat it with the mixed salt and honey if it is expelled.
If not, it will never be expelled by any other treatment. And if the splinter entered your finger at the joint and there was a thick layer of flesh or scalpel between them, and you saw the splinter below the skin surface, then split the skin from the beginning of the splinter. And you are splitting the skin with the splinter while it is in the splinter until you reach the split where the end of the splinter is, and the splinter comes out and falls, then clean those burned flesh that resemble a tube of bird feather and nothing remains of it.
Then treat him with cauterization until he is cleansed, for if blood overpowers you and hinders your work of cutting those flesh, the best thing you can do and the quickest benefit is to cauterize it with fire or a strong drug, for cauterization with fire unites two good conditions: burning the excess flesh.
Then cut the blood and drain the moisture, then treat him with a poultice of softened flour mixed with salt or sulfur in oil until the area is cleansed and those burnt flesh comes out in the qiya, then treat the wound at that time with cauterization using the sharp, hot Mirahem paste made for hardening meat.
These are the drugs that have suction and drainage, for if he sneezes and it comes out, he has been cleansed and there is no need to repeat it. If the probe has reached deep into the abscess and is away from the surface of the body, insert your finger into the abscess and explore it.
If you feel the pus and there is a barrier between you and it made of cloth or flesh and it is close to the opening, then there is no work in it except by way of hope and desire, that is, to use one of three ways: either to cut it as we said.
Either you should incise it until you reach its bottom to insert a probe and treat it from near, but do not incise deeply lest you cut the surrounding muscle which causes the expulsion of feces without will, then treat it as we mentioned earlier, perhaps it will be cured as we said.
Or you should insert that probe and puncture it after incising it near the anus as we mentioned earlier, either with a spatula or another sharp instrument, then clean all the rotten flesh in the incision until you can reach it completely.
Then ram the wound completely with the incision and the upper jaw until it closes, leaving the anus open inside the anus, which is less burdensome on the patient, and the anus may break down on this condition.
If the spatula is inserted into the anus and it is on one side of the anus towards the surface of the body with the skin and encircling the anus, then take a spatula with a sharp point like a syringe needle in this manner:
Then insert a thread with an opening of five threads or more into the spatula, and then insert the spatula into the anus until it reaches its bottom, if it is open from inside the anus close by.
Extract the surgical procedure from the Arabic text:
If the nasal passage is not open, you can try to clear it as best as you can, but if it is deep and you cannot reach it without risking damaging the muscle, then you should not attempt to do so. Then, treat it as previously mentioned until it heals.
The sharp-edged instrument used to scrape the nasal passages requires thorough cleaning on one side and less cleaning on the other side to avoid damaging what is not necessary, as you see.
Chapter 80.
In the case of broken noses that bleed and are cut, and their treatment for fractures.
The noses can be broken into two pieces, either inside the nasal cavity, resembling the appearance of red grapes or like grape clusters, and they can have small and large fragments, with blood always coming out from them.
One can also be broken, and many can be broken, and they can be outside the nasal cavity, with their tips except that those outside the nasal cavity are usually less moist and always have a yellow or slightly bloody discharge, and they are of a skin color.
The treatment for those broken inside the nasal cavity is to order the surgeon to press and massage until the nasal cavity emerges and the third fragment appears, then quickly secure it with forceps or grasp it with your fingers, then cut it at its roots. If the forceps do not hold due to its moisture and relaxation, then you should wait.
Pierce her with a sharp needle or cut it with a razor or grab it with your fingers then cut it and sprinkle some sharp sand on it after cutting to make it stand up like a callosity as mentioned in the chapter of callosities.
Then treat her with all the treatments until it is clean, if the inflammation does not allow for exit, then inject the mixture into it with a small amount of oil to wash out what is in the inflammation and to exit quickly when the inflammation subsides, then apply the ointment on the outside of the inflammation.
And it is that you take her by your fingernail or tie her with a thread and cut her then treat her with what was mentioned until it is clean, and if someone does not like to cut with iron, it is necessary to use a file on this manner taking a thread openly and inserting it into the needle.
Then pull the thread upwards and insert it into its origin from the other side and tie the ends of the thread below the needle while it is resisting, tightly tie the thread then remove the needle, do this with all the ointments and leave one that you do not file.
Then, remove a piece of cloth soaked in red wine or vinegar and place it on the wound, then command the patient to remain still until it falls off. If it falls off, treat it with poultices and other treatments until it heals.
For the treatment of sharp wounds, often exposing bone and flesh, if it has been a long time and no medication has helped, it is recommended to scrape it with a feather or your finger until it becomes moist and the upper layer of skin that prevents it from healing is removed.
Then treat it until it melts away as appropriate, if it does not melt, repeat the scraping with a stronger one than the first until it becomes soft and heals, then treat it as it will heal.
The second and eighty chapters.
In the treatment of fractured and unfractured teeth, and dry ulcers and bedsores.
The tooth is only a hard, long, and rounded body of the skin that resembles the head of a tooth and is found throughout the body, especially in the soles of the feet and fingers, and pain may occur from it when walking.
It is recommended to cut around the tooth and hold it with a pair of pliers or a needle, then remove it from its root, then treat it as appropriate in its chapter, and if you wish, apply a poultice on it as mentioned before in its chapter. As for dry ulcers, one of them is a small, hard, and smooth callus on the surface of the body.
Frequently, the treatment of this condition in young boys involves extending the foreskin and cutting or crushing it with a silk thread or hair until it falls off. If desired, the remaining part can be cauterized with fire or a strong medicine.
The inverted and non-inverted foreskins can also be removed with the tool that I mentioned in the treatment of elephantiasis. The elephantiasis is also a small, thick, hardened lump on the skin surface that penetrates deeply into the body and if it catches a cold, it feels like an ant bite.
In the body, especially in the hands, the treatment involves taking a pipette made of an ostrich feather or a strong eagle's feather and placing it on the elephantiasis until it forms a circle around the pipette from all sides. Then, use your hand to move the pipette until it cuts around the elephantiasis.
It should be placed deep into the flesh and the elephantiasis is removed from its source. If desired, this can be done with a brass or iron pipette in the following manner:
The top of the pipette should be open and smooth to facilitate handling and lengthening it. If desired, the elephantiasis can be cauterized with fire as mentioned in the treatment of the foreskin in the chapter on burns.
The Third Chapter of the Eighty
In the images of the instruments used for injection in cases of constipation, diarrhea, and vomiting.
The syringe may be made of silver, porcelain, copper, or brass, and it can be made in various sizes according to the users' needs. The syringes used for treating small children with constipation and those with narrow or painful stools should be very fine, with a large image of the syringe.
The upper part that connects the needle should be wide on this feature, with a stopper where the needle is connected as seen, and the lower part that enters the rectum should be smooth and very fine to facilitate passage through two small holes in one side and one hole in the other side.
The size of the holes should be according to the thickness of the medicine or slightly thinner, and the needle that is used for making the medicine should be made from the intestines of an animal or from a reed, in the shape of a small straw with a diameter of one centimeter.
He makes many small holes as he twists, with a thickness of a finger between each hole, then inserts a strong and thin thread made from ten or more silk threads and gathers the needle like a straw. If the medicine is placed in the syringe and the piston is pushed between the two stones with a tight force, then it is injected. This is the appearance of the needle and the hole:
The method of injecting the medicine into the syringe or the catheter when it is open to a certain degree, and be careful that it is not too hot or too cold, then the patient lies on his back and elevates his legs above his head.
Then a cloth or cotton is placed under him, then the tip of the syringe is smeared with oil, egg white, or henna paste, etc., and then it is inserted into the wound gently, then the assistant holds the needle with both hands and scrapes it vigorously until all the medicine in the syringe comes out into the wound.
Then the syringe is removed and the patient elevates his legs against the wall, if the medicine causes him to expel it, he should hold as much as possible, even if he sleeps all night with it, it would be better for the purgation, but if he injects it in cases of diarrhea and hurries its exit, then the injections should be repeated until he is free.
If there are wounds or painful masses in the wound, then the syringe should be very fine and smooth from the needles used for boys, this is the appearance of a fine needle with a smooth skin on it:
Chapter Four and Eighty.
In the treatment of surgeries.
You mentioned in the division of treatment about those that cause cataracts, and now I am recalling their treatment with the hand and with drugs to perfection, so I say that surgeries differ according to the thing that is present in the surgery and according to the place where the wound occurs.
The things that are present in surgeries are many, such as a stone or a cut by a sword or a knife or a stab by a razor or a dart or a spear and so on from many things.
And as for surgeries according to the places in the body, it is like the wound that occurs on the head or the neck or the chest or the abdomen or the liver and so on from the organs.
And I am describing the treatment of some surgeries to make them a standard and a rule for all surgeries, and I begin with simple head surgeries especially because the compound ones will be mentioned in the first chapter of this book.
So I say that when a simple wound occurs in the head and it is not a fracture of a bone, and if it was from a stone or similar and had only punctured the skin and the wound was large and I feared for the patient's life that the hot tumor might occur, so I immediately applied the cauterization on the spot. Do not delay that and extract blood from him according to his strength, unless he is prohibited from cupping and especially if the bleeding from the wound is light and the cupping should be done against the direction of the wound.
Warn the patient against overeating, drinks, and heavy foods, as prohibiting cupping from him is prohibited. He should reduce his food intake and avoid meat and drinks. If he develops a hot, hard lump soaked in rose oil alone or with a drink containing vinegar, he should apply it to the wound.
If the hot lump is soft, apply it to the wound if it is not changed by the air and the dust I mentioned earlier. However, if it has been changed by the air, apply some moisture to it.
Until the wound is fully expanded, then treat it until it heals. If the wound is large and resulted from a sword cut or similar, and the lips did not come together with the benefits, stitch them together as I mentioned in the suturing of abdominal surgeons.
If the skin is exposed and adhered to the bone and was only attached in a place that is easy to cut, then cut it. Then treat the wound with medicines that harden flesh as a substitute for the skin. The patient should eat foods that are durable such as heads and horns and similar.
If decay occurs in the skin but has not adhered to the bone, cut away the entirely decayed part and insert it, then treat the wound. If in these incisions there is a vein or gland that bleeds, and the blood has not been stopped by medication, examine the vein.
If it is necessary to remove it, soak it in vinegar and tie it, and if the mentioned methods are not effective and the bleeding continues, remove it until the blood stops flowing. If these incisions are small and simple, treat them gently, suffice with treating them by applying this vinegar while they are still bleeding.
Before the air changes it, the vinegar recipe is to take a part of curdled milk, a part of sulfur, and three parts of either extinguished or unextinguished charcoal, grind them all together, spread it on the wound, and bandage it tightly with a good quality cloth.
Then, it is tied with blood and bandaged from above with bandages, leaving it undisturbed until it stops hurting, as the medicine will not be absorbed until it is fully cleaned. This can also be done with charcoal alone if milk and sulfur are not available.
This surgical procedure can also be performed by the eyelid in many major surgeries if he mastered its placement on him and tightened it, and the surgeries were successful with their blood as long as they did not change them with air, but if they had changed them with air some changes especially if it was in the summer time.
There is no meaning in the position of this drill except for its treatment with what we mentioned that it should be loaded with some moldy bread or loaded with some dough made of flour and honey until the wound expands then treat it with all the treatments until it heals.
If there was a fracture in the bone and it was moving, then he should grasp it with the splint, and you mentioned the treatment of skull fractures in the neck in the book of surgery of the neck, so if the wound occurred in the neck, there is no difference between its treatment and the treatment of a simple skull fracture.
If it was a nerve that was cut from the neck or a vessel, then there is no remedy for it except to avoid treating it with something that grabs a very tight grip like the iron and the clamp and so on because they harm the nerve and constrict it.
Do not place anything cold on the wound, for the essence of the nerve is cold and its connection to the brain, which is the most noble of organs, and what you treat with it from mild drugs such as cleaned Nora boiled in sweet water repeatedly mixed with oil or with Ward and Tooty.
If you also washed with sweet water and all the metallic stones on this property and wet sponges, and if the wound is large, use sutures or sew his lips together with the benefits then treat him until he is cleansed.
If the wound is deep and there is something hidden in its bottom, such as pus, remove it from the lowest part of it, if a blood vessel has been cut off in the wound and you have reached his blood that is flowing, either plug it or suture it or sew it if necessary.
If the wound has cut off some of the muscle fibers or all of it and the guts have fallen out, gather the skin's lips with stitches on the throat bone and do not touch the throat but straighten it and return it to its natural shape then tighten it firmly and leave it for days.
Then treat him with wet sponges until he is cleansed, if the wound has penetrated into the bone, explore it, if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all of them or as much as possible and what you cannot extract leave it until the wound heals and becomes clean and easy to remove.
If the wound is sharp, leave the splinter in it as we described, if it becomes rotten in the wound, a bone has appeared, then treat him with what is mentioned in his chapter, regarding chest surgery and what is between the shoulders.
If it is a stab wound from a spear or a knife and you see that there is pus coming out of it, if the patient breathes in, know that it is a dangerous wound. If it does not have pus and is sharp, do not put the first splinter of the bone in it or tighten it so that the blood does not collect in its pus.
If it goes back to the heart, it will kill the patient, but put a soft and well-fitting bandage on it twice a day in the morning. If you do not have a bandage, put a piece of cotton in the wound mouth to absorb the moisture that comes out of it. Place the patient's sleeping position on the wound.
To prevent the collection of pus, if it has been three days or more since the wound and the patient has not experienced chills, shortness of breath, or difficulty breathing, and you have seen all other conditions are good, know that the wound is healed. Treat him with the full dose and the rest of the treatment until he is completely cured.
If it is difficult to see and the wound is constantly opening, know that it has become infected, treat it from its source, apply pressure to the wound to expel what has accumulated in it, and if it has progressed to the chest or back, treat it with what was previously mentioned about sutures.
If it is large or small, if it has penetrated into the bone and broken off pieces from it, examine the wound and immediately extract those pieces if they are clean, but if they are not clean, leave them until they are.
If it is healed, it will be easier to remove them, but for other injuries in other organs, their treatment is as mentioned earlier.
Chapter Five and Eighty.
In abdominal surgery and the removal and suture of the intestines.
The incision that exposes the abdomen may be large or small, and middle-sized. In a large one, intestines or several intestines may come out, making their introduction and suturing more difficult and harder.
Even a small incision may also be difficult from another aspect, it is necessary that its return be harder and the intestines, if they do not immediately enter their position from the beginning, expand and become thick, making it difficult to introduce them. Therefore, the medium-sized incision is better because it does not make returning the intestines as difficult as in these two types.
Know that sewing the belly in four ways is a common practice for both sewing the belly and other surgical wounds, while the other two ways are specialized and apply to all surgeries except for sewing the belly, which they are specifically designed for.
If the wound is small and something from the intestines has come out and it is difficult to return it, then it is one of two ways due to its small size or because the intestines are exposed and have been previously affected by cold air.
If that is the case, it is recommended to warm it by soaking a wet sponge or incision in warm water alone or with some herbs such as garlic, senna, and sennosides, and then apply it to the intestines until the cold air is expelled.
He can also use a drink that contains honey, which is better than water alone in expelling the cold air, so if you see that the cold air has been expelled, then apply warm water with some herbs such as chamomile or ginger to facilitate its entry with the easiest effort.
If it is difficult to return it after this treatment, then cut a little in the incision using the tool that is used to cut the intestines, and the first treatment is better than cutting if it can be done, but it is only necessary to cut if there is no other option and the situation is desperate. Here is the image of the tool:
The incision should be narrow on one side and wide on the other, with a blunt point that is not sharp but slightly dull, resembling a small spoon. If the wound expands and the probe enters, it should be returned to its natural shape.
If possible, it is best to place the patient on their side with their legs raised higher than their head if the wound is large and located in the lower abdomen, or raise their head and chest if the wound is in the upper abdomen.
Similarly, if the wound is on one side of the abdomen, always position the patient so that the surgical side is raised higher than the other side, which is appropriate for major and intermediate surgeries.
For minor surgeries, position the patient as best as possible, then have a trusted servant hold the incision with both hands and spread its lips, allowing the sewer to stitch it layer by layer.
This is the general method of stitching: take a needle or several needles according to the size of the wound, then insert it from the incision edge, leaving enough thread on both sides of the skin without entering the wound. With my fingers, I will remove the protruding part of the skin from inside to outside until it is completely removed from that side. I have gathered my skin flaps and skin flaps of the wound, making them four tails. Then, I will stitch them together with a double-stranded thread from both sides simultaneously until the edges of the wound meet firmly.
Then, I will leave a space as thick as the end of a finger and insert another needle. I will tie it with the thread as I did with the first needle until all the wound is filled with stitches. The needle should be medium in thickness between the thick and thin parts.
Because the thin needle is too weak and easily breaks the flesh and thick parts are difficult to penetrate the skin, it is necessary for the needle to be medium in thickness between the thin and thick parts. It should not be inserted close to the edge of the skin.
So that the flesh does not break quickly and the wound does not open before it is closed, do not stitch too much to prevent the wound from closing. Then cut the ends of the needle so that it does not harm the patient during sleep and make benefits from breaking the suture from both sides where the needle's ends are held.
And leave it until you know that the wound has healed, and this type of sewing with a needle is thus suitable for small surgeries because it may suffice in its sewing with one needle or two or more.
As for the characteristic of sewing for the second type of wound, it is to gather the four flaps of skin and fascia in one stitch with a needle containing a thread that is moderately loose and tight in the running, then when these four flaps have been stitched, repeat the stitching from the same side from which you started.
So that the thread lies loose from the top of the wound, so that the stitching is according to the stitching of the shoe which the tailor uses and makes between each stitch and the next a small knot and this stitching is known by everyone.
With this stitching, the surgeon has sutured a wound that was in the abdomen of a man who had been cut by a knife and the size of the wound was more than an inch and it had exited from his intestines by about two inches from the middle of the abdomen.
And then, after he had kept his intestines outside of the wound for forty-two hours, the wound healed in about fifteen days and she treated him until he was completely cured and he lived many years afterwards and was able to do all his activities and the doctors considered that he would never be fully cured.
I wonder why I did not treat him with a cauterizing iron since I was in a place where there were no medicines, so I put sand on the wound twice a day and washed it with honey water until it healed.
As for one of the two types of special sutures, I remember it according to a saying by Galen, which is to start sewing from the skin and insert the needle from outside to inside. If the needle penetrates the skin and the fascia going towards the stability in the length of the whole abdomen.
I left the hollow of the gluteus in the side where I inserted the needle and penetrated the needle into its other hollow from inside to outside in the other hollow of the muscle, if it penetrated it again, I penetrated it a second time from outside to inside in this same hollow.
Leave the hollow of the gluteus in this side and penetrate the needle into its other hollow from inside to outside in the gluteus, and penetrate it with your penetration in the muscle to the hollow of the muscle that is in its opposite side until it penetrates all of it.
Then also start from this side with its eye and its line with the hollow of the gluteus in the other side and extract the needle from the skin that is near it, then return it to those skins and draw the hollow of the gluteus in the other side with this hollow of the muscle.
Extract the main ideas from the following text and present them in a bullet-point format, ensuring that no information is added or omitted:
When suturing with a needle, it is important to sew from one side of the skin with its edge and leave from the other side until it opens up. As for the second type of stitching mentioned by Galen, this is his exact words.
And that they should do it like how a certain group of healers would stitch it, by gathering each part to its corresponding part's problem, of course, they would sew the edge of the wound to its other edge and the edge of the opening to its other edge, this is as described by him.
It is recommended to insert the needle from the edge of the opening near you from outside and push it inside it alone, then leave its edges of the wound, then pull out the needle from outside and push it inside its edges of the wound both of them, then pull it out again.
And push it from inside to outside in the edge of the opening on the other side, which is on the opposite side, this stitching is better than the general stitching which is easy and is the one mentioned by him, this is Galen's exact words, and some of them said that stitching the belly can be done with two needles. And that you should put one thread in both of them and start by inserting the needle from your side and push it to the other side, then insert the other needle from the opposite side and push it from your side according to the stitching of sandals equally.
Know that if the wound is in the middle of the abdomen, its suture is harder than in other parts of the abdomen. As for healing the wound, its treatment is like that of other incisions, that is, if you reach the wound quickly and before it changes color due to air exposure, remove the membrane and tissue around it, cut it, and carefully suture it using salt powder as a dressing.
If the wound has changed color due to air exposure, apply some ointment that promotes healing and prevents the stitches from loosening and the wound from becoming infected or suppurating, then treat it like other incisions until it heals completely.
If you do not have medication, apply cotton soaked in warm milk and change it twice a day as I previously instructed until it heals completely. In most cases, if the incisions are simple, you will not need further treatment. However, if you are concerned about causing pain to the main organs, avoid applying pressure on them.
You should soak a soft cloth in warm, moderately heated olive oil or rose oil and place it around the areas between the ribs and the sternum. If you feel pain or infection in its vicinity, often this indicates that it is exposed to air, so rinse it with a solution of black, thin vinegar.
If the infection has reached the intestines and become an open wound leading to its core, know that if the intestines were thick, it is easier to remove, but if they were thin, it is more difficult to remove.
As for the intestines known as the hungry ones, they do not accept removal from surgery that occurs to them, because of the abundance of nerves and their bones, and their thinness and closeness to the nature of the nerve. However, if the part that emerged from the wound was a large piece and you were able to grasp it quickly, then treat it according to your judgment of the intestines.
If it has passed some time and turned green or black, it is necessary to suture it with a thread above the place from which it emerged, so that blood does not flow out. Indeed, in the intestines there are nerves and vessels, then cut what remains below it.
Make the ends of the thread hang down from the incision outside it, so that it is easier for you to tie and remove it when the intestines fall and clean the wound. Mentioned is the wound that appears in the intestines, but if there was a small tear in the intestines,
it may be possible to stitch it in some people, because I saw a man who had been stabbed in his belly with a spear and the wound was on the right side of the intestines, so he sutured the wound and it became a fistula from which urine and feces came out. Therefore, I treated him as if I did not intend to remove it. I did not stop stitching until the wound was completely closed, and then I examined the position, which had been properly secured. However, I feared that some unfortunate event might occur in his abdomen. Fortunately, none of the expected complications arose, and he remained in good condition. Indeed, he eats, drinks, has intercourse, uses the bathroom, and performs his duties without any issues. Some experienced individuals have mentioned that if a small wound appears in the abdomen, it is recommended to apply pressure on that area.
It is also recommended to use large ants' heads, then bring the edges of the wound together, and place a mandible of one of them on the edges of the wound. If it bites and clamps down, it will adhere and not come off. Then, another ant's mandible should be placed near the first one.
And continue doing this with several ants according to the size of the wound, then remove them and stitch the wound. Those heads will remain adherent in the abdomen until it heals and becomes clear. This method does not cause any complications for the patient, and it is also possible to use a fine thread to suture the abdomen.
The one who is to be inserted into the animal that adheres to him after entering the needle should take a tip of this thread from the mosquito and then tie a knot at its end, then insert a fine silk thread, which is open, into the needle. In the Egyptian cat's intestine, a thread is passed through it and then returned to the anus, this blow from sewing with worms and Egyptian cats is only on the path of greed and hope.
If the perforation is large and wide, and especially if it is in one of the thin intestines, there is no remedy or hope of saving the patient.
The sixth chapter.
In the treatment of mumps and chinchilla.
Know that every wound or tumor, if it becomes old and decomposed and becomes a carbuncle and does not unite and the pus is always flowing and does not stop, is called on the whole in any organ wherever it is, chinchilla, and we call it mumps.
In fact, it is a complex, hardened, white lump with no pain, with an opening like the beak of a bird.
And for this reason, some of them called it "beak", and it is sometimes moist and always flows pus, and sometimes the moisture disappears in some times, and this moisture may be much or little, and it may be thick or thin.
And I have mentioned in the division of surgeries that every wound does not heal and does not grow flesh in it because of one of nine reasons, one of which is lack of blood in the body and another is its dryness and another is that there is flesh inside it and on its lips hard flesh that prevents the growth of good flesh. If it is numerous in its pain and suppuration, or if the wound itself is putrid and the material that extends it is of poor quality, or if the medication is not suitable for its treatment, or if corruption has occurred in the village from a certain type of pus, or if it is specific to the village.
If it is numerous in its pain and suppuration, or if the wound itself is putrid and the material that extends it is of poor quality, or if the medication is not suitable for its treatment, or if corruption has occurred in the village from a certain type of pus, or if it is specific to the village. As was shown in the city of Syracuse, where diseases ripen slowly and tumors grow naturally, or if there is a single bone or multiple bones, all these causes, symptoms, and treatments with medications were explained in detail.
Here, I must inform you of the treatment for nasal discharge and colds that are treated by manual work, knowing that nasal discharges can occur in all body parts, including those that end up in large sinuses or nerves.
Or to the spleen or to the kidneys or to the ureters or to a rib from the ribs or to a vertebra from the vertebrae, which are complexly constructed like the hand and the foot, and some of which lead to the vicinity of a major organ, such as the heart, and so on.
Any of these nasal discharges that have this characteristic are difficult diseases that do not accept treatment and effort, unless they reach the places mentioned, hoped for, and desired for treatment.
If you wish to know this, take a probe made of brass or iron if the patient is standing upright, then examine him with it. If there is any swelling in the patient, then examine him with a probe made of fine copper as copper is soft and gentle on the body.
When entering and turning towards the swelling, if the patient has many mouths, you cannot deduce it with the probe, so draw out some saliva from one of his mouths as the moisture will flow to the other mouths.
Then examine which face you can detect if there is bone or nerve, or if the patient is far or near, or if he is one person with many mouths and stand on all of that depending on your ability to investigate and feel the pain when pressing your hand on the spot.
And similar to that from the signs and causes of the tumor, so if you have stood on all of that truthfully, then at that time proceed to treatment with confidence by examining whether it is.
If the patient is visible and near or in a safe place away from joint, nerve, blood vessel, vein, or one of the places you mentioned, then cut the patient according to what I have described and remove what is inside him of pus, rotten flesh, and excess flesh.
And if there is meat or pus in his mouth, and similar things, treat him until he is cleansed. If the wound is far from the jaw and on a stable part, it is appropriate to cut into its depth as much as you can, then cleanse all the decayed flesh from it.
Then use the tainted silk in the strong medicines and pour it into the wound of the spear-thrust victim, which you can reach with iron, do this repeatedly until he consumes all the strong medicine that remains in the wound of the spear-thrust victim from decay.
Then force him with the splints that grow flesh correctly until he is cleansed. If he does not become cleansed by that, give him what you previously described, if the cause of the spear-thrust victim is bone and it is correct for you to examine it, then examine it and cut into it as you were informed, unless something prevents you from doing so.
If it is nerve, bone, or main organ as we said, and the bone was revealed to you and it had some decay and blackness, cleanse it until its decay disappears, then treat it with what heals it until he is cleansed. If he does not become cleansed and you lengthen the bandage as he previously did.
Know that you have not reached all removal of decay, so expose everything on him again and examine his cleansing and cleanse it with the greatest effort, then force him, if he becomes cleansed or not, know that that decay is far from decay, so expose everything on him again.
Examine the bone and clean it thoroughly to the best of your ability, especially if it is a small bone that you can hold in your hand. If possible, grasp it with smooth, suitable tweezers.
If there are many bones, examine and grasp them all, leaving none behind. If anything obstructs you from doing so, such as threads not connected to them, and there is no risk of cutting them, then cut those threads and the flesh if present, and clean the bones.
If you are unable to remove the bones at that time, apply a remedy on the wound and leave it for several days until the surrounding flesh and threads are healed. Then cover the wound so that the part you had cut does not become infected.
If you are afraid of that, apply a piece of soaked cotton in powdered borax mixed with oil or a piece of soaked cotton in Egyptian marsh-mallow or one of the other marsh-mallows, as they facilitate the removal and grasping of the bones once the threads are healed.
If it is a single large bone, such as the thigh or shoulder bone and its face has rotted, remove it thoroughly until that darkness and rot are gone, then close the wound. However, if a large part of it has rotted and the rot has reached the core of the bone, it must be removed.
Cut the entire [injured] part until you reach the end of the decay, then treat it so that it heals together. I am informing you about a case where a man had a bone fracture in his leg, which was exposed as an example and aid for your treatment.
Around the age of thirty, he experienced pain in his leg due to movement from within the body, causing the substances to reach the leg and swell, forming a large tumor that was not caused by anything external. The matter then worsened over time with the mistakes of physicians until the tumor opened.
Many substances emerged from him, and his treatment was poor until the leg became rotten and many mouths formed in it, all stretching out the feces and bodily fluids. A group of physicians treated him for two years, but none of them were skilled in handcraft.
Until he sought me out, and I saw his leg and the substances flowing out of those mouths in a great stream. The man had rotted away, and his skin turned yellow. I then introduced the probe into one of those mouths, and it reached the bone. Then I examined all the mouths.
I found some of them flowing into each other from all sides of the leg, so I cut open one of those mouths until I exposed some bone. I found it rotten, having been eaten away and turned black and putrefied and punctured until the puncture reached the brain, and I revealed what I had discovered to him.
I have successfully removed the diseased bone and I believe that there is nothing else in the bone except for the decay that I cut and spread, and I have already extracted it. Then, I applied strong medicines to the wound for a longer period of time, but it did not heal. Therefore, I returned and exposed the bone again after the first exposure.
I found the decay connected to the bone, so I exposed what appeared to me from that decay and then I forced it again, but it did not heal and did not unite. Then, I exposed it again, but I continued to cut the bone piece by piece and force it until I removed almost a whole bone.
Then, I extracted it with a probe and forced it with medicines, so it united quickly and completely. However, this repetition was necessary due to the weakness of the bone and its low probability of healing, and my fear of his death because he would often have excessive swelling and discharge.
He recovered in the place of the bone with solid flesh and his condition improved in his body, his strength returned, and he was able to move around without any ailment that would harm him. However, if the bone had been broken in a part of the body, it would not have healed.
It is essential to apply this procedure by taking a suture and stretching it at the end of the adjacent bone, and then pulling it upwards until another suture is inserted from the thicker part of the bone.
Then, tie it to the flesh beneath the bone and pull its end to attract the flesh downwards while exposing the flesh from the desired position to prevent damaging the muscle, and then place a board or plank under the bone from below securely.
Because if you do this, the muscle will not avoid cutting the decayed bone, and it is essential to apply the suture slightly above the decayed position so that it does not become decayed in the bone cavity, which would not be visible externally for touching, thus forcing you to apply it again.
If the bone is decayed and not adjacent to each other, but connected in some parts and the decay is in its middle or some parts, then expose the flesh from all its sides completely, then place the board from below, and then apply the suture from the first side where the decay is.
If you finish applying the suture from one side, then apply it from the other side, and let the suture be slightly away from the decay as we mentioned, if the decay is in a joint, cut the decayed joint itself and apply the bone where it connects from the other side.
If the damage is in the connection of joints, there is no remedy other than cauterization. If the damage is in the palm of the hand or the sole of the foot, the matter of its treatment is very difficult, but it is necessary to scrape away the damage as much as possible and cauterize it, regardless of the condition.
What method do you use when the nerve or tendon does not obstruct you? Know that the cutting and incising of these bones is many according to the position of the bones, their placement, thickness, flexibility, size, and hardness. Therefore, it is necessary for each type of work to have a tool suitable for that work.
And know that the work itself may indicate the type of tool needed if you have a long apprenticeship and knowledge of the skills of this craft, as mastery of the craft and observation of many cases of illness. For he may deduce for himself what tools are needed for each disease, and I will describe many tools to you at the end of this book.
You make them examples to follow and a standard by which to measure others, God willing, an image of a spear:
Image of another sharper.
Image of a small sharp.
Image of a large sharp.
The head of this simple is in the shape of the head of a needle, and its engraving is in the shape of the engraving of the Iskelfage. However, it is better to use it for repairing the heads of joints if they are damaged or a large wide bone.
Image of a wide simple.
Its upper shaft and engraving are made of iron, and its handle is made of hardwood, firmly attached. Image of a simple with an indentation.
Image of another simple, delicate.
Image of another simple with a rough end.
Image of a small simple that resembles a needle.
Image of another small piece.
Its end is like a rod, and it can be used in many places of bone tissue. Image of a simple that is suitable for cutting out bones.
Its end is triangular and sharp, made of Indian iron. Similarly, all the simple and small pieces should be made.
Chapter Seven and Eighty.
In the section on amputating limbs and scattering bones.
The limbs may become putrid either due to an external cause or due to an internal cause. If you treat this corruption with medication and it does not improve, and you see that the corruption is spreading within the body and nothing can stop it.
It is appropriate to amputate that body part until the corruption reaches a point where the patient may escape death or from a great calamity, which is greater than losing the body part itself. A sign that indicates this is when the body part becomes so swollen that you think fire has burned it.
Or if the corruption spreads after the blackening of the body part, and it starts to spread to other parts of the body, then you should amputate it immediately, and this is also the case if the cause of the corruption is due to certain poisons such as sea urchins, snakes, or scorpions and so on.
If the corruption or spread is in the tip of the finger, then amputate the finger and do not delay in treating it so that the corruption does not spread to the hand. Similarly, if it has taken hold of the hand, then amputate it from its root and do not delay in treating it so that the corruption does not spread to the elbow.
If the injury is in the arm, cut the arm at the elbow joint itself, if the corruption is tolerable and you see it fitting, bring it towards the shoulder but do not cut the shoulder entirely as that would cause death. Use other treatments according to the strength of the patient.
Likewise, do the same for the leg if the injury is in the toe, cut the toe at one of the metacarpals. If the injury is in the ankle, cut the leg entirely as it ascends to the knee, then cut the thigh at the knee joint.
If the injury has reached above the knee, there is no remedy but to leave it and let the patient pass away peacefully. The method of cutting the affected part or spreading it involves tying a rope at the lower part of the desired cut and another rope above the cut.
Stretch one rope downwards and the other upwards, then tear the meat between the ropes with a wide needle until all the meat is exposed, then cut or spread it. It is recommended to make incisions from all directions on the skin.
To avoid exposing the affected area to excessive pain and heat, if bleeding occurs during your work, quickly cover the area or apply some blood-absorbing materials then return to your treatment until it is fully drained.
Then, he sutured the injured member with a suture that suits it and treated it until it was cleansed, and I inform you of an example of a discharge in a leg, this discharge with an eye, which I describe for you, that is, it occurred in his leg, blackness accompanied by a burning pain similar to fire.
That discharge was the first thing that happened in his finger until the leg took all of it, then the leg was amputated from itself when he saw the discharge, seeking the member with the intensity of the pain and burning, so he cut it at the joint and cleansed it.
When a long time had passed since he saw that discharge with his eye in the finger of his right hand, he sought me and I advised him to apply the medicine that I had on my hand after cleaning his body, but he did not heed the advice and continued seeking the other finger.
Until the discharge took his hand, he sought me to cut his hand, but I refused him hoping for my advice and also feared for him when cutting his hand, because the strength of the leg was to fall, so when he gave up on me, he went back to his country.
It was reported to me that he cut his hand by himself and cleansed it, but I only narrated this story as an aid for what happens from this kind of disease and as a sign to be followed.
8th Section: Treatment of Fractures
In the treatment of fractures and how to inject them with medications.
If a tumor occurs in some of the fleshy organs and its duration reached until it gathered all its extent then exploded or melted and everything that was in it of its duration remained, leaving the place empty as if it were an empty vessel.
The skin that is like a scar has cracked and has not reached the extent of its corruption to affect bone or nerve or tendon, from here it deserves to be called hidden and was not named "Nasor" except if its duration became long enough for the corruption to affect something from these organs.
Then it is called "Nasor" or "Zakam", and its treatment is to cut that skin completely as it moves, especially if it has cracked and become like a scar, and it is confirmed that it does not stick to the place due to its corruption.
If one hoped that the skin would stick and it had not reached the extent of its corruption, and there was in the skin a lump of meat, then he treated it with injections, which is to look at the hidden place and if it was large and the pus that extends from it is strong in smell, then inject it with Egyptian medicine.
This is a recipe for a plaster made from frankincense, oil, honey, and cloves, all mixed together in a container and cooked over fire until it thickens, then used as needed by applying it to the affected area, rinsing with water and honey, injecting it into the wound, closing the mouth, and leaving it in place for two hours.
Then, you can remove it with perfumed water, doing this for several days until the wound is clean and the pus disappears. If this medicine is not available, you can inject water mixed with ash from burned cedar or cypress wood by pouring water over it.
Then, you can squeeze it and inject it until you are sure that the wound is clean. If there is no access to the Egyptian medicine or water mixed with ash, then inject it with water and honey mixed with some powdered cinnamon.
Or you can inject it with honey and vinegar mixed together because the honey cleans and washes, while the vinegar adheres to the wound, especially if it has astringent properties that contract and dry. If you have done this several times and confirmed that the wound is clean, then inject it with something that promotes tissue growth in it.
It is like taking a sample from the tooth and treating it with clove oil, red wine vinegar, and a binding agent or by injecting it with some medications and other remedies that we have described in the treatise on dental caries, provided that the mouth is not too narrow to accommodate the syringe.
Or expand it slightly with a little iron or place a dirty thread in the Egyptian tooth or the root canal until it expands, and similarly, if the mouth is also wide, gather his lips together with sutures and leave only enough space for the syringe to enter without adding more.
And similarly, if his mouth from which pus is flowing is elevated above the level of the tooth, cut it in the lowest part of it so that the pus can flow out below, because if the pus is injected into the cavity of the tooth, it prevents the flesh from growing in it.
If you cannot cut the cavity downwards as desired, then tilt the tooth so that the pus can flow out of it easily according to what is available to you and ensure that nothing remains in it.
As for the caustic medications that are applied to the cavity from outside, their nature and how they are applied, it is that you take one of the remedies that you want and extend it on a piece of cloth and let the cloth be as large as the entire cavity can accommodate. Then, with the scalpel, make an incision in front of the hidden mouth, a larger opening than the hidden mouth itself, then extend the fine needles over another puncture on the level of the incision and place them on it, placing them apart from the hidden mouth to facilitate the exit of the purulent matter from it and do not remove the large puncture until later.
For several days, and as for the one on the hidden mouth, it is the one that is removed at all times to allow the purulent matter that has accumulated in it to exit and to know how much pus or little pus, mixed or not mixed, comes out of it.
Also, examine the position of the hidden mouth itself, whether its owner feels pain in it or not, and if there is a lump in it or not, and if there is a lump, then if your treatment progresses in this way and you see the material that comes out flowing towards the hidden mouth.
Know that the hidden mouth has become united or almost united, then leave it until the next day or on the third day, and when the wound heals, change the puncture with another one and replace the needles, for if pus comes out from the hidden mouth after a long time, do not lose hope of unity.
If the patient is slow in healing after a surgery, it is possible that the wound has become infected. If the wound has become putrid and does not heal despite many days, then it is certain that the wound has become infected.
If the patient's condition has worsened, then increase the drying of the medications so that they remain moist and not too strong, like a pomegranate rind. If it has increased in strength beyond this, then take a pomegranate rind.
If you do not have a pomegranate rind, then apply henna oil to the wound and sprinkle it with old, moderately strong vinegar in its moisture, then mix it with water and use it. If you do not have any of these, then cook cinnamon, pepper, and cardamom until they become thick, then mix them with honey and use it on the wound while it is still hot. Then apply it to a bandage and cover the wound with it, or apply honey that has been cooked until it becomes thick, then sprinkle it with powders and place a bandage on it and cover the wound.
He may also use long zinc rods, ground aspen bark, crushed carob flour, and powdered cinnamon mixed with honey that has been described and used. If the wound has not healed after this treatment, then know that there is decay inside it.
The treatment of fractures in bones or other hard tissues or sinews is as described by Nasir, as mentioned earlier.
Chapter 89.
In the treatment of the hammertoe, ingrown toenail, amputation of extra fingers, and splitting the joints of the fingers.
The hammertoe is a thick tissue that grows under the toenail of the hand or foot, and sometimes in other fingers. If the condition persists and is not treated, it becomes inflamed and painful.
Or it may rot and decay until it eats away the nail, sometimes completely destroying it, and sometimes the decay reaches the bone so that it has a pungent smell and becomes wide at the tip of the finger, with a yellowish color. If you treat it with the methods mentioned in the separation, but it does not heal, then
It is recommended to cut off all the tissue that grows under the nail with an iron, then suture the wound afterwards, as this is very beneficial. However, if the bone is healthy and the nail is also healthy, then
If the angle of the nail has become infected and caused the tissue to rot and decay, then it is recommended to place a thin piece of cloth under the angle of the nail that is infected and lift it up, then cut away that tissue gently.
Place the remaining flesh on top of the cauterized, escharotic drugs until it is all consumed, then treat it with cautery until it is clean. However, if the corruption has affected the bone, it is necessary to cut that bone and remove it, for as long as there is a corrupted bone, the flesh will not be clean.
If you see that the decay and corruption are spreading in the finger, cut it off at one of the joints as previously mentioned, then treat it until it is clean. However, if the blow or injury has caused severe pain, it is necessary to first apply a poultice.
Then sharpen the finger with a sharp, crooked nail from top to bottom, avoiding it from reaching the flesh beneath the finger, for doing so would cause severe pain and may cause an excessive growth of flesh in the area. Then treat the area with what alleviates the pain.
As for the excessive fingers that sometimes grow in some people's hands, sometimes they are all fleshy, sometimes they have bones, and sometimes they have a nail, and sometimes the growth is from the joint of some fingers.
The plant of the finger, which grows in some joints of the finger and does not move, and if it grows at the joint of the finger, perhaps it moves, so if it is not fleshy, cut it off easily, because to cut it off near its root with a wide needle is easier.
However, if the plant grows at the root of the joint, its treatment is difficult, so it should be left uncut. And if the plant grows in the finger near one of the joints, it is recommended to first cut off its flesh continuously until the bone, then spread the bone with one of those forceps suitable for that.
Then treat it until it is clean, and if the entanglement that exposes some fingers to each other occurs frequently and is often caused by the birth of the human and occurs at the time of melting of the wound or burning with fire and the like, it should be separated.
Until the fingers return to their natural shape, then place between them a cotton or a cord soaked in rose oil to prevent them from entangling quickly and separate them or place between them a thin piece of copper to melt the affected area as appropriate.
And if the entanglement of some fingers with the palm occurs, it should be separated as appropriate and corrected to restore the shape of the organ.
The Ninth Chapter:
On the Extraction of Teeth.
Teeth are rooted, thick, dark, brittle bones that occur in many parts of the body, most commonly in the legs, especially in the knees and hips, and it is necessary to use strong forceps to extract them.
Then, the patient should be made to bite on a leather strap, and if treatment with iron is necessary, it should be done in two steps: one step involves breaking and extracting the black blood and the other step involves squeezing and removing the pus. The first step is to heat the leg with hot water first.
Until the thick, dark blood is broken up, then the leg of the patient should be spread from the back of the knee to the foot with a bandage, and then the pus should be squeezed in one place or two places or three wide places.
Then, the black blood should be squeezed out from the bottom of the leg to the top and from the top to the bottom until the amount of blood that is sufficient or can be tolerated by the patient comes out. Then, it should be bandaged and the patient should be instructed to avoid foods that cause toothache and to rest and bite on a leather strap again.
When the veins are filled and this causes harm to the patient, and if he is able to bear it, then circumcision of the patient's leg should be performed if there is much hair on it. Then, the bath attendant should introduce warm water into the leg and massage it until it reddens and the veins are drained, or a strong exercise is performed.
If a bath attendant is not available, then the body part should be heated until it is warm. Then, the skin should be cut lengthwise either at the end near the ankle or at the bottom near the heel. After that, the skin should be opened with scissors and the veins should be cleaned from all sides until they are visible to the touch.
If it appears red and swollen, then after the skin is removed, it will also appear like a wound. Then, warm water should be introduced underneath it until it rises and exits the skin. After that, it should be hung by a blind, smooth hook, and then another cut should be made nearby, about the width of three fingers.
Then, the skin should be cleaned from above the veins until it is visible. After that, it should be raised with warm water as before and hung by another hook as before. Then, another cut or multiple cuts should be made if necessary.
Then, pull it and cut it at the end of the groove near the heel, then tie it and pull it until it comes out of the second groove. Then, tie it to the groove above it and do this until it is tied from the third groove, all of them until when it comes out, cut it.
If it does not adhere to the tying and pulling, then insert a needle with a strong double thread and tie it and pull it until it comes out, and fasten it with your hand in all directions until it comes out, so that it will not be cut off. If it is cut off, it will be difficult for you to tie it again.
If it enters the flesh from him, it is harmful. If you tie it all, then place it in the surgical position with moist cotton soaked in water and oil or red or oil and treat it until it is clean, if the cause is a sharp object with corners that fit into directions.
If it was not as we said, then it is necessary to cut it at all the corners and positions of its fittings and then tie it with the needles until you tie it all, and fasten at your cutting that you do not cut the flesh or hurt it, because if you cut it, it will be difficult for you to tie it again.
Image of the needle with which the daughter performs the operation.
Image of the blind craftsman.
She should not have a polishing like other craftsmen and should not be sharp-ended to avoid cutting the flesh and she should be smoothly rounded because if she is too sharp, she will cut the flesh, as we said.
Chapter 89.
In the vein of civil blood.
This blood is produced in the legs in hot countries like Hijaz and Arab countries, and in hot, sparsely vegetated lands, and possibly in other parts of the body besides the legs, and it is produced by a worm that lives under the skin.
Also, as it happens in the bodies of living beings and worms, and the worm that is produced between the skin and the flesh, and a sign of the beginning of this blood is that it occurs in the leg with severe redness, then the affected area becomes hot, then the blood begins to come out from that area.
It is as if it is the origin of a plant or animal, and if its end appears from it, it should be bandaged with a small piece of iron weighing from one to two dirhams, and it should be tied and left hanging from the leg.
Whenever something exits from him, if it is coated with lead and sealed, and if it is very long, cut off a part of it and tie the rest. Do not cut it from its source before it fully exits, for if you cut it, it will shrink and enter the flesh, causing a wound and infection at the site and an unhealed sore.
Therefore, it should be massaged and gently pulled out little by little until it exits from the last part, and nothing remains in the body. In some people, this discharge can be as long as five fingers and ten.
I have heard that it exited from a man who was twenty centimeters long, and if you cut it for him at that time during treatment, you should insert a probe into its hole and gently pull out a long thread with the flesh until all the matter in it is removed, and try to heal the site with medicines for several days.
Then treat him with tumor treatment, and this discharge can have many threads, especially if it appears in the knee joint or the leg itself, it can cause many mouths to form and exit from each thread of the flesh, so treat it as mentioned in the section and with what was previously mentioned.
The second chapter and the ninetieth.
In the incision on the liver that arises beneath the diaphragm and is called the 'disease of cattle'.
This disease is called 'al-la'lah al-bahriyya' in some countries of ours, 'al-bahr' meaning the sea, because it often appears in cattle and is a small worm that grows between the skin and flesh and spreads throughout the body, going up and down.
It becomes apparent by touch from one part to another until it burrows, wherever it burrows in the skin, it exits and forms from a mixture of some impurities as it appears in worms and lice, and the heart is affected in the belly.
And it is expected that if it burrows in the body and rises to the head and reaches the eye, it may open in it and exit, destroying the eye, which often appears, so if you want to treat it and remove it, it is only possible when it is felt and seen.
It is necessary to bind what is above it and below it with a strong rope, then incise it and remove it, if it burrows in the flesh and you cannot find it, carry out the procedure at the affected spot with fire until it is burned, and the greatest expectation for its damage to the eye as we mentioned.
If you see it has reached the head near the eye, tighten it underneath on the forehead with a strong cord, then cut it and extract it. It is recommended for the patient to purify his body with easy-to-digest medicines that prevent putrefaction of foods that cause infection.
Chapter 93.
In the cutting of the disease known as trismus.
This disease, known as trismus in our country, is a pain that appears in some parts of the body and then spreads from one part to another. I have already described it for you.
I was called to a patient in some remote areas, and I examined her arms and found a needle inserted into the elbow tendon. After an hour, I saw that the needle was moving back and forth like a snake, as fast as possible.
If I moved from one place to another, the pain disappeared from that place and settled in the elbow, then it remained there for an hour. Then, it started moving throughout the body until it reached the other arm, then it told me that its whole body was spinning as I had seen.
I was amazed at the speed with which it moved from one part to another, and I had never seen this disease with my own eyes like this before. However, I saw a group of people who were finding that the pain was moving from one part to another, but I did not see it like this in any person.
I did not consider it except for the fact that the woman was from the people of the desert, with a lean body and exposed bones. From this, it became clear that such a wind was transmitted. Therefore, it is necessary that this measurement does not appear in people of prosperity and bodies that are moist, hidden, and have covered bones.
If you want to treat him and his owner feels pain, if he appears to you with the open eye as mentioned, then press above and below him with the iron and cut until that transmitted wind comes out and clear the place.
If you do not see it with your eye, then treat him by stripping the body and what does not transmit wind and reveal it like honey, mustard, and other similar drugs.
Chapter 49.
In the extraction of arrows.
Arrows vary depending on their types and the positions in which they are placed in the body. As for their variation by type, there are large and small ones, glass with engraved patterns, glass with smooth patterns, and some have three angles and four angles.
And some have tongues and some have splinters, and as for those that depend on the body parts that are placed in them, they are on two hits, either that the body parts are from major organs engraved such as the brain, heart, liver, lung, kidneys, spleen, and others. When a dart pierces one of these limbs and signs of death appear, as I have described to you afterward, it is advisable to avoid removing the dart from it, for in most cases death will accompany its owner. When these signs do not appear and the dart has not lodged in the depths of the limb, remove it and treat the wound. Among the signs of brain injury is if a dart pierces it and passes through bone, and cuts the membrane covering the brain, for this exposes him to severe headache, dizziness, and vomiting.
When these signs do not appear and the dart has not lodged in the depths of the limb, remove it and treat the wound. Among the signs of brain injury is if a dart pierces it and passes through bone, and cuts the membrane covering the brain, for this exposes him to severe headache, dizziness, and vomiting. Redness in the eyes and tongue, trembling, confusion of mind, vomiting, and possibly blood coming out of the nostrils or ears, and possibly loss of speech and voice, and a watery substance like pus coming out from the wound, similar to the juice of meat.
If these signs appear, do not attempt to remove the dart or treat the wound if it has not come out. But if the signs of the dart piercing the heart appear, and it is near the left breast and you feel as if it has entered something solid rather than nothing, then...
And sometimes the dart has a movement similar to that of a pulse, and black blood flows from the wound, followed by cold extremities, cold sweat, and a feeling of approaching death, and a sign of the dart piercing the lung is the exit of yellowish blood from the wound.
If the arteries that are near the neck twist and their color changes to pale, and they breathe heavily with a high-pitched breathing, and they seek to take in cold air, then if the spear has pierced the sternum, it is close to the small ribs and the breathing is very strong with severe pain.
And the wound contracts and all the limbs of the abdomen move, and if the spear has pierced the liver, it follows with severe pain and blood comes out of the wound that resembles the liver in its redness, and if the spear has pierced the stomach, perhaps something unchewed came out of the wound from the food.
And the injury is obvious, and if the spear has pierced the belly and it became inflamed and something came out of the wound that was urine or feces or intestines that had burst, then there is no treatment for him and no way to remove the spear, for if the spear had entered the bladder and urine came out.
Something protruded from it and the pain intensified on the chest, so know that he is dead, but as for the other limbs such as the face and the eye and the neck and the shoulder and the arm and the thigh and the buttocks and the leg and so on from the limbs, they are all in a very bad state.
When the arrow has not struck a blood vessel or nerve, and the arrow is not poisoned, I will inform you of some things that I have observed regarding this matter so that you may deduce your treatment from them. This is because an arrow had pierced a man's leg at the base of his eye in the region of the nose.
Then I removed it from the other side under the earlobe and he was cured, and nothing happened to his eye. Another arrow had pierced a Jewish man under his eyelid below the lower eyebrow, and the arrow had become embedded and I only removed its small tip that was sticking to the wood.
And another arrow was large, made of iron, and smooth, with no eyelets, but the Christian man was cured and nothing bad happened to his eye. I also removed an arrow from a circumcised Christian man's neck, and the arrow was barbed.
And he had earlobes, so I split them open between his ears and the arrow had gone into his neck, so I gently pulled it out until I removed it, and the Christian man was cured and alive. Another arrow had pierced a man's belly, and we thought that he would die from it.
After thirty days or so had passed and nothing changed in his condition, I split open the arrow and turned it over on him and removed it, and he was cured and nothing bad happened to him. I also saw a man who had an arrow pierce his back, so I squeezed the wound on him.
When seven years had passed, a man was pierced by a spear at the root of his thigh, and I saw a woman who had a spear pierce her abdomen and heal the wound, and the spear remained unchanged in its condition. She did not suffer any harm from her natural bodily functions.
I also saw a man who was pierced by a spear in his face, and the wound healed without causing him much pain. There were many such cases, and I removed a spear from the nose of one of the Sultan's guards, which had entered slightly to the left side of his nose.
The spear disappeared completely, so I called for his treatment after the spear had entered, and after three days, I found that the wound was very narrow. I probed it with a thin probe, but I did not feel anything, and he felt pain and a lump under his right ear from the back side.
I thought that this lump might be the tip of the spear, so I applied a bandage with strong adhesive power and waited for it to swell up and show signs of the spear. However, nothing happened in the affected area that would indicate that the spear had reached that point.
I continued to apply the bandage for many days, but nothing happened. Eventually, I removed it during this time, and the wound remained closed for a long time until I felt the spear inside his nose one day. He told me about it, so I applied a strong antiseptic ointment to the wound for many days.
Until I opened and cleaned it, feeling the tip of the thin arrow that sticks to the wood, then I continued to enlarge the wound with this harsh medicine until its tip appeared to us visibly after about four months.
Then, when the wound expanded and I was able to insert the probes into it, I stretched and moved it, but it did not respond to extraction. Therefore, I continued to massage and manipulate it with various instruments until one day I grasped it firmly with probes in its final form as shown in the last chapter.
The doctors judged that the cartilage of his nose should not be sutured, so I closed the wound and removed the arrow completely without causing him any harm at all. I will tell you how to extract some arrows as a comparison and evidence for what I did not mention.
Because parts of this craft and its details cannot be understood by description or known from a book, only the skilled artisan can measure a little on much and understand what is present where something is absent, and create new work and new tools for unusual situations.
If a splinter enters from this craft, I say that it only emerges from the body parts where it has grown in two ways: either by being pulled from its entry point or from the opposite side, and from where it entered.
Either the splinter is prominent in a fleshy part, it will attract and emerge if it does not pull out from its entry point immediately. If it enters a bone, it should be left for several days until the surrounding tissue rots, making it easier to extract.
If it does not pull out, leave it for several days and try to extract it by pulling and moving it every day until it emerges. If it does not pull out after several days, it is recommended to drill around the splinter in the same bone from all sides with a small drill until the splinter expands, then extract it.
If the splinter is embedded in the skull bone and has penetrated into one of the brain's cavities and symptoms of meningitis have appeared, do not try to extract the splinter and leave it until its condition improves after several days.
In the case of a deep wound and its extraction, if the wound is severe and not suitable for direct extraction, use the forceps as described to you, then treat the affected area until it heals, and if the arrow has penetrated into a certain part of the body. If it is lost from feeling, search for it with a probe, if you feel it, extract it with some tools suitable for extraction, but if the wound is too narrow and the arrow is in the abdomen and it is not bone, nerve, or muscle.
Then split it open until the wound widens and the arrow comes out, but if it has ears, extract the infected flesh from both sides with all possible methods, and if you cannot extract the flesh, crush it and pull it out.
If you try to extract the arrow from any part, use a probe all around until it comes out, and be careful not to break it, as it will be difficult to extract if it breaks.
Leave it for a few days until the flesh around it rots, then try again, as it will be easier at that time. If bleeding stops, use the methods mentioned in the chapter on treatment, and be careful not to cut nerves, muscles, or tendons, and use tricks.
In all cases, you can extract the sword with gentleness and patience, and firmness as described to you, and it is recommended that you use the hook when drawing the sword, so that the hook takes the shape it had at the time of the sword's penetration, for it is more effective.
If you cannot do that, use whatever shapes you can manage, and as for the sword that exits from the other side, either it has emerged from something outside or you find the tip of the sword by touching it from above the skin, near and you see it coming out.
Make a cut on it and the cut should be as wide as can fit five fingers, then draw it, for it is easier to extract, and if it grabs onto bone, press your hand against the resistance until the sword affects the bone and expands for itself, then draw it.
If not, leave it for a few days until it exits, and if the sword's tip is in it, push it with something, and if the tip has fallen and you want to use pushing, insert the auger into its hole in the bone then push it with it.
If the sword is sharp, push it with a tool that fits into that hole, for the sword will exit easily, and if the sword is poisoned, it is recommended that you remove all the meat that has become poisoned in it if possible, then treat it with what is suitable for that.
If the spear is located in the chest or abdomen or urethra or thigh and is close to being crushed by the probe, and you are able to approach it, then cut and extract it without severing the nerve or muscle and remove it.
Then suture the wound if necessary, then treat it until it heals. Image of the shields that attract spears:
Their tips are sharp and curved like a bird's beak if they catch the spear or any other object, and they can be made in various sizes, large or small, according to the size of the spear, its thickness, and the width and narrowness of the wound.
Image of the curved spear:
Image of the straight spear:
This is a straight tip like a needle to facilitate its entry into the curved spear and push it out:
Chapter 59.
In the treatment of nerves.
There are thirty nerves in the body, sixteen of which are in the head: two pairs of nerves that supply the ears, known as the hypoglossals and two pairs of nerves in the temples, known as the optic nerves.
The blood that accumulates in the middle of the forehead and the blood at the tip of the nose and the armpits and the two bloods that are in the neck and the two bloods that are in the upper lip and the two bloods that are in the lower lip and these bloods are known as the "Jihark" and the bloods under the tongue.
As for the bloods that are released in the arm and the hand, they are five bloods, one of which is the "Qayfl" and it is from the side of the shoulder and is called by the common people as the head blood and it is the middle blood and it is composed of a part of the basilic vein and a part of the qayfl vein and is called by the common people as the body blood.
The basilic vein and it is the subject in the inner side and it is also called the "Ibt" and is called by the common people as the abdomen blood and the arm cord and it is the subject on the zind and it is the one that sticks to it and it is the one that appears above the eyebrow a clear appearance and the basilic.
And it is the blood between the kneecap and the ankle bone and it has two branches, in the thigh and the leg there are three bloods, one of which is under the ball of the foot from the side of the shoulder and the second is the "Sfn" and its place is near the heel from the inner side and the women's blood and its place is near the neck from the side of the shoulder.
In the other leg, there are three nerves similar to them, namely, those behind the ears. Their function is to prevent chronic sneezing, headaches, and skin eruptions, as well as persistent scalp irritations. How to cut them is described in detail.
To cut them, one should shave the back of the neck and then rub it with a rough comb until the nerves appear behind the ears in the lower parts of the head. Feel for them with your finger where you sense their pulsation beneath your finger, and that is where they should be cut.
Then take a sharp, needle-like scalpel and insert it under the nerve in the skin until the tip of the scalpel reaches the bone. Then raise your hand with the nerve and skin above and cut the nerve along with the skin into a torn piece, with the length of two fingernails.
Or similarly, you may leave some blood on them and then tie them up with bandages until they heal. It was previously mentioned in the book how to cut and tie them. As for the arteries in the chest, their function is to prevent chronic coughing, severe headaches, persistent nasal congestion, and intense, sharp eyestrain caused by prolonged staring at something.
Method of extracting them as described to you, the surgeon should press the patient's back with a cloth until the veins appear clearly and you can feel their pulsation under your finger. Then, when the time comes, you learn the incision and then raise the skin from above the vein to the finger above it, which is the subscapular.
Then, insert the needle from below and raise the vein to above, as you did in the other veins, and send blood onto a container according to your need. Then, clean the wound of the patient and place your finger on the vein for an hour.
Then, place a cotton and ointment on it, press from above firmly and leave it until it heals. They have mentioned its incision, cutting, and extraction in the first book. As for extracting veins on the face, it is beneficial after extracting veins on the forehead for chronic facial conditions such as pimples, boils, and red spots.
Method of extracting it as described to you, the surgeon should press the patient's back with a cloth until the vein appears. Then, take the tool called the "fas" and here is its image:
Then, place the needle at the tip of the "fas" on the same vein and strike from above with a sponge or something else in the direction it goes, allowing the blood to flow onto the container you desire. Then, clean the wound of the patient and press it firmly until it heals.
It is necessary to open the wide blade, but it is not appropriate for the blade to be sharp like other blades, but rather it should be wide and thin at the tip, and its edge should be honed on a stone because the bone is close. Therefore, if the blade were sharp, it might break in the bone.
As for the two glands located in the corner of the eyes, their function is to remove foreign substances from the eye, such as dirt and redness, and other face diseases. And as for how to extract them, it is by holding the eyelid with a cloth, then extracting them while standing on the head, and the extraction should be done on a stone hone of a small, wide blade slightly.
If there is no flesh in the place, then if the blade is sharp at the tip, it might break, so you should squeeze the blood out of them and put a cotton on them and hold them for one night, then wash them. And as for extracting the nose gland, it is beneficial to remove severe inflammation.
And severe headaches and other face diseases such as redness in the nose, especially if it is chronic, and how to extract it, it is by holding the eyelid with your left hand and then taking a sharp, long blade.
He should insert it in the middle of the rabbit's own flesh between the base of the nose and its stability, as the blood does not show up there, and it is necessary to moisten your finger slightly with the probe and remove the required amount of blood, then seal it for a night, as it heals quickly.
As for the wounds, they are beneficial to remove them due to narrowness of the breath and beginning of decay and the black diseases that appear on the skin surface such as black pustules and boils and foul ulcers and sores, and how to remove them is that the assistant ties a bandage underneath them in his neck and the operator stands on the assistant's head.
The assistant is on a chair then the blood is drawn to length and wide suction slightly then the required amount of blood is extracted moderately or according to what you see as needed, then do the same with the other blood and then seal the bandage.
The blood is drawn in medium amount so that the assistant does not suffocate and leave him to the next day as it cleans the wound, and as for the veins of the jawbones they are beneficial to remove them after removing the tumors because it benefits from the abscesses in the mouth and decay of the gums and foul ulcers and splitting of the lips and foul ulcers.
The procedures involving the nose and its surroundings, and how to extract a foreign object from them: place the patient in front of you and tilt their head with a cloth, then turn their cheeks towards you and examine the two nasal openings that you see one on the right side of the cheek and the other on the left, and identify them by their color.
Also, if there are thin, dark veins around them, cut them off in small pieces, and if you are unsure about what they are, cut the largest ones and examine them, and do the same for the veins in the lower jaw.
As for the veins under the tongue, they are useful and should be extracted after extracting the frenulum from the jaw of the person suffering from harelip and mouth diseases, and how to extract them: place the patient between your hands with a sun shoe, raise their tongue and examine one vein under it on one side and the other vein under it on the other side, and identify them by their color.
Then extract them and preserve them without damaging them, as there are veins underneath them that may cause bleeding from those veins, and as for the three veins extracted from the armpit, they are usually extracted from people in general and should be extracted on both sides.
Either a needle with a wide, round eye or an oil-tin needle to the suture, or a sharp needle with a narrow, pointed eye, and this is the image of the wide, round-eyed needle:
It should be wide as you see to open the swollen, filled, prominent veins that are visible and contain thick blood like dar, and this is the image of the oil-tin needle:
And this needle is narrower and sharper, it is suitable for suturing thin veins that contain clear, straw-colored blood, and this is the image of the pointed needle:
This pointed needle is suitable for cutting and has various types of thinness according to the size of the veins, and its narrowness, and it may be inferred about others, and it is famous among craftsmen.
And as for the basilique, which is one of these three veins, its purpose in suturing is that it attracts blood from the vessels beneath the neck and chest, and then to the breast and abdomen, and it is recommended for the suture to be careful and to have a small part of it on his finger, as there is a vein underneath it, and if he adds too much of the needle in the suture, he may cut that vein.
In case of bleeding, it is not appropriate to stop the bleeding with a small needle but rather with a sharp instrument called nashl, as if the cause of the bleeding does not appear clearly, it is recommended to avoid it and seek alternative methods or request some of its parts.
Or if the location of the bleeding is known, a thread from the arm should be used to tie it, as we mentioned earlier, and before tightening the arm, one should locate the place of pulsation and then apply pressure on it using the pad.
Then, tie the arm and cut the flesh in a way that does not affect the blood vessel, as we mentioned earlier, and be careful that the blow is away from the place of the blood vessel, and if you notice that the tightening causes puffing in the place where you applied pressure, avoid it as it indicates inflammation of the blood vessel.
If you see the blood flowing like that of a young boy and it is thin and red, know that it is from the blood vessel, so at that time, quickly place your finger on it for a long time then remove your finger, as often the bleeding stops when the arm is tightened.
Leave it and warn the patient not to move or touch it for days until it heals, as if the bleeding does not stop, the wound becomes inflamed and you do not have any medicine at that time, then cut the blood vessel as its ends shrink and the bleeding stops.
Take a piece of date palm shell and split it, then take half of it and tie it firmly on the wound with stitches and bandages until the next day. If the bleeding stops, if not, treat it as mentioned before by applying cauterizing agents to stop the bleeding, and cutting the blood vessels is not difficult in most cases.
For small wounds and stitches in the arm, know that it is beneficial to draw out the blood from the top of the head and the lower part of the body to a place where it is mixed with basilic vein and quick vein as we mentioned before.
The person who is drawing blood should have a firm hold on the skin of the bloodletting area because underneath it is a nerve, and if he increases the pressure on the puncture site and hits the nerve, it may cause a bruise that is difficult to see, and sometimes it may not have been cleansed before.
If it is hidden in some people and is a thin vein that does not show, it is recommended to make your bloodletting incision sharp with a needle and avoid the nerve, exert yourself to do so because if the blood vessel is between two nerves, cut the blood vessel long. And as for the quick vein, it is beneficial to draw out the blood from the head.
This is a section title from the 10th century Arabic textbook on surgery by Albucasis. The translation of the excerpt is: "Benefits of Eye Diseases and It is Recommended to Use Olive Oil or Wide Rosemary Essence because it Penetrates All Blood Vessels and Nerves without Any Resistance.
This is a sentence from the 10th century Arabic textbook on surgery by Albucasis. The translation of the excerpt is: "Except that it is recommended to avoid using Rosemary Essence of Muscle Head and ask for a smooth place, unless it does not harm him if he is not hit by the first strike, otherwise it may cause swelling in some people if it is not done in the first strike.
This is a sentence from the 10th century Arabic textbook on surgery by Albucasis. The translation of the excerpt is: "However, that swelling does not harm him, and as for the method of the strike and its symptoms and what should be done to repair it, firstly it is recommended to know that the strike can be used either to preserve health only.
This is a sentence from the 10th century Arabic textbook on surgery by Albucasis. The translation of the excerpt is: "Or it can be used in diseases and what is used to preserve health and its duration and preventing the occurrence of diseases, the strike should be in one of the three veins that are in the groin, namely the femoral vein, the popliteal vein and the basilic vein, and the strike should be in the first spring when signs of engorgement appear.
The incision is made on Sunday or Tuesday after daylight has lasted for three hours, but the incision used in diseases has no fixed time and is done whenever necessary, whether it be night or day.
At every hour and at every time, boys should not be circumcised until they reach fourteen years of age, and the elderly who have exceeded sixty years should not be circumcised either. If someone decides to undergo circumcision for any reason, it is up to them.
Before circumcision, the foreskin should be cleaned with a dilute solution if it is heavily soiled to prevent it from sticking to the penis during circumcision, which could cause damage to the main organs. Those who are weak, diabetic, or obese should not undergo circumcision until their condition improves.
Circumcision should also be avoided after intercourse, diarrhea, constipation, frequent ejaculation, overexertion, physical exercise, sleep deprivation, and fasting, as well as any other physical or mental strain that weakens the body. Before circumcision, the blood should be checked for thickness if possible.
With food, drinks, and medications if possible, the person should enter a steam bath if not prohibited or engage in some physical activity to thin the blood and make circumcision on the first day of the month as we mentioned, and it is recommended that they keep their chest clear of all impurities throughout the day.
In ailments and anger and fear and all bodily afflictions such as fatigue, extreme rigidity, and impotence, and similar conditions, it is necessary to prepare a mixture of substances that people have used traditionally from various herbs, winds, and balms, and so on, according to each person's capacity.
Then, the masseur should sit on a higher stool than the one used by the person receiving the massage, then extend his arm and massage the person's back twice or three times, then tighten the bandage with the oil and rub it twice or three times, but the tightening should be moderate.
Because if the tightening is not moderate, it may either cause excessive bleeding or prevent relaxation and also cause bleeding, then after the tightening, it is necessary to massage the person's hands together with each other by interlacing them.
Until the veins expand and it is felt, then the masseur should gently wipe the affected area with old oil, especially the little finger of his left hand on the same spot under the intended massage position to prevent the vein from moving away and avoiding the blow. The translation of the excerpt is: "For among the veins, what you find is like a cat's tail that escapes at the incision, and from it, what is filled with wind, when the bandage is placed on it, it sinks under the bandage and deceives the incisor, and if the bandage opens the vein, it only opens narrowly.
Therefore, it is necessary for the incisor to be firm and careful in all these matters, then the bandage should be placed, if the vein opens from that place, otherwise, it may recur at that place or above it with the forceps if the incision does not throb.
If it throbs or the wound is painful, leave it for a day or two and do not tighten the bandage, because it may bring back a hot inflammation and does not enter the bathroom, then if you want to incise again, if the bandage entered and the opening was small and the blood flowed thinly.
I was afraid that the amount of blood that you want to remove would not come out, so prepare the bandage in the same hole and press it firmly on stability and increase the opening slightly and do this with the forceps before the incision throbs, because in many people, the incision may throb when the opening is small.
If you see him, and he has a burn, do not apply the whole cloth to it, for it will not help you. Instead, place something on it from olive oil, as it facilitates the flow of blood and is better in this situation than the oil itself or any other lubricant.
Use olive oil in all your dressings for fractures when there is bleeding, as it may be done by the trayaq farwak and shkhznya, if one of them is placed on the site, the blood will flow and dissolve if it is thick.
If there is a large lump in the fracture site, it often happens, especially for those who have not set the bone except that time or if the opening of the bone was small, then immediately place a moistened sponge on the lump and sprinkle some salt on it and tie it tightly for an hour, as it will dissolve.
You should do this after the blood has completely come out of the bone itself or from another bone, as if there is something black or green left in the site after days, it does not harm, but if you want, apply something from the dissolved sparrow and marsh mallow.
Or something from the juice of the fodenge and similar, as often a lump and nipple occur at fracture of the jaw, place your hand on it, if you find it smooth when you look at it, then that is bad nipple, so be careful not to apply anything from what we mentioned.
Perhaps he bled from an artery, but he stopped the bleeding by pressing on the wound and let it clot. Then he treated him with all treatments until he was completely cured. It is necessary for each person to lose blood according to his strength and the dominant color of his blood.
If the blood is black, let him lose until it turns red, and if he is thick, send him until he becomes thin, and if he is hard, let him lose until his hardness disappears. It is necessary for one who is full-blooded and strong and needs to lose blood to do so in one go.
He should expand the incision and make the drain wide, and if he is weak, then the opposite of that should be done, and it is necessary for him to lose blood in stages and for the drain to be narrow. The best thing to use for draining is a sharp, rough, non-porous knife.
This bleeding is a good sign from the incision and cutting of a nerve, and it is Hamdullah and As-Salm from the incision by its width and length. And if one is accustomed to fainting during incision, it is necessary to give him something to eat before the incision, such as bread soaked in water of pomegranate or sour milk.
If he has a fever and his blood has been drawn three times or four times, and if his body is cold, let him take before the cupping bread that has been soaked in wine or in honeyed milk or in rose water.
If the blackening occurs during cupping and its cause is the loss of a large amount of blood, it is recommended to drink meat broth and rose water with cardamom, and to use the mummification with galbanum, and to massage his chest with it, and to use all that we mentioned in the section on blackening in the chapter on cupping.
Whoever wants to relieve his arm and draw blood again should, if he has done much cupping and his strength is weak, gradually draw a little blood little by little according to his strength in consecutive days.
And whoever wants to relieve his arm and draw blood again and has a strong body should do so on the seventh hour or the ninth hour of his first cupping, and whoever wants to draw blood from his body in the opposite direction of where it flowed should go to him on the second day or the third.
And whoever has a lot of blood in his body that has become hot and hardened and caused him to have a fever should gradually draw all the blood at once, and let out a large amount, and widen the opening until the blackening is exposed after being free from all the conditions of cupping. And if you place your hand on his pulse when the blood is flowing, lest death occur due to the puncture, it often happens that this occurs if the hunter is unaware and negligence takes place. It is not appropriate if you intend to remove the arrow and let the blood flow again.
If the mouth of the wound has been plugged and it is difficult to exit the blood, either by pressing hard or pulling with force, this is a very dangerous matter. Sometimes you may leave him until he vomit again, and sometimes you can use the edge of the knife to scrape off the clotted blood from the mouth of the wound.
Or carry something salty that has been dissolved in water, or carry something from the farroq tray or shakhanai and gently press it to him until the blood exits, if the wound has become inflamed, leave him.
And do not press him until the swelling subsides, if necessity requires to let the blood flow again, there is no other option but either to vomit over that place or in the other arm or in the other wound.
And if the arrow is removed from the arm, it is removed as a substitute for the akhla and basilik if they are not available or hidden because it is made from them. How to remove it is that the physician puts his hand in hot water until the skin becomes red and the wound appears, then tie it tightly with a bandage moderately hard.
Then, squeeze the blood gently without causing any swelling or elongation, and make the incision wide enough for easy drainage. Place your finger above the joint of the hand to control the bleeding. If the bleeding is severe, dip the hand in warm water to help stop the bleeding.
However, if you are in the summer months, you can omit dipping the hand in warm water and instead focus on allowing the blood to flow into the warm water for a longer period during winter months. This method is effective for draining all the blood from the incision. Since there is no tendon or nerve underneath, draining the blood from the left hand is beneficial for relieving abdominal pain and its method of drainage involves massaging the back of the hand with a bandage or your fingers after immersing it in warm water until the blood clots.
Since there is no tendon or nerve underneath, draining the blood from the left hand is beneficial for relieving abdominal pain and its method of drainage involves massaging the back of the hand with a bandage or your fingers after immersing it in warm water until the blood clots. Then, squeeze the blood gently again and if it is completely drained, it will not harm him. Be careful not to pinch your fingers with the forceps, as there are nerves underneath and the area is prone to bruising. Then, place the hand back in warm water.
If you do not place the hand back in warm water, the blood may clot in the incision and prevent further drainage. Once the desired amount of blood has been drained, apply a salve and salt to the incision to prevent it from sticking together too quickly.
And likewise, you should do with each narrow section, and as for the benefit of drawing blood from the left hand, it is beneficial for treating fevers and so you should do in drawing its blood just as you did in the second one, and as for the benefit of drawing blood from the forearm, it is beneficial for diseases that are below the body such as rheumatism.
And preserving semen and diseases of the kidneys and ulcers on the buttocks and thighs and other such diseases, and how to draw its blood is that he should put his leg in hot water and carry it on his leg until the tendons relax then tie above the knee joint with silk and the place of the flesh is at the ankle visible towards the instep.
And if there is a lot of pus in the face of the leg, then draw its blood from the widest part of it or near the ankle at its base, for this is better and safer, for if you draw its blood from the face of the leg, it may damage the nerves beneath it on the face of the leg.
And make your drawing of blood for him as if you are trying to remove the tooth and the pulp should be removed, but if it is difficult for the blood to come out, then put his leg back in hot water and leave the blood to flow until it comes out, for if the person who draws blood makes a mistake in drawing blood for the first time.
The incision should be made slightly above the tendon, as this location is safe and does not risk damaging it, as we mentioned earlier. Similarly, make the incision on the other leg in the same way. As for women's blood, its source is near the coccyx on the side of the buttock.
The benefit of making this incision is to relieve pain in the heel, especially if it is caused by hot blood. The method for making this incision involves inserting a sharp needle into the heel from below up to above the ankle with four fingers' length of fine, long silk thread. This will not be visible except through this method.
If it appears, then incise it in any case, either by enlarging the opening or by removing it completely or cutting it open. Its location is safe, and it is found in most people but hidden very deeply. If you cannot find it, then do not worry about it.
If it does not appear by touch, then incise a part of its tendon, which is the one that appears at the back of the foot towards the ankle and calcaneus bone, and avoid damaging the nerves and release the desired amount of blood.
Then apply a bandage on the incision site and tighten it, as it will quickly heal.
Chapter 69: Treatment of Fractures in the Skull
In the helmets and their use.
The helmets may be from centuries, made of wood, brass, and glass. The helmet has two faces: one is the helmet with a strainer to drain blood, and the other is the helmet without a strainer.
These helmets without a strainer have two faces.
The helmets of the neck are both sides of the neck, the helmet of the jaw is under the lower jaw from the mouth, the helmet of the elbows is on the elbow, the helmet of the arms is in the middle of the arms, the helmet of the knees is on the knees, and the helmet of the ankles.
The helmets only attract the blood from the thin veins in the meat, and for this reason, they should not be used with heat or without heat in one of the diseases that cause swelling until the whole body is exhausted.
If the need for enema arises due to illness or as a regular practice, we use it at all times, at the beginning of the month, at the end of the month, in the middle of the month, and at any time when necessary.
And this is because some people, when there is an excess of blood in their heads, may need an enema to expel it. They may experience a heavy feeling and headache, and some may have redness in their faces, necks, and shoulders. Some may have hiccups in their faces and jaws, and darkness or blurred vision in their eyes. Some may also experience pain in the position of their molars.
And some may have an increased appetite, and some may taste blood in their mouths and feel it dripping from their teeth. Some may sleep excessively, and some may see blood, redness, wounds, and other similar things in their dreams.
Especially if it occurs in the middle of the month, we recommend performing an enema after two or three hours of daylight. The benefit of using an enema is that it helps to remove heaviness from the head and moistens the eyes.
However, it should be done after the body has rested, and this enema can be an alternative to purging the intestines. It is warned that those with a cold brain or a current illness should not use it, as it may cause great harm.
Therefore, it is not appropriate for the elderly and those with cold diseases in their heads, or those who are addicted to it, to use it as it causes forgetfulness.
Therefore, it is necessary to instruct the barber to lower his hand slightly with the razor, out of fear of causing forgetfulness. However, the use of the cauterizing iron is a substitute for cautery and cauterization.
Therefore, it is beneficial for coughs, shortness of breath, discharge from the respiratory apparatus, and sneezing and congestion. It is necessary to raise the cauterizing iron slightly as if it is lowered and used, it causes weakness in the heart and stomach.
However, the cauterizing iron of the Akhudain is beneficial for sudden headaches, toothache, and other dental pain, and it is a substitute for cautery and cauterization. It is necessary to instruct the barber not to deepen his hand with the instrument lest he cut a blood vessel and cause bleeding.
However, the cauterizing iron under the tongue is beneficial for mouth ulcers, tooth decay, and other oral diseases, and it can replace cautery and cauterization in the mouth. The cauterizing iron of the elbows is beneficial for heat and congestion caused by swelling.
The benefit of binding the abdomen with a belt is greater than that of binding it with three other types of bandages, namely the basilik, akhlaq, and qiyaal, because it draws blood from all the fine sinews in the meat and attracts those fine sinews from other sinews that are thicker than them until it reaches the attraction to the three thick sinews.
It is recommended that the belt should not be too tight because the place where it is placed is exposed to meat and underneath it are nerves and vessels, and as for the single belt that is tied around the waist, it benefits from the tendons of the seat and the lower curvatures.
It is recommended that the belt should be large and made of copper because the place where it is placed requires a strong grip and perhaps the glass belt has broken and caused a great restriction, and as for the leg belts, they reduce the fullness by a noticeable amount.
Because it draws blood from the entire body and benefits from chronic ailments in the kidneys, bladder, and uterus, and promotes virility, and benefits from pimples and boils, and replaces the function of pressing the sinews and veins except that it causes great harm to the body and causes constipation in most people, and the belts around the veins have a benefit similar to that of the leg belts.
Method of placing the gauze: First, place the gauze empty and moisten it with a moderate amount of water, but do not prolong its placement. Place it quickly and remove it quickly to allow the cotton to absorb the secretions towards the affected area evenly. Repeat this process and continue until you see that the area has become red and opened up.
When the redness of the blood appears, then repeatedly moisten the gauze and then examine the condition of the body. If a person has loose flesh with wide wounds, it is recommended to apply one piece of gauze so that the area does not become irritated.
The gauze should be expanded and slightly deepened, and the gauze should be adjusted gently if necessary. If there is thick blood in the blood, it is recommended to apply two pieces of gauze. In the first application, it should open a path for the thin blood and its water, and in the second application, it should check for the removal of thick blood.
If the blood is very thick, repeat the gauze for a third time to reach the desired result. In general, if we want to remove a small amount of blood, one piece of gauze is sufficient. If we want to remove a large amount of blood, more gauze is needed. And if we think that the blood is thick.
It is necessary to set a deep condition and the moderate limit in the condition is the depth of the skin only, what should be used from the bandages at the time of setting the bandages and from the water and what the bandager warns about, but if his skin was thick, hard, dry and his pores were narrow.
It is necessary to apply the bandages at the places of the bandages with open, smooth, and pure bandages, but if it is in the time of summer, then like the application of the khira or the application of the naphtha or the application of the sweet almond oil or the application of the rose oil.
And if it is in the winter, then like the application of the nergija or the application of the sosn or the application of the papaw or the application of the zanjabil and so on, but if the skin was thick and cold, then let the application be the application of the murzanjush or the application of the namnam or the application of the ban or the application of the shabath and so on.
And if the bandager has wide pores and fat meat, then it is necessary to avoid the application of the bandages and these people should wash their bandages after the bandages with the water of rose or with cold water or with the water of grape vine or with the water of rose oil or with the water of the legs and so on.
Wash the teeth with water or ashes and similar substances, but if they are very dirty, wash them with old wine or water of marcanguayo or boiled sugar cane juice or papaya and similar substances, and it is advisable to warn the patient in the bath and after the bath.
After leaving the bath, it is advisable to use it for one or two hours and it is not advisable for anyone to sleep after the tooth cleaning, what is advisable to be done by the patient before and after the tooth cleaning.
First, if the patient is a feverish and has sharp and inflamed teeth, it is advisable to take cooling substances such as rumman and hindaba with water and honey and sugarcane juice and jallab and similar substances, and make his foods like friaryeg and meat of gazelle soups and similar substances.
And if his condition is cold, it is advisable to drink honey drink and mead or sugarcane juice with alcohol and aromatic wine of medium strength which is between old and new, and order less food and make his food like friaryeg and quince and pigeons and chickens soups.
It is necessary to give some people, at certain times, a drink of Faruq tragacanth or musk or shilajit before the circumcision and before the cauterization or after it, in order to strengthen the main veins and quench the blood. It is not recommended for the barbers to give it.
As for the circumcisions that do not have a condition, they are those that are placed on the liver, spleen, breasts, abdomen, flank, and kidney position, because these organs do not tolerate conditions on them, but rather it is intended to draw blood from one organ to another.
We place the circumcision on the breasts in cases of mastitis or use it to remove a cold smell from the organ that has entered the organ, as placing the circumcision on the abdomen and flank heats up the organ and drives away the pain for its removal.
The circumcision can be placed on the kidneys if there is a stone or calcification in them, perhaps it opens the stone or removes it from its position, and so it does if it is placed on the liver and spleen when a wind that causes pain in them is present. These circumcisions can also be used empty with the medicine only.
You may use heat or fill it with foul water in cases of mouth sores, as it fills the cavity and becomes large with hot water alone or with water that has been boiled and some herbs that are suitable for that.
Then it is placed on the affected area and held, removed, and repeated as needed. This is an image of the cloth used with heat:
Her mouth should be open with two fingers and the depth of the cloth should be half a centimeter, with a small hole on the side that the needle enters, made of Chinese brass or yellow brass with thick threads.
The cloth should be flat and folded to prevent damaging the tissue when placed on it, with a fold of brass or iron where the candle is placed on fire. This cloth can be larger or smaller depending on the disease.
Women should use a smaller cloth as the cloths for boys and girls are not used for men and women, and how to place this cloth on fire is that you light a match or a small candle from a strong wick and place it in the middle of the bent penis where the cloth is.
The ascent of the fire should be from above towards the bottom of the mold, lest the body of the patient burn. Then it is placed on the limb and the finger on the hole that we mentioned until when we hold the mold, what we had tied was removed.
The bark then came out from that hole and the mold was broken on its place, then the foot of the fetish is placed on the side and it is returned if needed, but the mold used for the disease of shoulder by water does not have a hard nail and no hole.
But it is only used by filling with water and placing on the limb, this is its image:
This mold, whenever it was large enough to hold much water, was better.
Chapter 70.
In the commentary of Al-Jurjani.
The commentary only used in most cases of the limbs where it is not possible to place the mold because of their smallness like the cheek and the throat and so on, or because the limb is surrounded by flesh like the finger and the nose and so on.
How to use it, is to take the commentary that is in the water that is pure and free from impurities of the sweat, then leave it a day and night in the pure water until it becomes thin and nothing remains in its core. Then, the body is first cleaned with a sponge or cloth, then the affected area is washed.
Until it becomes red, then it is applied to the affected area, if it is too full and bursts, it should be removed, otherwise, the affected area can be scrubbed with a brush and then washed with plenty of water and dried. If the bleeding continues after the removal of the clot, it should be soaked in cold water.
Then, it is applied from above until the bleeding stops, if there is too much blood, a compress made of cotton, powder, or similar materials should be applied until the bleeding stops or a piece of clean, soft cloth is placed on the affected area.
Then, the compress is left until it sticks to the affected area, as the bleeding stops. If the clot needs to be reapplied, a different one should be used if possible. If the clot does not stick, the affected area should be washed with clean water.
Or, a needle is inserted into the affected area until blood comes out, then a compress is applied if it feels any blood, it should be placed on the affected area. If you want to remove it, sprinkle some salt, flour, or ash on it, so it falls off the affected area.
The Third Chapter
On Trepanation
This chapter also discusses the important aspects of surgery, which is trepanation, or drilling holes in broken bones and fractured bones.
Know, O my son, that this chapter may be considered as one of the secrets of physicians and commoners, and those who have not perused the works of the ancients in it or read a single letter from them.
For this reason, this art of surgery has become almost extinct in our country, and I have not found a single skilled practitioner in it. I have only benefited from it due to the length of my reading of the works of the ancients and my insistence on understanding them, until I extracted knowledge about it from them, then I was forced to practice and experiment throughout my life.
I have illustrated for you in this chapter all that I know about it. I have continued to practice it after presenting it to you and simplifying it from the length of explanations, and explaining it in detail, and illustrating many images of tools used in it.
As for adding more explanations as I did in the previous chapters, it is only by the power of Allah, the Exalted.
1st Section: On the Treatment of Wounds and Injuries
In this section and the following, various matters related to the treatment of fractures of bones should be discussed before we proceed to mention the broken and dislocated limbs one by one. It is appropriate that we mention in the beginning of this chapter some general principles and sections. It is necessary for you to first understand these principles and establish their truth, as those who are eager to learn this noble craft will not be like you.
I say that when a fracture, dislocation, or sprain occurs in any limb, it is necessary to go immediately to the site of the injury or excretion, or both. If something prevents this, such as weakness of the strength, or if the person who suffered from one of these things is a child or an old man, or if the time was very hot or extremely cold, then you should not go immediately.
Then he should limit his food to cold vegetables and poultry, and avoid drinking and meat that is too thick or filling, as well as any food that fills the veins with blood until the inflammation has subsided and there is no expectation of suppuration at the site.
Then the patient should return to his usual diet, and if the broken bone is in the jaw, he should eat food that is rich, thick, and strong, such as meat, rice, lentils, beans, and the offal of animals. The white of the egg, fresh fish, and thick drink, etc., if treated in this manner, will cause the fracture to heal quicker and better. Know that the broken bones in strong men and elders cannot be united and knitted back to their original state naturally.
Due to their bone density and strength, they may unite and knit back together, but not as well as the bones of young boys. Naturally, around the broken bone, there is a substance resembling a callus that hardens and binds the fragments together until they fuse.
Until they are bound together to the point of maximum strength and durability, as it was originally, so that nothing hinders his actions.
Therefore, the food of the patient should consist of foods that are durable, binding, and thick, as we mentioned earlier. Know that fractures may vary depending on the difference in body parts, as a fracture of the thigh bone is different from a fracture of the skull, and a fracture of the chest bone is different from a fracture of the backbone.
Similarly, all other body parts are different from one another, and we will mention each type of fracture in detail in its own chapter, and the type of bone fracture may also vary within itself.
The fracture may occur without the presence of splinters and may be longitudinal along the bone, with or without splinters and fragments, clean or dirty, accompanied by a wound and laceration in the skin, and it may be a simple fracture.
For each type of fracture, there is a specific method for reduction, which will be detailed in its respective place. One can identify a bone fracture by its deformity, mobility, palpable irregularity, and crepitus felt when gently touching it with your fingers.
If there is no apparent deformity, crepitus, or tenderness in the bone when gently touched with your fingers, and the patient does not complain of severe pain, it is not a fracture but could be a sprain, hairline crack, or simple fracture. In such cases, manipulation and probing should not be performed.
Instead, apply the medications mentioned in the appropriate place later, then gently splint it. Note that if a bone fragments and shatters into two pieces without producing splinters, it has completely disintegrated from its original owner.
It is necessary for you to promptly examine and set in order the affected area before a hot tumor occurs. If a hot tumor does occur, leave it for several days until it subsides, then treat it with whatever method you deem appropriate from your skill and cunning.
Know that fracture and setting are easier than bone splinters, which may occur in the bone. Then, follow the instructions mentioned later. If there are bone splinters, it is necessary to extend the broken part from both sides, whether by hand or foot.
Either by your hands if the part is small, or with two ropes and a rope and hand, and place the part in its natural position until it extends. Then, trim the broken ends of the bone in their places with whatever method you deem appropriate from your skill and cunning.
Be careful not to cause pain or injury with your actions, and strive to unite the broken bone with its original partner in the best possible condition. At that time, gently feel and manipulate them with your hands. If you find anything abnormal, correct and set it according to your ability.
Be cautious of the sharp and powerful forceps, as many ignorant people use them excessively and often cause severe injuries or burns to the body, as you have witnessed multiple times from their actions.
Then, after achieving perfection and skill in using forceps, ensure that the affected body part is at rest and free from any movement or disturbance. Warn the patient not to move it during wakefulness, sleep, when changing positions, during defecation, and at all times of movement, as these actions could cause damage to the body. The goal is to maintain the natural position of the body part and alleviate pain.
When the affected body part feels pain or discomfort in its current position, it is necessary to move it to a different position that does not cause pain, while also ensuring that the new position is level and straight.
To prevent the affected body part from becoming displaced if it is moved, I will describe to you how to handle fractured body parts, as they vary in size and location. Some are small, like arms and fingers, while others are larger, such as ribs and limbs.
For fractures that are open and have loose fragments, such as those in the thigh, back, and chest, it is necessary to apply rigid splints to hold the body part together and support it evenly from all sides without any interference or instability.
Then, after your rest from setting, you should apply the appropriate paint. Then, apply a thin layer of plaster on the fracture site. Fold the bandage three or four times according to the need of the limb, and gently press it with the bandage. Then, take it to the upper side of the fracture site.
Then, press gently on the fracture site. Slightly separate the bandage from the fracture site and let the pressure relax a little until you get something suitable from the correct position. Then, take another cloth and fold it on the fracture site as well.
Then, fold the bandage to the lower side of the fracture and do as we mentioned in the first folding at the upper side. Then, put between the folds of the plaster or crushed cloth what is suitable for the depression of the fracture.
If there is a depression and otherwise, do not put anything in it. Then, fold another cloth on it. Then, arrange these loose and tight folds from your watch if there is no air or heat in the limb.
If there is air or heat in the limb, bring what can soothe this wound and remove the air and leave it for some days. Then, press these loose folds at that time. The folds should be made from the best part of the date palm leaf, carved and prepared with wisdom.
The lancets made from boxwood, palm leaves, copper, or the like, as available, should be of equal size to each other and to the shape shown here.
However, the lancet placed on the fracture itself should be thinner and slightly longer than the others. The length of the lancet is made according to what is appropriate for the broken bone, its size and smallness.
Then, it is tied with another cord according to the first tie. Then, it is secured from above with strong threads as mentioned in the previous section, that is, the tie at the fracture should be stronger. The tie becomes weaker as it goes away from the fracture.
The threads should be medium in thickness and flexibility, especially since the threads, if they are thick like what you have seen from the work of the ignorant who make their threads from flat sheets of cloth, is a great mistake.
Because the tie will be off balance and flexible threads also do not work because you cannot pull the lancet with them as desired, and it should not be less than a finger between the lancets.
If the patient's toes are injured by the sharp edges of the instruments after proper incisions, place a soft, clean cotton or a sterilized sponge underneath them to prevent any further harm from that. However, if the fracture is accompanied by a wound and a rupture occurs in the skin, mention it separately.
Know that not every fractured body part should be set with the instruments on the first day, as the body part, if it is large, should not have the instruments placed on it until five days or seven days or more, depending on your concern about the occurrence of inflammation.
This is the property of bandages that were used by the ancients to be placed on fractures, fractures, and wounds, a general short bandage that can fix fractures and correct for all types of injuries, especially boys and women, as it is not affected by heat or cold.
It is that you take from the flour dust and it is the fine flour that is related to the flour in the hopper when the mill is moving, grind it as it is without whitening it with egg white and make its dough neither thick nor thin, then knead it.
The last plaster for fractures, dislocations, and ulcers should be taken from the flesh of sheep, ladanum, acacia, rasn, magath, and skin from each ten drachms and five drachms of patience. From the herbals twenty drachms and from the Roman or Armenian clay twenty drachms. Grind everything and mix with water from the herbals or with egg white if the wound is moist, then use this plaster as it is excellent for healing broken bones quickly and fitting most people due to its balance.
Another plaster that also helps for fractures and ulcers should be taken from magath, sheep, and white khatem from each ten drachms of patience five drachms of acacia six drachms of Armenian clay twenty drachms. Grind everything gently and mix with water or egg white and use.
Plaster for joints and bones that have left their place and to relieve the pain from them and to prevent bone displacement and fractures, take cotton soaked in vinegar and immerse it in hot oil and apply it to the affected area. This plaster does not have healing power.
However, it is preferable for settling the hot tumor and expelling the ailments, especially, a property of another bandage that forces the broken bone, taking the strong tin paper and the rough banana leaf and cutting them all together and bandaging with them moist, a property of another bandage used specifically for fractures during childbirth.
To analyze the remaining tumor, take from the source of the khutamii and banana, napkin blue and flour of carrot from each part cutting all together and grinding it with the paint if the body is not burned, if it was burned, grinding it with the senna water or water and using it.
Another strong bandage in analysis from this first one is used when a solid tumor occurs during childbirth, taking from the source of the khutamii and bark of the acacia and the thyme and the frankincense and myrrh and napkin blue and banana from each part.
All are cut and ground with the vinegar water or sweet water or paint, all depending on the heat of the body and its calmness, but Albucasis did not mention in his book to put it on the broken bone when fixing it.
Except for the Qirawat, which is made from pitch and oil, no other description is given except that it should be of medium thickness between stiffness and softness. As for Jalinosus, he thought to place on the broken bone, while fixing it, something warm like honey, wax, and similar substances as mentioned.
Recipe for a plaster that is beneficial for swellings and pain, take mallow, lentils, human hair or feather down, chalk, and salt in equal parts, pound and strain it, and mix it with it, and wrap it around the affected area.
Then, if no harm occurs to the fractured bone, do not fix it for many days, as if any of these symptoms occur in the place, it is a sign of severe pain or intense discomfort or inflammation.
Then, fix it at the right time and do not delay this matter, and apply the plaster to him, then take a soft sponge or sea sponge with fresh, wet sand, dip it in dirty water and clean the place until the pain subsides and the inflammation calms down, then leave the body to rest for an hour.
Then, apply a poultice made of yeast soaked in water and oil or of red rose and tie it on him for a night until the heat subsides and the inflammation calms down and the pain disappears, then return him to a soft bandage and a light plaster, but do not apply the first strong one.
Press on until it is completely removed, for if you see that the tumor, redness, pain, and other symptoms have all disappeared, then use the bandage and sutures as you did initially.
Do not remove it until three, four, five, or seven days have passed, and it may remain for twenty days, depending on the condition of the organ, as we mentioned, until it becomes necessary to fracture and approach the healing of the tissue.
Also, at that time, add more sutures than the initial ones and also increase the thickness of the food for the wound according to what we mentioned earlier. If you see that the fracture site has become dry and cracked, then know that the food is prevented from reaching it.
Apply diluted water to the fracture site every three days and gradually reduce the sutures, as this will allow the food to reach the organ and it will heal quickly. However, what the unskilled do in forcing the fracture again is different.
If it does not heal as it should and they force it to heal in an unnatural way, this is a mistake on their part and a great deception. If it were correct, I would have mentioned it in the initial texts of their books and performed it myself, but I have never seen any benefit from anyone in that regard. The correct answer is that it should not be done.
Chapter Two.
In the fracture of the forehead.
There are many types of fractures in the forehead, with various shapes and causes. Some fractures occur due to a sword blow, and may result in the entire bone breaking until it ends in a condition called "al-safaqa," which is under the bone. As the carpenter does with wood.
Therefore, this type of fracture is called "qadawmiyya" and if the sword cuts some of the bone and breaks only the face, without reaching the end of the bone, it is called a "qala' mutlaqa" fracture. The wound from these two fractures may be large or small.
Another type of fracture is a "hishama" or "ridza," which occurs due to a blow from a stone or falling on a stone or similar. This fracture may be open, almost reaching the pericranium under the bone, or it may be in the face of the bone.
The wound from these two fractures may also be large or small, and another type of fracture is a "khafiyya" in the bone at the root of the hair, which is a slow, gentle movement.
This type of fracture is called "hair-like" because it occurs due to a fall or the impact of a stone, and the fragment enters the periosteum and becomes displaced, as shown by the bronze if it is struck with a blow.
Moreover, this is most common in the soft skull bones of young children, and all types of fractures may have sharp or blunt fragments, which will be mentioned in the treatment of each type in its place, and we will learn about all these types of fractures by examining them.
Examining them by probes and removing decayed flesh from them, and as for the "hair-like" type, it is known that it is examined on the bone, wiped and painted with a mixture of bronze, because the fracture appears black, and as for the treatment of the fracture, one first looks at the symptoms of the injury.
If you see among its symptoms something that indicates a serious complication such as vomiting, loss of consciousness, loss of speech, coma, high fever, dilated pupils, redness of the eyes and other similar symptoms, then do not approach the patient and do not treat him, because death is imminent for him with these symptoms in most cases.
If you observe symptoms that are not life-threatening but for which you hope for recovery, then in such a case, take up his treatment. This is because if the wound occurs in its initial stage and this happens during the winter.
It is necessary to exert effort in removing the bone before the fourteenth day, regardless of the situation. Even during summer, it is necessary to hasten in removing the bone before the seventh day lest the tissue underneath the bone becomes spoiled and exposes the symptoms that we have described.
If the fracture of the bone has reached the dural membrane and was accompanied by crushing and bruising, it is necessary to cut the damaged part as I have described to you, which is to circumcise the head of the injured person.
And expose the bone in whatever way you are able to, depending on the shape of the wound and what is hidden from the injured person. If upon exposing the bone, blood or hot pus flows out, treat it accordingly.
And it is to fill the wound with a poultice soaked in drink and oil, red wine, and to cleanse the wound until the pus settles and the bleeding stops, then proceed to examining the bone and removing it, which can be done in one of two ways.
Translation: "As for the single face, it is to cut the bone with a delicate sharp knife, narrowing the sinus, and this is its image:".
Translation: "Then, use another knife after this knife, making it slightly wider from it, and this is its image:".
Translation: "Then, also use another knife wider than the second one, and it is necessary for you to have several knives of different sizes, some wider than others, and some narrower than others, and they should be at the peak of their sharpness, and they should be made of good Indian steel or good copper".
Translation: "Use gentleness in striking the knife so that it does not loosen the head and hurt him, if the bone is strong and solid, it is necessary to drill around it before using your knives with non-penetrating drills, but they were called non-penetrating drills".
Translation: "Because they do not penetrate the bone beyond its surface for the sake of having a flat mark on the sharp side of the drill, which resembles a ring or a small circle, preventing it from penetrating and exceeding the edge of the bone".
Translation: "You should take several of these drills, each one adjusted to the size of the edge of that bone until you have a drill for each bone with a sharp point in length and adjusted to the size of its edge". From the great, medium, and small incisions.
As for the method of making incisions around a broken bone, it is to place the incisor on the bone and guide it with your fingers until you know that the bone has pierced, then move the incisor to another position and place between each incision an amount of olive oil or similar.
Then cut between each incision with scissors and do this to the extent that you can with kindness, as we mentioned, until the bone is removed, either by hand or with some other tool that you have prepared for this.
Such as the jaw and the incisors, it is necessary to be very careful that the incisor or scissors does not touch anything of the tooth, so if the bone has rotted and become free from the tooth, if it is attached to it and removed, then it should be cleaned.
And smooth the roughness that remains in the bone with another tool that resembles scissors, except that it should be softer and gentler than all the scissors, if there is any small bones or fragments, then take them with kindness with what you have.
Then treat the wound with plasters and bandages as mentioned, and if the other face of the work is simple and far from the mention of the trick mentioned by Galenus and praised greatly by Madhah, this is his saying. It is first necessary for you to begin by revealing the part of the bone from the place where it was fractured, which is strongest and most prominent until when you have revealed that part, you fit underneath it the tip of this dental instrument and here is its image:.
The part of the dental instrument from it is blunt and does not cut anything, and the sharp part of it in its sides is long as you see, so that the part of the dental instrument should be supported by the hardness and the face of the sharp part on the bone, then you strike on the sharp part from one side.
With a small hammer until you cut all the bone neatly as it turns and you are safe from the flesh so that there does not occur in it any dangerous event, even if the physician is ignorant of people and is not skilled, yes, if he is cautious.
If there remains something necessary for the bone from the flesh in some places of the bone, then remove it from it by the tip of the dental instrument itself and extract it from it gently, then it will be extracted without pain and fear.
But if the fracture of the bone did not reach the flesh and what was cut from the bone was its face and some sharp edges remained, then it is necessary to remove those sharp edges and cut off those sharp edges with a fine file that has taken various sizes so that you can use it in every place that fits it and fix it according to what leads you to do the work.
Use the same broken bone and its shape, and you should first use it in your surgery for the bone that is most exposed, then use the next finer one after that, and continue doing so until you reach using the finest and sharpest one.
As for the other small fractures and delicate breaks, it is recommended to use them in each case according to what leads to their healing, which is a matter that is not hidden from anyone who has knowledge of this craft, as we have mentioned and explained in the larger fractures.
If the membrane remains exposed at your bone fracture, you should take a needle of the size of the wound and dip it in red oil and place it on the wound's mouth, then take another needle that is double or triangular. Then dip it in a drink and red oil and place it on the first fracture, and do this with the finest that you can manage so as not to weigh down the wound, then use a wide bandage from above, but do not tighten it except by the amount that holds the wound.
And you should give him this treatment for a day or two until you ensure that the hot mass is healed, then clean it and use afterwards the medicines that have benefits such as the roots of sosan and flour of carraway and cardamom and zirandeh and so on, and it is to make a powder from these medicines.
The wound should be left alone as it is dry and in tact, and a medication should be used that will promote healing without causing pain. It is important to make sure that the wound is kept clean and free from any dirt or pus, and that no pus is allowed to collect in the wound.
Because if the pus collects on the brain, it will damage and rot it, causing a very serious condition known as brain abscess. This can be seen in the skull when the bone is exposed, especially if the wound is left untreated.
If the skin appears black, it is a sign that the patient has the condition we mentioned earlier, and there is no doubt that they are dying. The blackness is caused by the medication used on the wound, which had the power to cause this blackness.
You should take a part of honey and three parts of rose oil, and mix them well together. Then apply this mixture to the wound and treat it with various types of treatment until it is completely healed.
The Third Chapter.
If the nose is broken,
Know that the nose does not break, but only the upper part of it, both together or one at a time, because they are bones. The lower part of the nose is not a bone, but rather cartilage, and only this part may become crooked or displaced.
If one of the fingers is broken, it is appropriate to insert the small finger into the nostril and align the break from inside by your little finger and thumb from outside until the nose returns to its natural shape. This should be done with gentleness and care to avoid causing pain or discomfort.
If the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and the finger did not reach it, it is appropriate to align it with a thin, slightly thick rod. If the fracture is on both sides, do the same. It is recommended to apply pressure to the fracture on the first day after the injury.
If possible, after the seventh or tenth day when the swelling has subsided, insert a small piece of broken bone into the nostril if the fracture is on one side, or two pieces if the fracture is on both sides.
The piece should be slightly thicker than the size of the nostril hole, and some early practitioners mentioned that it should be coated with fat and changed daily. However, I do not agree with this method and recommend using a white paste made from egg yolk and flour of rice instead.
Then, the piece should be left until the bone heals and the swelling solidifies. It has been reported that a small piece of ostrich feather can be inserted into the nostril after it has been coated with a thin layer of broken bone to help hold the piece in place and prevent the patient from difficulty breathing.
This is not a necessary thing if you wish to make it and if you wish to make the fetal, but if the nose appears during your work and it is hot, then compress the nose with a cotton or a wet cotton ball soaked in water or oil of St. John's wort.
If the hot swelling does not appear, then it is appropriate to compress it from outside with fine flour and finely ground candurr, mixed with egg white, then place a soft cloth on it and do not bind the nose with anything at all, for if the nasal bones break into small pieces.
Or if it has burst, then it is appropriate to cut it and extract it with the tool that is suitable for it, then stitch the wound and treat it with what hardens and melts from the appropriate materials. until it heals.
Chapter Four.
In fractures of the lower jaw.
If the lower jaw fractures and it was not a fracture with a cut, but only from outside and has split into the inside, then its recognition is easy.
If the fracture is in the right side, then insert the little finger of the left hand into the mouth of the patient and do the same if the fracture is in the left side, then raise the fragment of the fracture from inside with gentleness to outside.
When the other tooth is outside the bone, its positioning depends on its situation. If the fracture of the jaw has spread in two directions, it is appropriate to use the mallet from both sides to ensure its stability until its positioning is complete, especially if there has been a fracture in the teeth.
Or, if the part that you wanted to remain has separated, you can use a gold thread, silver, or iris fiber, then place it on the fractured jaw, and then place a double-headed nail on it, and then place a large, strong piece of leather or a piece of calfskin of equal length to the jaw. Then, you should bind it from above according to what is available for binding and ensuring its union so that it does not separate. The patient should be advised to refrain from talking and rest, and give him soft foods. If you suspect that something has changed in the shape, do not hesitate to address it on the third day.
Then, you should bind it from above according to what is available for binding and ensuring its union so that it does not separate. The patient should be advised to refrain from talking and rest, and give him soft foods. If you suspect that something has changed in the shape, do not hesitate to address it on the third day. Then, you should repair what you have bandaged with the dust of the rue mixed with the whiteness of the egg or with flour after removing the nail from it, and place a soft cloth on it. As long as it sticks to that cloth and has not changed its shape for the bone, leave it.
Do not lance it until it suppurates and the fracture becomes severe, as this fracture often worsens within three weeks. If a pus appears during this period and a hot abscess forms, use the method we have repeatedly mentioned for its resolution until the abscess disappears.
If the fracture is accompanied by a wound, and if the bone has already separated into splinters or fragments, gently remove those splinters with the tool that is suitable for their removal, depending on the need. If the wound opening is narrow, widen it with the probes according to your requirement.
Then, if you have removed all the splinters and nothing remains, suture the wound opening if it is wide, otherwise, use one of the needles that are suitable for that purpose. Suturing the wound until it heals.
Chapter Five.
In the treatment of fractures, if it occurs.
The most common type of fracture is at the front of the metacarpal, where it breaks into two pieces without splintering and is easier to treat.
And sometimes, the fracture may have splinters, which is more difficult to treat. If the fracture is accompanied by a wound, and if it is not a wound, you should prepare two slaves to hold the broken bone in place while another slave extends the neck towards the other side.
Then, align the fracture with your fingers until its shape returns to its proper form without any deformity or angulation. If it is necessary to extend more, it is appropriate to place under the eyebrow a piece of cotton or wool.
Then, the bone should be extended to the extent of your need and the splint is raised and the pad is pressed with your hand until the fracture is aligned as it should be. If you cannot pull the end of the splint outwards because it has gone too deep, then the eyebrow should lie on its back.
Then, a medium-sized pad is placed under the cheekbone and the splint is pushed downwards until the bone in the deep fracture rises above. At this point, the fracture is corrected and aligned with your fingers.
If you feel that a part of the splint has broken off and is moving, it is appropriate to cut it off with scissors if it is stuck in the bone. After the fracture is aligned under the splint, a device that maintains the reduction is used, which is made of wood or metal, and this is its appearance:
It resembles a spoon without angulation and its width is according to the size of the bone, whether it is large or small. As for its length, it is also according to what you can work with, so that it has two ends, one wider and the other narrower as seen in the single end.
If the laceration you made during the extraction of a bone's sharp point is wide and you have exposed the hot tumor, then sew up the wound with sutures. However, if the laceration is narrow or you are afraid of the hot tumor, then leave the wound open and treat it according to the extent of the laceration.
If the extent of the hot tumor is large, then apply grease made from rose petals, vinegar, or drink to it. However, if the bone is thick and there is no laceration or cut, then place a bandage made from the ashes of rye flour mixed with whiteness of egg on the bone. Then place a thin, flat cloth on it and then place a circle under its tail if necessary. Then take a long cloak with a width of about an inch or so, and then apply a double-layered bandage on the cloth and the bandage. Then take a thin, flexible piece of wood. Its width should be three fingers and its length should also be the same. Then insert it into the laceration, then insert that laceration along with the thin piece of wood in the position of the cloak that covers the fracture. Then tighten the cloak over the fracture as it naturally wraps around. And the cloth should be placed on its neck and under its healthy tail, and also under the sick animal's tail. Then repeat it on all sides and observe how the tightening can firmly fix the fracture, which is something that is not hidden from you.
Do not remove the fractured bone from over the broken bone. So it is necessary to examine the bandage every day, and whenever you see that the fractured bone has disappeared, correct that and tighten the bandage, then place the bandage on the back of the patient and place a small pillow under his arm when he sleeps at night.
So that the muscle does not hang by his side and the fracture of the shoulder joint occurs due to the elevation of the arm or the arm is tied to the neck, and do not tighten the bandage unless a disaster such as a swelling or a tumor occurs within twelve days.
Then replace the bandage if you see such a thing. And if it is painful, leave it until it becomes stable and the fracture of the shoulder joint becomes stronger, and it becomes stronger in eighteen days. And it may be in some people within less than that.
Chapter Six.
In fractures of the elbow. Say: What breaks in the elbow is not the whole bone, but only its parts, so whenever it breaks or breaks in the middle, it is known by touch. According to the shape of the fracture, do as follows.
Mold it to its natural shape in every possible way, then apply a mixture of soot from the fireplace, egg white, and linen flour on top of a thin layer of pork fat, and finally place a wide piece of board on it.
Apply it thinly, about the thickness of your elbow or slightly thinner, if there is any roughness underneath, smooth it out with a fine linen cloth until the board becomes level, then remove it by lifting it up with a long piece of cloth.
Tighten it firmly and secure it from the board so that it does not slip off its position, examine the bandage every day, and whenever it loosens, tighten it again and smooth out the board if it slips off, and make sure the arm is bent at the correct angle, and the arm should be kept in a sling for twenty days.
After a day or fifteen days, if you have completed this period in safety, then it is one of the bones that should not be broken or crushed, so if any sharp piece of bone emerged from the bone and was causing pain under the skin, cut it off and remove it. Do as mentioned in the previous chapter on fractures of the thigh bone regarding the softening of hard tumors if anything happens.
The Seventh Chapter
On Setting Fractures of the Ribs
The ribs may fracture in the middle and slightly, but rarely is this exposed. However, their ends are more prone to fracturing and dislocation. Symptoms of a mid-ribs fracture include pain that is severe, difficulty breathing, and coughing.
If bleeding occurs and the dislocation is visible in the fractured bone, it should not be hidden from the senses. The patient should lie on their back with a pillow between their arms, then the injured limb should be gently lifted and the ribs bent by the hands from both sides, and efforts made to set it in place on all possible surfaces.
Until the bone returns to its proper shape, then bandage it and apply a splint made of a thin board or a piece of wood from a pallet or similar material, and secure it with a bandage in the back after covering the fracture. Then gently tie the bandage to secure it on the fractured bone so that it does not dislodge, and repeatedly apply the bandage along the backbone firmly, then examine the bandage at regular intervals, and as the patient relaxes, tighten it again.
If necessity requires it to be done at the position, if there is pain or a tumor, then immediately proceed with its solution and remove the bandage and correct what is shown of that in order to facilitate its treatment, then replace the bandage if you see fit for that. Then apply pressure until it is completely cleansed.
Chapter Eight.
In the treatment of fractures, if the joints have broken, know that the fractures usually occur in the parts that are narrow and flat, behind the back and at the ends of the ribs, because they are cartilaginous and this is known by touching with the fingers.
Treat them by aligning the fracture with your fingers on the strong face until the shape is as it should be, then bandage and compress the broken bone with a splint if necessary, because if the joint fractures are inclined inward, they expose to pressure and severe pain.
And if it is like a fracture that shows signs of infection, because the bone can break and also expose to difficulty breathing, coughing, and heavy bleeding, which is difficult to treat, and many early physicians used various tricks for it.
Some say it is necessary to make the food of the patient that which causes belching and wind, so that the abdomen may be inflated and stretched, and the fracture is pushed outwards. We disapprove of this lest it be a sign of the occurrence of hot tumor, if it has not occurred, then if it has occurred, it increases in it and confirms it.
Some say that a piece of cloth is placed on the wound and then sucked with force, which is similar to measurement, except that it is feared that the cloth may stick to the wound due to its weakness, and some say that it should be covered with soft cloth that has been soaked in hot oil.
The splint is made between the fingers until it fills, so that the fracture is level if it has been bound on a straight line, then the patient is treated with the treatment of the shoulder from food and drugs, if the patient is severely exhausted, it is a difficult matter that one cannot endure. The bone was crushed and painful, and we were afraid for the patient, so it is necessary to cut on the wound and expose the broken limb, then apply the machine that preserves the fracture, as described in its description, and cut the bone gently and remove it.
Then we gather the edges of the wound if it is large by sewing and treat it with cauterization until it heals, but if there is a burn in between or a hot inflammation, then we apply a poultice made of garlic oil on the affected area and treat the patient with what can soothe the inflammation from inside as well.
He lies on the side that has the wound covered until it heals.
The ninth section.
In the treatment of spinal and neck injuries.
If the bones of the neck are fractured and it is said that it is exposed to certain things and more exposed to others, and also for the vertebrae of the back, if such a thing happens to one of them and he wants to know whether it will heal or not, then... If you see that his hands have relaxed, become soft, and died, and he could not move them, nor stretch them, nor grasp anything, and if they were pricked or pierced with a needle, he did not feel it and did not find any pain in them, then know that he will not heal in most cases, for he is dead.
And if he can move them and feel pain in them when pricked or pierced with a needle, then know that the bone has healed and the patient will heal with treatment, but if the spinal injury is like this and you want to know whether it will heal or not, then...
Look at his legs, if you see that they have relaxed and what happened to the hands has occurred in them, then when he lies on his back the wind and urine come out without his will, and when he lies on his stomach the feces come out without his will. And if he lies on his back and wishes to urinate but cannot, know that he is dying, so do not try to treat him, for if nothing of this kind has happened to him, the matter is less severe, and the treatment for what has happened is to calm the hot tumor.
By placing on the inflamed furuncle, alone or mixed with cooked egg yolks, three times a day until the hot tumor settles, then apply a strong, clean cloth bandage and tie it tightly on him, order him to rest and be quiet.
He should not sleep on the side that causes him pain until he is free from it, for if something has occurred at the bone that can be removed, such as a splinter or something else, then it is necessary to cut his skin and remove that bone. Then gather the edges of the wound if they are large by sewing, then treat with the Mercurochrome until it heals, for if the last bone of the little finger is broken and it is the sinus, then it is necessary to insert a probe from the left hand into the sinus.
The fractured bone is adjusted with the other hand according to what can be achieved and accomplished in the adjustment, then it is wrapped with adhesive and bandage if necessary, and then it is sutured if needed.
If you feel a sharp piece of the fractured bone, then split it and remove it, and treat the wound with the appropriate treatment until it heals completely.
Chapter Ten.
On setting fractures of the ribs.
It is said that the ribs fracture in such a way that they only break at their ends and extend in length, and lean towards the inside and expose to pressure and cause pain at the place of fracture and bruising and swelling of the leg from which the rib is fractured.
Then set it by passing your hand over it until you reach the fracture, and shape it according to its natural form as much as possible if the fracture is at its ends only.
If the fracture is in the middle or has leaned towards the inside, then place pressure on the belly to make it possible for you to set that fracture. Then wrap it with adhesive and place a splint of wood or leather and suture it tightly.
Do not fear the transfer of fractures or the loss of the dislocated parts, and level the unevenness of the bones with what fills them until the cord reaches its equilibrium. Command the patient to sleep on his back or on his healthy side, for if he lies on his sick side, a hot swelling will appear.
Stop applying pressure and manipulation until the hot swelling subsides, then place him on what will soothe him as previously mentioned, then return to manipulation and apply the cord as appropriate, for if there are projections or separation from his ends, something is not suitable to be removed.
And do not touch it, but level it from outside as we mentioned and leave the cord until it is free.
Chapter Ten.
In manipulation of bone fractures.
The bone is between the elbow and the head of the arm. If it fractures, manipulate it on one of its two faces, one of which should take a sharpened, smooth, medium-sized cord like this:
And tie ropes at its ends, then hang him from a raised position and make the patient sit on a chair, then receive his fractured arm on the cord until it becomes stuck in the middle of the cord's bend, then hang something heavy above it.
The servant should extend the patient's arm downwards, then the surgeon should straighten his broken bones together until they are in their proper position, and the other method is for the patient to lie on his back and tie a bandage from his neck.
Then command two servants to control the part above the fracture with their hands and the other to control the part below and extend each of them towards his position, and if you want the extension to be stronger, tie a bandage under the fracture and above it with a bandage and extend each of them towards his position.
If the fracture is close to the tip of the little finger, it is appropriate that the bandage be placed in the middle under the nail and the other under the fracture towards the ring finger, and similarly if the fracture is close to the ring finger, it is appropriate that the bandage be placed on that position and on the ring finger itself.
Then the fracture is straightened gently without force until it is in its proper position and the bones are well aligned, then it is bandaged if there is no hot inflammation, but if there is hot inflammation, leave the bandage until the seventh day and put on it a wet cloth soaked in wine and olive oil.
Until the tumor is settled, then crush it. The method of crushing is to place the bandage on the fracture, then place a new layer of rag over the bandage, and then bring the arm back to its original position, with the hand open on the joint.
Then bandage the fracture and crush on the arm and elbow so that the arm stands upright like the splints, unless something prevents you from doing so or if nothing has changed in the broken bone, then use the splints.
And it is that you place a splint on the fracture itself, which is wider and stronger than all other splints, and make the distance between each splint the width of a finger, and the length of the splints according to the fracture, increasing by three fingers from each side.
Then crush on the splints as mentioned in the first chapter.
And it is that your crush should be stronger at the fracture position.
And as the fracture gets worse, the crush should be less, so if you see that the splints and crush are as mentioned in the time of your injury, then do it.
And if you feared the hot tumor, leave the crush and splints until the seventh day as mentioned, then examine the dressing every three days to prevent infection, foul smell, or lack of food reaching the organ due to excessive crushing, all of which was mentioned.
If you are confident that nothing of the sort will happen, do not perform the suturing until after many days have passed, and the patient should lie on his back with his hand on his abdomen and a soft cushion filled with cotton placed under his arm.
Examine it frequently during the day and night to prevent the broken bone from deforming or the sutures from loosening, and make sure the patient's diet is light initially until the bones become strong enough.
His diet should be strengthened, as it is usual for the bones and legs to become strong in forty days, so at that time it is appropriate to perform the bath and use the crutches that are suitable for him, if the fracture was severe and prominent.
Do not remove the sutures until after fifty days or two months.
The twelfth chapter.
In the treatment of fractures of the arm.
The arm is composed of two bones, called the radius and ulna, one of which is smaller and follows the thumb, and the other is larger and lies below the smaller one from below. Sometimes only the larger bone or the smaller bone may fracture, or both may fracture together.
When the small upper jaw fractures, it is easier to set and heals faster, and when the lower jaw fractures, it is difficult to set and heals slowly, and if both jaws fracture together, if the jaw that fractured the small upper jaw, it is the one that fractured.
The doctor should make the setting gentle and careful until it is straight, if the upper jaw is fractured, he should make the setting stronger, and if both jaws are fractured, he should make the setting much stronger.
The shape of the hand should be used in setting, and the setting should be extended on a pillow, and the index finger should be raised above all other fingers, and the little finger should be bent below all other fingers, and the middle finger should be bent on itself.
The pillow should be at the same height as the setting to avoid the middle finger causing discomfort.
Then the assistant should extend the arm from below, either with his hand or a bandage, and another assistant should extend it from above in the same way, then the doctor should set the bone until it is straightened to the best possible shape, if there are splinters of the bone, they should be removed.
Return each fracture to its place, exerting effort to do so, for if a sharp fragment appears and is eating away at the skin, and you have no desire to remove it, then split it and extract it according to the method we mentioned earlier, as if it were a door.
Then treat it from there, if the incision is made in the first extraction and a hot mass appears, then apply a poultice made of the following: red gum, white wax, and make it moderate between the edge and the base, and tighten it gently until the mass settles.
Then remove the poultice and place a prepared cloth mixed with flour from the rye and whitened egg on it, then apply the bandage that is placed over the fracture, making it slightly wider and stronger, and know that in most cases, the number of bandages for the arm will be more.
If the fracture was in one zandal or both, then make your bandage stronger and tighter at the site of the fracture, and every time you pull it upwards or downwards, make the bandage slightly looser as mentioned earlier in the beginning of the chapter.
Let the bandage that is placed over the fracture be a flexible, moist one and not too stiff, and use thread that is specifically medium between the edge and the base as we mentioned earlier, and examine the limb and the dressing after several days.
If something happens that needs to be repaired, such as a wound exposed in an organ, it is necessary for the organ to be soaked in warm water until the wound heals and the organ is left undisturbed for a night until it rests, then the repair can be attempted again.
If the repair has already rested and the bone has disappeared or something similar, make every effort to fix it all. Also, if food is prevented from reaching the organ due to excessive repair, it is necessary to warm it slightly and leave it for several days until the food reaches it, then repair it again.
If nothing that was mentioned has been exposed to the patient, it is not appropriate to do anything until twenty days or more have passed, then the surgeon should hold his hand on the patient's neck and keep his arm moderate, avoid rough movements and make the patient sleep on his back.
This fracture of the arm may heal in twenty days or two and thirty, and sometimes it may heal in eighteen days, all depending on the condition of the bones and the strength.
Chapter Thirteen
In the fracture of the hand and fingers.
The examination of the hands and fingers is a simple matter, as it rarely reveals fractures, only minor injuries.
The patient should sit upright with his back straight, on an even surface.
Then, the patient should place his hand on a flat surface with the fingers extended. The doctor should then straighten the broken bones and align them properly. If there is no severe heat, apply a bandage and splint to the affected area. If there is severe heat, apply a poultice from above onto the affected area.
She described it in a simple manner, if the fracture is towards the palm side of the hand, make a circular shape with the splint and instruct the patient to grasp it with his broken hand. Then, apply a long splint.
The poultice should be made from thin, soft leather to gently touch the skin and moisten it while supporting all fingers and aligning them properly. If the fracture is towards the outer side of the hand, make a poultice from above and another from below in the hand to keep the hand open and upright.
Then, the splint should be applied as the hand naturally bends and interlaced between the fingers with a bandage. If the fracture is revealed by one of the finger examinations, if it is a phalanx, align it properly then apply the splint with the hand. If you prefer, make a small upright poultice to support the fracture.
If the fracture is in all the fingers, such as the middle, ring, or little finger, or the thumb, then it should be aligned and fixed to the adjacent finger with a splint, or both of them on the back, as this is the best option, or place a small upright piece of bone on it.
As we mentioned in the eyebrow, examine it at the time of injury and after it, away from the hot tumor, and if anything happened as a result, repeat the description as it occurred.
Chapter Fourteen
In treating fractures of the hip.
The hip bone often fractures and is palpable because it bends forward and backward, and to treat it, a bandage should be placed above the fracture and another below it, and the patient should lie on his face.
Then, each bandage should be extended to its position on the back, if the fracture is in the middle of the bone, and if it is near the root of the hip, a thin bandage should be used, made of cloth or similar material.
At the root of the hip, towards the groin, so that the splint falls above and the other bandage below the fracture, and if the fracture is near the knee, the bandage should be near the knee so that the splint falls below, then the surgeon should align the bone with both hands until it returns to its natural shape.
The bone is fractured neatly, therefore, it is necessary to apply the bandage and the splint if there is no harm to the limb and the inflammation is hot. If the inflammation occurs in it, leave it for several days until the hot inflammation subsides, then return to its treatment.
As for the splint, it is necessary to wrap it twice or three times around the fracture with a stiff, wide cloth and leave whatever remains, then wrap the thigh until the heel returns to its original place and insert a long thread between the buttock and the thigh near the ankle from below, and let the ends of the thread come out from both sides.
Then, apply the remaining part of the bandage on the thigh and place the pad in the same position as the fracture on the buttock, then make a pad from it and place it on the bone of the thigh, then fill the gap between the buttock and the thigh with cotton to make the splint even.
Then, start with the strong splint from the middle on the fracture position three or four times and as you tie it from the fracture position, make your splint weaker and thinner and looser.
Then, bring the ends of the thread that you inserted between the buttock and the thigh to the bottom until it reaches the ankle bone, also tie them from the other side with the remaining pads.
If the suture does not come loose from its position, then leave the sutures on it as long as there is no speech, ulcer, or pus, and so forth, for if anything of this kind occurs, immediately address its resolution and repair all that has occurred according to what we have repeatedly mentioned.
If there is a cavity in the bone that decays, it is appropriate to fill it if possible, otherwise cut it and remove it, and treat the wound as mentioned earlier until it heals, and this fracture of the thigh without adding the leg with splints may be mended.
As we mentioned in the muscle and arm, except that such a fracture does not expose the joint, and if it is fixed without the leg, it will never be able to move its owner again.
And know that the thigh fractures in fifty days or more, or less by a little, or more by a little, all of this depending on the differences in the conditions and other cases.
Chapter Fifteen.
In Fracture of the Ankle.
The ankle is a part that rarely shows fracture, and it often shows dislocation, but if it shows fracture, it is either a split or a separation of its parts, and this may or may not be accompanied by a wound.
The entire process is done by touch and force, aligning the separated parts of it with the fingers until they unite and blend together according to the extent of the alignment, healing, and skill, then wrap the bandage and apply a movable plaster if necessary.
Then, a suitable bandage is applied from above the appropriate dressing, then all the conditions mentioned in other fractures, such as hot swelling and the like, are treated by facing each part with what is suitable for it until it is cleansed.
The sixteenth chapter.
In the treatment of fractures of the leg.
The leg has two bones, one of which is thick and called the thigh bone, and the other is thin and called the shinbone, and both are exposed to fractures similar to those of the arm bones. Therefore, the treatment of fractures in the leg is similar to that of the arm, and the method of treatment is the same. If both bones fracture, the leg will turn in all directions. If the thin bone fractures, the leg will turn towards the front. If the thick bone fractures from below, it is a condition that cannot be hidden from you.
Use the splint, alignment, and bandaging according to that, except that if the fracture of the leg is a severe one with many sharp fragments, it is better to make the splint less and lighter, and to exert effort in healing it.
In the leg, there is more work than in the arm and it is that if you have leveled the teeth and completed all your work, take two split bamboo sticks from the bamboo used for leveling rooms between the cracks of the doors or from date palm fronds or similar.
Choose from them what is slightly thick and not thin, and let its length be from the ankle to the bottom of the leg, then fold each one in two lengths of two folds, place one on the leg and the other on the other side.
And let it be from the ankle to the bottom of the foot, then connect the split bamboo sticks in three places on the sides and the middle because with this part, the leg will not tilt to the right or left and will be firmly supported well, and a splint of wood along the length of the leg may be used.
And it is placed in it to protect it from movement and as much as possible, do this in fractures if there is a special wound with it, then examine the leg every day and check it carefully for tumor or pus or any of that. And when something of that happens, treat it as appropriate until it heals, and the bone of the leg takes thirty days or similar to heal.
Chapter Seventeen
17th Chapter. On Fractures of the Leg and Fingers.
As for the heel, it does not usually show fracture of the metatarsal bone. However, the bones of the leg may show fracture, and also the fingers, although less frequently than in most cases, they usually show dislocation rather than fracture.
If the bones of the leg show fracture and you see that some of them have shifted, then the patient should place his foot on the ground, elevated like a stool, then you lift your foot and place it on the part that has risen from those bones, then gently rub and align them.
Until they return to their original positions, then lift the bandage and plaster from above and place a small flat-headed nail under the sole of the foot, then tightly bandage the foot after breaking its fracture and other parts as needed.
If it has been three or four days, then remove the bandage, you will find that the bones were fractured or dislocated, so do as you see fit. However, if some fingers are broken, force and align them according to what was mentioned in the treatment of finger fractures.
Then, make a splint for the broken finger, long enough to cover the finger and slightly narrower than it. Then place this board under the foot that you described and tightened it firmly, if the fracture involved two or three or more bones.
Then, make a splint for each finger, of a size that fits into the palm and tighten the board under the foot so that each end of the board is outside the sole of the foot to hold it firmly in place.
You should not forget to apply all that we mentioned to you regarding the symptoms of fractures and treat each case appropriately.
Chapter Eighteen.
On the fracture of the clavicle, scapula, and mention of the leg.
When the clavicle fractures, bend it and then gently lean her back slightly to align it with the spine, then hold it in place from behind, and apply a cotton pad to fill the fracture until it becomes round like a ball.
Then gently shake the woman and slightly raise her back, as the cotton pad will come out until it becomes round like a ball near the fracture, and the bone fracture will return. Then place a bandage on her back, and when she wants to urinate, gently remove the cotton pad.
He should be turned on the way you first placed him, then return to his original position for seven days or thereabouts, as he will recover. If you wish, you can give him a sheep's udder and place a reed pipe in his mouth, and insert the entire milk into his anus.
Then blow into the pipe with force until the milk is expelled from his anus, as the fracture will heal. Then stuff him with cotton and rest for several days as described, until he is healed. However, if the thigh bone of the leg of a man or woman breaks, it is used in setting the fracture.
And his positioning is as described for the thigh bone, and you will not be mistaken in these unusual fractures that he mentioned occurring and especially for those who have some experience and understand this book well, as the fracture itself often occurs in many situations.
In the correct positioning and setting of the fracture, you will understand, and if he mentioned the man breaking his thigh bone, take a saw and insert it into the wound, then place a poultice on it and bind it tightly, leaving it for three days or thereabouts until it is healed.
Chapter Nineteen: The Treatment of Fractures and Dislocations
In the case of fractured bones with wounds.
If a person presents with a fractured bone accompanied by a wound, especially if the bone is large such as the thigh bone or the shoulder bone or the like, it is recommended to reduce it immediately if possible, provided that the conditions for reduction are met as we have previously mentioned.
If the wound is bleeding, it is recommended to cut it immediately and apply a poultice made of finely ground zaj (a type of herb) if you do not have any other means. Then proceed with the reduction of the fracture in that day itself and do not delay it.
If a hot abscess does not occur, then if a hot abscess does occur, leave the reduction until the eighth day until the heat of the abscess subsides and do not attempt it in the third or fourth day as it may cause serious symptoms.
If the fractured bone is exposed through the skin and is already aligned, it is recommended to reposition it gently with your hands and apply a steady pressure. If you do not have the means to reposition it with your hands, use this device which is made of iron with a length of seven fingers or eight. Exhibit them on the scale of the wound.
Therefore, the physician should take three or four of them according to the amount of treatment needed for each type of fracture, and they should be well-drained with a slight thickening so that they do not burst when examined at the time of operation.
And they should be sharp at the tip with a hook at the end, and the highest part of them is thick while the lower half is very thin, and this is their appearance:
And they are called by the Greeks 'perma' for a small hook, so it should be sharp at the tip and curved like a hook, and it should push the bone fragment with one blow until the bone returns to its original position and the fracture fragments fit together.
If the broken tip of the bone is thin and the forceps did not grasp it well, then it should be cut with a sharp instrument until the forceps can grasp it, but if it cannot be returned to its original position as described, then it should be cut with the instruments mentioned earlier.
Or, if possible, insert a splint into the bone and remove any remaining sharp edges or thin fragments, then if the bone returns but there is severe pain after it has returned and it is very painful, know that the bone has not returned to its original position.
If you have the opportunity to return it to its natural position, do so, for you will be doing a great benefit for the patient. If your forceps has grasped the bone, then immerse the tip in strong black vinegar, especially if it is summer and do not place a cotton or anything greasy on the wound.
To prevent it from becoming putrid and decaying, use the forceps at a time when you are not grasping the bone and leave the wound open so that you may puncture it with a needle at intervals according to the size of the wound.
Be very careful not to suture the wound with fracture, as many ignorant physicians have done, causing their patients either death or infection or gangrene. Let your sutures be fine and even, opposing the sutures of other fractures.
If the wound is clean or a large wound and you were afraid of some of the bad symptoms we mentioned and he felt pain at the site, it is not appropriate to place forceps on it. Make him splints from hard rags in the position of the forceps and suture him with them.
If after a day or two you see that the wound is beginning to produce pus, remove the rags you placed on it with vinegar, then use the poultices and compresses that are customary for us to dress wounds such as the four-cornered compress and the like, and it is appropriate for you to apply a plaster.
The wound should be examined every day in the evening and morning until it rots and heals, and the bone should be set in a position that allows the pus to drain downwards easily. If the wound has lasted for many days without closing or stopping the pus flow, then know that there are small fragments of bone remaining.
It is necessary to probe the wound with a probe and remove any fragments that are not fully drained, as they can cause pain and further damage to the tissue. Remove them in any way possible.
If the wound appears to be infected with pus, ulcers, or any other type of decay, treat each type of infection according to the remedies described in the relevant section of this book.
If a large bone is broken and fractured, causing it to protrude from the body, such as the hip or shoulder bones, do not attempt to pull or remove it. Often, attempting to remove such bones will result in death. Instead, leave it until it rots away after twenty or thirty days.
When treating the wound, if you see a place where treatment is possible, then treat it. Otherwise, leave it alone.
Chapter Twenty: Operations on the Head and Neck
In treating the deformity that arises from some fractures.
This deformity often arises after fracture, especially when it is near the joints, making the shape of the organ ugly and sometimes preventing the organ from performing its natural function.
If the deformity is severe, one should use medicines that contract, such as frankincense, labdanum, myrrh, and other similar substances, by taking some or all of them and mixing them with a binding drink or egg white or glue.
Then, the medicine should be applied to the deformity in a plaster, tightly wrapped around it with great pressure, and left for many days without being removed, then it is removed and another is applied until the deformity disappears, God willing, or a strong lead plaster is applied on top of it.
Lead has a property that removes all that is in the organs, so if the deformity has hardened and become severe and necessity required its removal, it should be cut from above and the surrounding flesh or shredded with some scissors until it disappears, and the wound should be treated until it heals.
The Twentieth Chapter
In the treatment of fractures, if it becomes displaced and the bone remains after that fragile and not in its original form.
If the fracture of bones becomes displaced and the bone remains after that fragile and weak, it is only due to many reasons. One of the reasons is excessive use of bandages and tying them incorrectly, or excessive tightness of the bandages until the food cannot reach the bone, or excessive movement in the wrong time, or lack of blood in the body of the patient and its weakness.
To treat this, feed the patient and massage his body until blood increases in him, use heat and apply happiness and joy and so on, then apply a poultice on the bone to attract much food or continuously moisten it with weak water. Until the food enters him and returns to its natural form.
The Twenty-Second Chapter
In the treatment of broken bones, if they become displaced and prevented from functioning as they should.
When the bone is exposed after fracture and has become displaced or twisted or deformed, which spoils the appearance of the bone. Except in cases where the organ does not prevent itself from performing its natural function, it is not appropriate to accept the claim of those who assert that they can break the organ from its head. Many ignorant doctors and quacks have done this in our country.
This act is extremely reprehensible, leading to great harm and deceit. However, if the injury and complexity are genuine, it is appropriate to apply water that has been boiled with herbs such as khatma leaves, its root, and the king's nail, among others.
It is treated with the boiled herb such as diacalion, well-made, or with the juice of khatma root mixed with chicken fat and shrimp oil, or with fresh tuna meat cut into pieces and cooked in hammam water, among other remedies called antidotes.
And if the complexity dissolves, it is treated with constant gentle rubbing by hand, moving the organ in all directions at all times. If the injury has progressed, hardened, and necessitated treatment with iron.
Then, the bone should be cut, and any excess complexity or bone should be removed with sharp instruments, using gentleness in that effort and care.
Chapter Twenty-Three.
The Incision is the extraction of a joint from its natural position, which impedes movement and deforms the body's shape, causing severe pain and discomfort to the patient. Therefore, when an incision is necessary, it should be performed immediately.
It should not be delayed, as delaying the incision may cause the joint to become swollen and stiffen, making it difficult to perform the incision. Therefore, it is not recommended to delay, move, or prolong the incision when the joint becomes swollen, as this often causes pain and discomfort to the patient.
However, if the incision is necessary, it should be performed immediately on the affected joint, then left to rest until the swelling subsides slightly. Then, the body part should be soaked in warm water and oil, then gently massaged and treated according to what was mentioned for each part in its respective place.
The sections of the incision have also been arranged according to what was mentioned in fractures, from top to bottom of the body.
Chapter Twenty-Four.
In the Treatment of Lower Lip Incision.
The incisions are only made in emergencies and their removal is done on one side of the face, either they may gradually disappear from their positions or completely detach entirely until they heal. To the region of the chest until the tongue protrudes and he cannot hold it, and he cannot bear to have his jaw forced open and his tongue flicker with speech, then if he is gently removed, he may return in most cases to his former self in the easiest way.
However, if the removal is complete and total, it is recommended that he be quickly returned rather than delayed, and that a servant hold the patient's head while the physician inserts his single finger into the root of the jaw from inside the mouth, if the jaw is on one side.
Or he may insert both of his fingers if the jaw is on both sides, and the rest of his fingers from outside, to straighten it and make him relax his jaw and go in all directions, and the physician straightens the jaw and pushes it until it returns to its place.
If it is difficult to return them and especially if both jaws are involved, use a moist cloth with warm water and oil until they become easy to return, and do not delay their return as we have said, then if they return and stand and the patient's mouth opens and they have not relaxed, then at that time place compresses made of a burnt linen cloth mixed with oil and red on them.
Then, tie the bandage loosely around the patient's forehead, with the patient's head and back resting between two pillows to prevent them from moving their right or left side, or swallowing anything, but rather to make their food soft and easy to digest.
Until the pain subsides and the jaw is fully opened, let him eat whatever he feels comfortable with, without forcing it, and do not make him open his mouth for eating, drinking, or crying until the jaw is fully opened and cleared.
If the jaws are difficult to reopen and they do not return to their original positions, this often leads to fever, persistent headaches, and sometimes the patient's stomach may be affected, or he may lose his voice frequently. If you notice such symptoms, know that it is a failure.
Often, such cases may result in death within ten days.
Chapter 20.
On reopening the jaw and the angle of the mandible.
As for the mandible, it does not reopen from the inside, as it is connected to the chest, and if it does, it can be felt. To reopen it, the patient should lie on his back with his arms extended.
Then press the wound firmly with your fingers, as it returns, then place a bandage and dressing on it and tighten it, but if the edge that follows the wound and is connected to it does not come off except in scarcity, if it comes off one day, it should be reapplied and adjusted according to what we mentioned and what is available to you.
Then place a bandage, dressing, and tightening on it, and command the patient to lie still until it is cleansed, and with this treatment, the edge of the wound will return to its original position if it also returns to its original place.
Chapter 26.
In the treatment of wounds.
Know that the wound only comes off in three directions, one of which is that it comes off towards the pubic area downwards, and the second is that it comes off towards the chest, and sometimes it comes off above the wound, and this happens in scarcity.
And it does not come off towards the back for the place of the shoulder, and it does not come off towards the front for the place of the nerve, and the most common that comes off and exits downwards towards the pubic area, especially in those who have little flesh, because it exits quickly and enters quickly.
If their meat is abundant, it is the opposite, meaning it comes out difficultly and goes in difficultly. Sometimes, for some people, it may cause a blow or a fall, which makes the buttock swollen and hot, so one might think it has ruptured, therefore, it is necessary to examine this until you confirm its health.
When treating it, you will notice that the mouth opens downwards towards the anus. If you compare between the swollen buttock and the healthy one, you will find a clear difference, and you will find the top of the buttock with inflammation, and under the anus when touching the top of the buttock, it feels like an egg.
The doctor should not raise his hand to his ear and move it in all movements, and similarly, if it ruptures towards the chest or above, you will find it clearly visible when touched, not hidden.
This rupture may be easily repaired if the doctor is skilled or young, and he can repair it by raising his hand above then placing your fingers under the anus and lifting the joint with force up to its position, and the servant raises his hand and extends it above.
Then, he should lower it quickly, as it often returns rapidly. If it does not return and the patient has had difficulty swallowing for many days, it is recommended to bathe the patient in warm water and use a soft cloth, similar to cooking the leaves of the mulberry tree, hemp, and the king's seal in water and using it.
Then, the patient should lie on his back and a soft cloth of moderate hardness is placed under his foot. The doctor then places his hand on the cloth behind the patient's foot and holds the patient's hand, extending it downwards.
Then, he should push the cloth with his foot if it returns to its original position. If you wish, you can repeat this process on the same side. It is recommended to prepare a longer leg than the patient's and stop him from the side, inserting the other leg under the patient's foot and raising his foot until the patient is suspended in the air. Another servant should then pull the patient's hand downwards under his belly. If the patient is light, it is recommended to attach something else to him to weigh him down, as it often returns to its original position within an hour. It may also return on another face.
Then, a long plank of wood is placed on the ground with its head in a smooth, not too thick or too thin shape, similar to the shape of a honeycomb. The patient's foot is then placed under the plank after placing a soft cloth on top of the plank. The patient stands on the length of the plank.
Then extend his hand from the other side and also extend his body from the other side with force, for the joint will return to its place quickly. If it is difficult to return it, use this treatment: take a stick of about two arms' length. And its width should be about four fingers and its thickness about two fingers, so that it has a rounded head to easily enter into the depth of the bone on this image:
Then tie a smooth knot on the rounded head to prevent the stick from hurting the bone, then let it lie under the bone and extend his hand and arm on the stick downwards and tie the stick on the muscle, tendon, and tip of the hand.
Then place the arm on a pillow. Press it and extend his hand downwards, leaving the rest of the body hanging from the other side, for the joint will return to its place. If it has entered on any face that is possible, then it is recommended to place a moderately sized ball under the bone.
Then he should carry the prepared bandage made of flour from camel's hair mixed with lime and egg white on the affected area as it is wrapped from above, then tighten the ball from under the bone firmly and tie it with the bandage from above and hang his hand on his neck.
He should not move his hand for seven days, and the diet of the patient should be light until the organ regains its strength, as it is quicker to heal; then after the seven days or five, he should gradually move, and if it is stable and has not relaxed, then it has healed.
If the joint is frequently dislocated due to moisture or another cause, it is recommended to use the kyphos in three stages as mentioned in the chapter on the kyphos, and if all of this is done and the bandage is removed after seven days, but the joint has not stabilized.
If the bandage was removed and tied again, but it did not stabilize and he relaxed and it could not be raised above, then know that the nerve in the head of the thigh has broken or stretched or relaxed; then know that the joint will never stabilize in its place.
As for the fracture that is towards the chest and breast and back, it is pushed and stretched with the hands until it returns; all of the bandages and treatments are used until it heals, but if there is a deformity after healing in the organ and slowness in movement.
The bath-keeper should not frequently use hot water to soften the hardened skin, as it may cause it to return to its original state.
Chapter 22
In the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder.
The shoulder joint dislocates with difficulty and also returns with difficulty to all directions, especially forward or backward, its displacement is not hidden from you as it occurs under observation and touch in any form of displacement.
If the dislocated shoulder joint is correctly reduced, it will be clearly evident to you by the movement of the joint and he will not be able to extend his arm or touch his elbow, and you should immediately reduce the displacement before it becomes inflamed.
If it becomes inflamed, it is difficult to reduce and the joint may not have healed completely, especially if the displacement is backward, as it is more severe than any other type of displacement and causes greater pain and often death accompanies it.
If it is possible, the joint should be reduced by having an assistant extend his hand with both hands and arms relaxed, and the doctor's hands from above and below the shoulder, while pushing the joint with both hands simultaneously or with the palm of his hand until it returns to its original position.
If the fracture is in front, it may be reduced by repeatedly striking the palm of the hand against the root of the little finger until it aligns with the other fingers. If this method does not work, a very strong and forceful mallet should be used, which is to strike the arm twice.
The assistant should also hold the arm firmly to prevent it from slipping during the mallet strike, then move the arm in all directions after wrapping it with a folded cloth or a wide bandage. If the surgeon applies grease to his hands, it will make it easier to dislocate the joint.
Then the joint should be forcefully pushed back into place, and after it has been dislocated, a bandage with a grip and starch should be applied, which is tightly bound and the arm is left to heal for several days.
Then, if the joint has been successfully returned to its place, the bandage and splint should be removed and left to heal. If the joint does not become painful after it has been dislocated and repositioned, the bandage and splint should be reapplied and left to heal for several more days until it becomes painful, then it should be removed.
If movement is difficult, one should not use moisture in the warm bath and gentle massage until it becomes soft or place a fat, smooth piece of meat on the joint then tie it and leave it on for a day and night, then remove it and put it in the warm bath, if perspiration occurs, gently rub the joint with it.
Then prepare the meat again twice or three times with entry into the warm bath until it becomes soft, and if you wish to put fresh beef fat on it, moistened with oil and tied on it, do this repeatedly as it becomes soft and returns to its original state.
Chapter Eighteen.
In the treatment of dislocating the jaw.
The jawbone often dislocates and its joint becomes loose, unlike other joints, but it is necessary to quickly reduce the joint at the time it dislocates before the joint moves too far or becomes fixed in an acute angle.
If the joint is reduced, place the hand of the patient on a board and extend his arm, and the doctor places his hand on the back of the joint and pushes it until it returns, unless he should check if the jaw has dislocated to the inside of the hand.
The surgeon should place the palm of his hand on the board at the front and back, especially if the knife is prominent to the outside of the hand. If the back of his hand is on the board, he should place the inner side of his hand on the board so that the surgeon's hand is on the same level as the joint, and then tighten it with a bandage suitable for the swelling.
Do not let him do it again, as he does not bear it and you cannot retract it after he has had days unless the joint remains crooked and the surgeon will not harm him in any way if his hand relaxes and he cannot grasp anything.
Then you know that the nerve is severed or ruptured, there is no remedy except to suture with catgut, perhaps it will help and perhaps it will not help at all. If the tendon has been retracted, then apply the bandage that we have prescribed, then tighten and leave for five days.
Then he should move and stretch his hand, if it is stiff and there is something hard in it, then soak it in warm water and massage it repeatedly until it softens.
Chapter 29
In the treatment of fractures of the fingers
If the fingers have fractured in all directions, when one of the fingers breaks out to the outside of the hand or inside, extend the finger and push the fracture with your thumb until it returns, then tie the tip of the finger and turn it towards the direction in which it broke.
Leave her two days, then release her and massage her until she stands upright on the second day. If it is at night, tie her up in the same position and rub her with oil during the day and exercise her at night, doing this for several days until she strengthens.
And do the same to him if he curves towards the palm of his hand, tie him towards the same side, and do the first action until he is straightened, and also do this to him whenever he curves towards other sides.
The thirtieth chapter.
In the treatment of fractured spine.
When a fracture occurs in the spine or neck, it is a complete fracture or many fractures have moved away from their original positions, there is no treatment for this because death will soon follow.
And a sign of this is that the urine comes out without control, he cannot hold it, and often some of his limbs relax, either both legs or one arm, or one leg, and if one fracture has moved away from its original position, often it will disappear.
And if it moves to four directions, the one that disappears in the back is called a "spine," and treatment for this is that she should be examined, if the spine has occurred from birth, there is no treatment for this and the fracture cannot be healed, and if it has moved away due to a fall or blow and so on.
The ancients mentioned it with various treatments by long speech that does not return more than a little benefit, and they abbreviated from that what is enough to spare much of what they brought from my approach to the meaning and explanation of it, and I illustrated the tool contrary to what they explained and showed it.
I say that the hardness which is mentioned from ancient times in the chest has no remedy in it and no relief from it, and likewise the one to both sides, but only the one that is mentioned in the back specifically with what I am describing, which is to extend the ill person's face.
On a table raised near the wall and spread underneath and a wet cloth so that it does not hurt his chest, then place a propped up board in a trench in the ground towards his head and another board towards his legs in the other end of the table.
And a servant holds the board and it is not firmly fixed in the trench and another servant holds the other one in that position then cover the chest of the ill person and under his armpit with a thin, tight cloth and extend the end of the cloth to the board near his head and tie him in it.
Then, the sutures are made with a needle on his back and on his knees, and at his armpits. Then, all the sutures are gathered together and tied on the other board that is near his legs. Then, each suture is extended to its place on the board with the needle, and neither of the boards should be removed from their designated places.
Unless they are not authenticated as we mentioned, and the doctor places his hands on the sutures with force until they return, or he places a board on them, then he leans on the board with his legs until they return. If they do not return by this treatment, then he takes a board that is about three arms long.
And he carves in the wall that we mentioned should be near the patient, a place for the board to enter, then he places the board in the middle of the board on the board, and the doctor places his legs on the other side, and he makes a strong pull until the sutures are tight.
And she returns to her place, and if you wish, you can make it with the ladder that is spread by hand, which is to bury in the ground near the patient's head at the end of the operation, two boards that are about an arm long, and also at his legs at the end of the operation.
After placing a small piece of wood between each board, and making a hole in each piece of wood through which the lead pipe passes, the entire wood is fixed into the ground so firmly that the bat cannot move it. Then an adjustable auger is inserted into the holes in the wood.
At the end of it, a hole is made through which an auger of a length of one span is inserted into the other boards in the same manner, and then the silk thread that was tightened around the neck of the owl is tied to the lead pipe at its head, and the silk threads that were tightened around its legs are tied to the lead pipe at its feet.
Then a servant stands at each lead pipe, holding the mallet with which the owl is beaten and the physician levels the mixture on what we have prepared. This is the image of the owl and the surgeon and the bat.
Then, after the bat has returned and the position is leveled, it is necessary to place a dry cloth bleached with egg whites on top of the mixture, then apply a layer of plaster, and then place on top of the plaster a piece of wood with a width of three fingers or thereabouts and a length equal to the position of the mixture.
And on some of the correct bandages, it is necessary to tie with the silk thread that should be used and feed the bat a soft food until it is clean, if any remaining material remains in the position at the end of the cleaning, it is necessary to use medicines that are poured and mixed with the use of the wood that we have described for a long time.
In this procedure, a lead bullet may be used, and if the tip of the last stitches in the back appears to be coming out, it is considered an excessive bone that should not be treated with this method as it may cause death.
Chapter Twenty-Two.
In the treatment of a dislocated shoulder.
Know that the shoulder joint and the elbow joint only expose their articulation, not the other things that occur in other joints such as slight dislocation and subluxation. The shoulder joint dislocates in four directions.
This is because it dislocates inward, outward, forward, and backward, with the most common being inward. The sign of its dislocation inward is that if you raise the affected leg, it will be longer than the other leg.
The foot will be more flexed than normal, and the affected leg should not be bent at the hip, with the position after the hip being arm and arm, indicating that the head of the femur has moved to that location.
The sign of its dislocation outward is the opposite of these symptoms, and if it dislocates forward, it will straighten its leg completely, except that it cannot do so without pain in the foot, even if it tries to walk forward.
He has a hump on his back and his shoulder blade is prominent, and when he walks, it is pressed against his neck, and the sign that indicates this is that the jawbone is located behind the other one. He cannot extend his foot and cannot lift it up before the other leg extends and his leg is also shorter than the other one.
If the hump is flexible and the shoulder blade is located at the position of the clavicle, then this type of hump is due to looking down frequently. If the hump has been present for a long time with its owner not attempting to correct it, then there is no treatment for it.
It is not appropriate to expose him, and if it has been recently corrected and was of any of the four types of humps, then he should immediately apply pressure on the joint and extend it both inside and outside, and move it back and forth until it disappears.
If it does not return, then it is recommended to have a strong servant who can extend his leg from below either with his hands or with a stick tied above the knee on his leg and another servant who can pull him from above.
He should insert his hands under the armpits and then tighten a thin stick on the shoulder blade's origin and hold its end with another servant who can pull him either from the front towards the back or from behind towards the back.
The entire hamstring should be cut in one stroke until the Achilles tendon rises from the ground and remains suspended, as this type of cut is a common type for all four types. If the heel returns to its original position, then there is no other treatment for each type that we mentioned.
If the cut is internal, it is appropriate for the patient to lie on his healthy side and then a probe should be inserted between the gluteal fold and the place where the Achilles tendon is attached.
Then the bandage should be extended from the side of the Achilles tendon upwards to the highest part of the body towards the back, and then another strong servant should hold the deep place of the hamstring with his arms and extend it outwards forcefully, as it will return to its original position.
This type of treatment is easier than other types of treatments that involve this organ, if it is difficult for you and you are not able to perform this type of treatment, then the hamstrings should be tied together with a strong bandage on the heels and calves.
After each of its owners, the hamstring should be extended by four fingers and the injured leg should be extended more than the other by two fingers, then the patient should be tied to a wooden beam in the house and the lower part should be on the ground by two arms.
Then command a strong slave to hold the buttock and another strong slave to pull him, and the slave who is holding the buttock should push the other slave with force, for the joint will return to its place quickly. As for the specific dislocation, if it is outwards.
It is recommended that the patient lie on a mattress according to what we described in the book of the bowstring, and tighten the bandage on his affected leg especially and on his chest. Then place one plank under his feet and the other under his head, then place an additional plank in the middle of the mattress, secured very tightly.
A wet cloth was wrapped around her to prevent the patient from being hurt by the plank between her buttocks so that she does not attract downwards near the bed, then each servant stretches to his side and the physician adjusts the bandage with his hands, if he answers for return.
If not, place the plank on him and press it as we mentioned in the bowstring, except that it is recommended that the patient lie on his healthy side, and if the dislocation is forwards, then it is recommended to extend the affected leg a little while on this description on the mattress.
The doctor places his left hand on the iliac crest and then presses it with his right hand, extending the pressure downwards towards the knee, but if the extraction is to be from behind, it is not appropriate to extend the iliac crest downwards.
He is elevated off the ground and should be placed on something rigid as well as his arms being stretched outwards away from his body according to the degree of his inclination on the operating table and he is facing upwards with the bindings tightened.
As we mentioned earlier, the chisel should also be used on the position from which the joint was removed, so if the knee joint returns to its proper place and the sign of its return is not hidden from you, it is that you extend the iliac crest.
If you see both of them level and the iliac crest gripping the leg and straightening it without causing any harm, then know that the organ has returned to its proper place. At this point, level your hips and hold the bandage and tie a tight bandage so that the knee does not move to either side.
The iliac crest should rest for three or four days, then the bindings and bandage are removed and the leg is massaged on the other side. If you see them both in the bucket, know that the fracture has healed, so let the iliac crest walk, and if you see any relaxation in it.
Return and compress it, then apply pressure and tighten it according to your first degree of tightness, and leave it for three days, then soak it and let it rest for a number of days until it becomes strong, God willing.
The second and third chapters.
In the treatment of dislocating the ankle.
The ankle dislocates in three directions, towards the inside, outside, and downwards, that is, towards the back, but not towards the front. The sign of its dislocation is that the patient feels pain when he brings his leg to his thigh.
If he does not stick to his thigh, know that the ankle is dislocated, and apply pressure on all its directions of dislocation, making the patient sit down and extend his legs if he can, and have a servant sit behind him to hold his back and gently push him backwards a little, then make him sit on your thighs.
And press your back against his face and place his leg between your legs, then grasp his ankle with your hands and interlace your fingers on his ankle, then tighten it with your fingers on both sides of his ankle, and have another servant extend his leg until the ankle returns to its original position.
If the thigh is dislocated, it should be reattached to the leg without forcing it, then compress and reattach the thigh to the leg, and finally bind them together with a three-day or four-day bandage. It should not be used for walking for a few days until it heals.
If it is difficult to reattach it as described, then use the strong bandage as mentioned in my previous work for treating the hock until it returns.
Chapter 33
In the treatment of dislocating the hock.
The hock may dislocate completely or partially, and its dislocation may be either inward or outward. The sign of its dislocation is that the hock appears swollen and prominent on the side where it has dislocated.
As for the treatment of complete dislocation, it is easy to reattach it by gently stretching it until it returns. However, if it dislocates completely, the patient should sit with their back straight and a strong servant should hold it from behind their back in the middle of their chest.
Then, hold the patient's leg with your right hand from above and with your left hand from below in the position of the hock. Then, pull the leg towards you with your right hand and then with your left hand twice. Then, extend it with your left hand and push the front of the leg towards the thigh without force.
Create it twice as described, then push the sole of the foot to the leg in the third attempt while applying pressure with the knife, if it returns in one or two attempts and you see the foot level, then perform the operation again on it, for it will return.
If it does not return as described, then lay the patient on their back on the ground and lean on them heavily, ensuring that they are firmly secured to the ground, and place a bandage between their buttocks and tighten it well so that it does not hurt the patient, then control their buttock.
Then extend another assistant's hand or a strap tied to the ankle of the leg, then extend each assistant in the opposite direction of their companion and place the sheet between the buttocks of the patient, holding it so that the body does not slip down towards the extension, then the doctor straightens his hands.
And another assistant holds the healthy leg down, as the fracture will return quickly, if the fracture returns and you see its healing, then lift the bandage and splint and tighten it with strong straps and fix the foot with a strap below, avoiding the nerve that is above the ankle from behind.
If the bandage is too tight, it may cause him pain, so leave it on for two or three days. If the swelling subsides, then tighten it again on the third or fourth day. The patient should avoid walking for forty days.
If the patient walks before this period, it may cause the fracture to open and become infected, and he will not accept treatment afterwards. If he has a hot swelling, it is recommended to use the remedies mentioned earlier in other parts of the treatment and massage until it disappears.
Chapter 43
In the treatment of fractured fingers of the foot.
It is recommended to set the fractured parts with a slight and gentle pressure, not forcefully, as it is not difficult but rather easy. If the fracture is in some of the bones at the back of the foot, the patient should place his foot on a level surface on the ground.
Or on a board while standing, like a ladder, then you put your foot on the part where the fracture is, and then press it with your foot with force until it returns to its original position and there are no signs of displacement.
Then place a board under the sole of his foot, which supports the entire foot and has two ends. Tighten it strongly for three days, then loosen it and keep him from walking for many days until it becomes strong and secure, God willing.
The Fifth and Thirty-Fifth Chapter: Concerning the Treatment of Fractures in the Lower Extremities
In the types of fractures that occur with wounds, or with fractures, or with both together.
When such a thing occurs and treatment is administered, often it results in death.
Therefore, one should not attempt to treat such cases unless the surgeon is skilled in the craft, has a long experience, is gentle, careful, and diligent, and is free from nervousness and haste. In the beginning, he should use medications that reduce inflammation only and then leave it alone.
May God grant him safety from harm, except what he hopes for in his illness with gentleness, and some hope appeared to you in it. Then, return to him immediately at the beginning of the matter before the inflammation occurs.
If the member returns to its original state as you wished, use the method that reduces inflammation and treat the wound with cotton that is suitable for him. If the fracture is accompanied by a break in the bone and fragments have been exposed, remove them. And follow what we mentioned in the simple diseases where it was mentioned in their places.
Strive diligently and avoid deceit in your path, as I have advised you. This will be beneficial for your success and will be acceptable to others, God willing.
