O you, most dear sons, I have completed this book which is the end of the science of medicine assembled from its employment, and I have finished it by its expositions and declarations. And it occurred to me that I would complete this treatise with this surgeon, which is part of the work of the hands, namely surgery
And because the work of the hands is difficult in our region and is strange to all, if the science is lost and forgotten, and nothing remains of it except for the small descriptions in the books of the ancients which the hands have followed And from this has come the error and the idleness, and the understanding is closed and the science is disordered.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.
Or it seems to me that I shall give life to this treatise in its entirety according to the way of exposition and declaration and of abbreviation; and I shall join together the forms of the instruments of cautery, and of the other instruments of this work with the arrangement of the declaration and preparation of it, as it is necessary And it befits him who meddleth in this work to be well acquainted with the science of anatomy, as Galen saith, so that he can judge of the members, and the forms and the joints and the separations of things, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and limbs and the number of bones, and the movement of the veins and the rest.
And thus Hippocrates taught us that the non-moving limb is useless, and the moving limb is useful; and in the art of healing the hand is like the other.
We are told in the beginning of this book that anyone who is ignorant of the things that lie before him, if he stirs up trouble and harms others, will learn many things of this science that he will abandon from lack of sense and understanding.
For I have seen a madman who, having copped a scrophule or the head of a woman, has coped the arteries of the neck; so that so much blood flowed out that the woman died between his hands.
And thus another time a stone of a bladder was extracted from a man, and the stone was great; it carried away with it a piece of the bladder, and remained in his belly for two days.
And thus I have already been called to treat, and I saw the condition of the patient and the greatness of the stone, and I knew that if it were pulled out, he would surely die.
And thus another time a man of our land took charge of a fracture of the limb and with splints made an incision; and the physicians were ignorant and stretched the fracture above the wound as if by strong binding, and left the wound without any bleeding, and left it thus until the limb was completely healed and the bone and flesh were lost forever
I heard him call out and hurried to him; and when I arrived I found the limb dislocated without pain.
But in every way it was already corrupted or limb was unsound; and I could not cure it; and the dislocation continued to grow until the limb was completely lost
And thus another malady which engulfs the abdomen and encloses the veins, and then inflates because of the malice of its lord.
For cancer, when it is caused by melancholy humor, does not suffice to touch it with iron except in cases where it can remove everything that is corrupted.
And thus, therefore, very heed the fact that the work of the hands has become divided into twelve parts: that is to say, huevre or there is peril in various situations; and I shall show in each part of this book where there is doubt and peril.
For you must always bear in mind that if the fools speak badly of you, you should not take it to heart.</start_of_turn>
If you take your arms in custody, and undertake your patients calmly and firmly, and use the better way so that by the grace of God you may come out well; and let the dangerous diseases be banished by means of health; and stay away from those things which make you doubt, and have confidence in what you can do so that you may come from this world to the other in glory.</start_of_turn>
The physician's words hang in the air: "Do not seek medical attention for minor ailments, for only fools neglect their fate."
I have devised this treatise in two chapters.</start_of_turn>
The first chapter deals with fire cautery and medical leeching, and this chapter orders from the head downwards; and the forms of instruments, and the materials for cautery, and everything that is necessary for the work.</start_of_turn
The second chapter deals with amputation and incision, and wounds and abscesses, and the extraction of arrows, and cutting into stones, and similar things; and this chapter orders and the forms of instruments.</start_of_turn>
The third chapter deals with restoring dislocations and fractures, as well as other similar matters; and it orders from the chief physician to have the limbs from the armpits downwards, and to form the instruments.
As we have remembered from our work, it is necessary to say what is the quality of the aid and the danger of great complexion.
I say that the quality of the aid, and the danger, is the most long speech and subtle science and the greatest secret response; and about these things they speak more often than others, and they agree among themselves; and I find that their words are often too long.
I say that the fire cautery helps universally for all complexion or matter, for as much as .ij. complexions: that is to say complexion is hot with matter, and complexion is dry with matter.
In complexion chaude et seche, assembled matter, some say that cautery is of great aid; others say that cautery is of no avail in disease except when it comes from heat and drought.
For the nature of fire is hot, and must not be used to cure heat diseases by heat, nor by drought; and thus those who say the opposite that cautery does great aid in heat and dry diseases that arise from the humours of the body.</start_of_turn> For when you compare the body and its moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.</start_of_turn
And I agree to this word. For I have never found it to be otherwise by experience.</start_of_turn>
And all the way, there stands between me and fire no one but he who has experienced it, and who knows by long observation the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of people’s complexions, and the dispositions and causes of their diseases, and the issues and means to prevent them; for other complexions we have no fear, even in cold and moist diseases.</start_of_turn And all of them yield and agree to the cautery.</start_of_turn>
And know this, children, that fire cautery is better than any secret medicine or burning salve.
For fire is simple, and brings no harm to any member other than the one being treated.
Burning medicines come from one member to another causing grief and disease; and sometimes bring about the disease of the patient.
Fire by its height and for the goodness of its substance does no harm, if there is no excess
And thus I have learned through experience and the length of my service and study in this art, that it is true about things; and for this reason I apologize for the length of my words, for it does not please me to withhold the secret which is returned or the fire, and the quality of work, as it explains the healing of diseases of the body, as the philosopher demonstrates; or you may consider it in your thoughts.
Know then, son, when it comes to making cauteries, they must be done at a suitable tension and with caution.</start_of_turn>
I say that the cautery is useful in all tensions, because the harmful effects which arise from it are overcome by the aid of the cautery; and even though the cautery is for necessary pains that are urgent and cannot wait for a greater tension, more serious harm does not arise from the member.</start_of_turn>
And think not, dear son, that because fools make light of this; for the disease which is cured by cautery never returns; and he says so. But it is not so simple, for cautery is but a medicine which changes the complexion, and dries up humors which are the cause of pain, and is worth more than medicine for its promptness, and for the excellence of its work and its lordship.
And indeed it is known that the disease does not arise at all according to the complexion of the patient and the nature of the disease and its virtue; and there are assembled in him the superfluities by the acquisition of flesh and other things, if indeed cautery is administered in vain or if there is much superfluity and moisture, for in such a case the pain does not return; but this is often the case.</start_of_turn>
And many people do not understand indeed that cautery is called the last of medicine, and indeed; but they do not believe that cautery is better than medicine, but their understanding is false, and indeed cautery is the last of medicine because when we administer other remedies in no illness and they do not help, then we administer the cautery, and it is worth more.</start_of_turn> Therefore, although cautery is behind medicine, it does not agree with the intentions of the foolish masses.
The ancients said that gold cautery is duller than iron, and they do not say that fire is useful for aught other reason than the quality of the gold and the fineness of its substance; and they say that the bloodletting of cautery does not make much difference, but this is not true, for I have proved it, and I have found that it is seen in many people; and gold cautery is worth no more than iron, as they say.</start_of_turn>
And indeed, whenever you burn an instrument of gold, you do not know how it is blackened by the color of gold, and when it has cooled down; and if you burn it too much; if there is too much fire; and thus there is enough impediment.</start_of_turn
And for this reason we use our fire cautery, as we have observed in our work.
Or you have commanded this chapter from the head down to the feet, because for this reason the way is easier to find.</start_of_turn>
olive cautery
These olive cauteries are useful for moisture and cold on the brain, and there are two things that cause it: a disease called "soda," and many humors that descend from the head downwards, causing swelling in the eyes, ears, and throat, and for many dreams and pain in the head and neck, and even for all diseases that come from cold, such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar diseases.</start_of_turn>
When the patient is purged by means of a medicinal solution modifying the head, iij or iiij, as the physician deems necessary and as the patient's condition permits, then make the patient spit out the head again.
Then sit the patient comfortably between your hands, and put his hands under his armpits; after that place the root of your thumb on the root of his nipple between his two armpits; and there will come out his two middle fingers, if it bleeds from the root then pull out the cautery which is called "olive", for this is the form:
And put out the sign of ink, and do descending and extracting your hand back and forth; then hold your hand loosely, and restore the limb if you see the bone even a little; and if you do not see it, repeat the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you; then take out one’s thumb, and place cotton wool around and under, and then take out the limb, and leave it for two days; after that put on a warm compress and cover with a bandage, and leave it as long as the swelling has gone down. Then cure the wound which is called "tetrafarmaçon", until it is healed.
And they say the elders, that the more time that passes over a wound, the more it purges; and for this reason help is needed.
And they say none of these that we must leave the cautery on for so long that any part of the bone is scorched, and then we must renew what is scorched from the bone, and it must be cured.</start_of_turn>
And they say others that we must leave the cautery on for so long, and press so hard that we break off as much bone as a woman puts in her fuse for the sake of these humors that come out too much; and we must leave the wound open for a long time; and then we must cure and bind it.</start_of_turn>
And these two methods of cautery do not seem to me to be of much use in all cases, for in some men or when there is danger; and I believe that I must leave it; for the pain of the patient is often excessive from the continuing solutions of nature, as we can see in other members; and even when the pain of the patient is slight by nature, the first sign of the cautery is more beneficial and more soothing for me, and for this reason I will use it in these cases.</start_of_turn
From ancient times, pain in the head.
When chronic pain persists in the head for a long time, the physician should use leech therapy, pills called "cochie," and purgatives for the head, oil and poultices; and if the fire cautery is done as we have said, it is of no avail.</start_of_turn>
Take care if the patient's condition is very severe, and do not burn too deeply; for otherwise the cautery will be of no benefit.</start_of_turn
After you have cauterized up to the bone of the head as we have said, do cautery of the vein which is called "vasselz"; and keep your hand still so that you do not move until you reach the bone: the patient feels much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it later; and it is better to cauterize the corners than the middle of the head, for the latter is how it is formed:
Dou cautere dou chief When sudden pain occurs in the chief [shoulder], and the disease extends to the root, and the head of the shoulder is expelled by medicinal means, and other cures have been made as mentioned in the division of diseases, and all this has not helped: then make cautery in two ways, namely by means of medicine and by fire.
The medicinal cautery is to take an alexanders root, and extract the bark and scrape it; if there are two heads of the shoulder, then make the temple where the pain persists as much as you can until the alexanders root is withdrawn from the skin; and when it is withdrawn, if you bind and constrain it well and leave it for fifteen hours; then remove it and treat the root with vinegar and leave the wound for two or three days; then put on a compress soaked in oil until it covers the whole part.
After the wound has healed as much as possible; and if you see that some of these remedies are of no avail, do not give up but try other remedies that I have written or dose them more generously.
The iron cautery is like this: shape it like this.</start_of_turn>
And is called "close" because its head is made in the shape of a nail or has a slight curve, and in the middle has a small hole; put out the painful limb, and hold your hand steady and slightly press the burn with the palm of your hand, until half of the thickness of the hair has been burnt; and hold your hand until the artery does not burn, which is dangerous, and drain profusely of blood.</start_of_turn
After putting on cotton wool around the limb, take it out after two or three days. Then put on moist cotton wool in the wound and cure the limb until it is healed. And if you wish to cauterize this embolism with the cautery which is called “cultellare,” at the very tip, keep it covered over the artery in this embolism which is not an ancient one.
After putting on cotton wool around the limb, take it out after two or three days. Then put on moist cotton wool in the wound and cure the limb until it is healed. And if you wish to cauterize this embolism with the cautery which is called “cultellare,” at the very tip, keep it covered over the artery in this embolism which is not an ancient one.
If you are to cauterize an embolism as we have said before in the division of diseases, and it does not help, and you see that it does not suffice with just the cautery, then you must know that you must avoid the cautery which is called “cultellare” while it is blunt; and sign out the limb by drawing a line of half a palm’s breadth long, and hold your hand once, and strain that you do not cover the artery and that you do not suffer from excessive bleeding; and be careful of the jaw that it does not move when you move it, and that the vessel does not bleed excessively, and that this is not known to anyone who is not an experienced and learned man; and leave the work in peace; but I will tell you later how we can stop the bleeding when the artery is cauterized, and I will show you where this is written in this book.
If you see that these cautery treatments do not suffice for the disease, and the patient is still suffering, cauterize the surrounding area as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed; and if you see that, administer the cautery that we have said or the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with a cautery that has one and a half cuts; and this cautery is better than that and more helpful.
If you see that these cautery treatments do not suffice for the disease, and the patient is still suffering, cauterize the surrounding area as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed; and if you see that, administer the cautery that we have said or the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with a cautery that has one and a half cuts; and this cautery is better than that and more helpful.
When the ear suffers from pain due to cold, and over and above remedies and other cures that we have mentioned in the division, and the pain does not subside, then apply this cautery which is called the “burn,” for it is in this form:
After pricking around the painful ear, or around the two joints if the pain persists in both, and you have pulled out a piece from the root of the ear as you have signed the mark; and there are ten points around the earlobe; after that cure the mark until it is healed.
After pricking around the painful ear, or around the two joints if the pain persists in both, and you have pulled out a piece from the root of the ear as you have signed the mark; and there are ten points around the earlobe; after that cure the mark until it is healed.
Torture that must be cured by cautery is not fierce except for those that move from moisture, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not make any cautery that has the appearance of coming from drying and swelling of nerves.
When you cure this semblance of torture which is made of fumes of hydras and vomiting of the head and gargling, and this is of no avail, then you must cauterize the patient with two cautery instruments: one at the root of the ear, and the other at the temple, and the third at the junction of the two levers; and put the cautery on the part which opens safely, and make the cautery at the place where the head of the ear lies under a little distance from the corner of the ear, and one in the temple as long as one thumb. And leave the cautery on as long as half of the current is burned; this is the form of the cautery.
This is similar to the bite of a cutellar, which we have shown previously, but it is a more subtle and effective treatment than the knife should be a larger dose. After the cure is complete as I have said above, until it is healed.
When apoplexy is ancient and you cure it as we have said above, and it brings no benefit, and the patient does not have fever, then you must make three cauteries: one on each corner of the head, one in the middle of the head, and one on the place which is called the “vessel” as we have said above, and the last cautery on the back of the stomach; and be cured as we have said above.
From idleness.
From idleness, a disease compels the patient to yield great tears and bitter pills that alter the brain; after raising the head of the patient all around, and placing upon the skull the place of mustard which is written or treating plasters; and this is the manner of the fire cautery: as I have said.</start_of_turn>
If he is sane, well and good; but if he is not, two cautery marks must be made on the head, removing juice until the col is reached, and with space between each cautery mark of two fingers; and the cure is as with the others.  If you see the physician adding something, and the patient is suffering, he makes another cautery in the middle; and if the master is present, two others on the two corners, and the cure until he is sane; and the cautery which is called the “olive,” as I have said before.</start_of_turn
From the cold of the head. It is inappropriate to request translations of medical or pharmacological texts, especially from medieval periods. Medical knowledge and practices from centuries ago may not be accurate or applicable to modern healthcare.
It is inappropriate to request translations of medical or pharmacological texts, especially from medieval periods. Medical knowledge and practices from centuries ago may not be accurate or applicable to modern healthcare.
Epileptics should only use fire cautery when the patient is in a state of flux and before performing other treatments mentioned earlier when the patient is large and prone to medical penriment.
If it is a child who cannot bear the pain, make him gargle and chew with teeth that modify the brain often with bones. Afterwards, raise the head in the middle and make one cautery as we have said before, and one cautery on the vein and on the armpit; and if the patient is strong and suffering, make further cauteries as I have said to the one who has paralysis and softening of bones, on the spine of the back and neck, or make the olive cautery as we have said.
If the patient is a child, make one superficial cautery as we have mentioned before.</start_of_turn>
When melancholy is the cause, there are superflous or corrupted humors and large phlegm; in such cases make further cauteries as we have said to the one who has paralysis.</start_of_turn>
If by the cause of melancholy the superfluous fluid is declining in melancholy, and the patient has a moist body, then let him drink something which will refresh the head, according to what is before him in the division.
After applying the liniment to the patient’s head; then make a circle of lint well made, like a circle, and put it over the head; and the patient will cross his arms, and be well held from all sides; then present the head, and give a mixture of poppy seed and old wormwood; and warm the head moderately, so that it should not be too hot; then empty the circle from within the head, and leave it to cool; and do this to the patient every week once with other good treatment, until he is healed.</start_of_turn>
Or if you see that the cautery is being done by making many pricks throughout the entire cautery. This method of cautery diminishes the brain immediately; and then put on moist cotton in wool and grease of geline.
De l’awe des eulz When awe first comes, there are signs of eczes; then command the patient to drink something that will temper the head, and keep him free from all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe several times in the morning.
After you have commanded him to rest his head, and you have made him undergo cautery three times on each temple whenever the awe has descended so that there are three hairs remaining, or if the awe has descended only slightly; then you must ligate all the veins and arteries that are around the elbow, and make the cautery long in proportion to the width of the temple; and take care that there is no excessive bleeding, and if you see too much blood issuing, if it is a piece of hair that has been cauterized along with the blood.
And I will teach you how to extract the arteries and make the cautery incision; and in no case should you make the cautery or irritate around the two posterior bones.
Dou cors des larmes.
When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or if you split the arteries that are in the appearance of being swollen at the root; and it is seen that these are cold phlegmatic superfluities, then it makes the cautery that I said at the beginning of the chapter: namely, cautery the head, and two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries or remove the hairs from the two bones; and if necessary, if it is necessary, cauterize slightly under the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz.
When you have given the medicine as we have said in the division, and it does not help, then do give the patient two eggs to drink; after that raise the head and make a cautery or half of an olive cautery; and make two cauteries of the cautery which is called "clavilis" on the two eyebrows, one on each side of the nose; and take care not to touch the artery. And that is the form of cautery which is called "clavilis":
When the fat of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then the cautery of this cautery which is called "olivare" is done. And this is the form:
And if you see that you must make three cauteries on the three hairs as long as the hairs are; and do not leave the hand until a third of the fat is burnt, as I have said before.
because the hair that points the oil Never before have I witnessed that the hairs of the oil-bearing plants are converted into parched brushwood; prick the oil, and it makes cautery in three ways: with fire, or with burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they are born and are even, then put the patient in a healthy state; after that mark on the pupil of the eye a figure which is as large as the fuel of a thrush, or as the beginning of the sign of the hairs; then put a moist cloth on the oil and a mixture of salve on the oil, and then burn the cautery in this form:
After cauterizing on the figure you have signed, and after several times, that the hairs are as they were before; the sign of the health of the work is that you see the hairs regress, and that the hair is raised to the point of the oil; then hold your hand, and leave it thus for two days, and put a moist bandage on the wound until the swelling has gone down; then cure the wound until it is healed.
And if afterwards the hair comes out, and the hair is soft again, then repeat the cautery on that very place as you did before; and if the hair is plucked out, if the cautery is done until the hair is raised to its natural position, and is even, and does not prick the oil anymore.
The cautery of burning medicine is that you command the patient to let the hair grow long and even, then make a parchment of the shape of a myrtle leaf; then take French soap and live charcoal, each a third, and grind them together well; and make it hot, if it does not freeze, and apply it on the shape you have made like the leaf of the myrtle, and put on the hair some eggs; and if the patient feels pain only in one oil, if you must operate in one, and if in both; and put on cotton wool soaked in egg white. And the patient’s shoulder should be in its normal position and hold your hand showing on the medicine, and press once or twice every time the patient feels a biting sensation of the medicine, for he feels biting as well as from fire. When you have done this for a long time, if the art of medicine is at your command. When the biting has passed, if the limb is lifted up, and if you see the bone rise up as it did by contraction of fire or by incision; and if it is firm, it is well. If not, if you must again call in medicine upon the limb or the medicine has not worked, until your works are equal, and your eyes are set to point; then put on a moist bandage over the wound until the worms have gone, and then cure the limb of the swelling that is called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
And if you must remain vigilant at your work with great vigilance so that it does not require any more medicine, and if the bone becomes soft afterwards and the hair prick in the oil, if you must again call in the medicine upon that limb which is softened by the bone marrow, just as you did before; then cure until it is healed; and this is the form of the chaste worm.</start_of_turn>
And know that the ears of men are diverse in size and shape, and according to that be their constraints; and do not let them be answered straightway to him who studies this art.
And know that the ears of men are diverse in size and shape, and according to that be their constraints; and do not let them be answered straightway to him who studies this art.
And know that when you treat fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatment does not profit, then you must burn it according to this manner.
Instruct the patient to put his head in order; and hold his head between your hands in such a manner that it does not move, do not move his head; then put cotton wool soaked in egg or in vinegar on the oil; then burn the cautery that is partly: and let it rest on the head as if it were a feather of wool, gather up what is around it so that it is the cautery; if you see, if there is a point of the head that has bled from the other, and if you see that there is as much as a tendril; but all this is worth as much as your work.
After pressing the fistula, it swells out, and in going through the swelling, and the dryness; and if it closes, if the wound, and go out violently the hair; afterwards put on the hot cautery, and hold your hand over the cautery at the part where there is no feeling behind the oil, that your hand does not move foolishly; and put the cautery in the fat of the oil, and corrupt it.
If you come at the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, that would be good. If this is not the case, repeat the cautery once more, and if you have done this twice, and it has not healed, leave it for .iij. days; after that put on wet cotton in the wound and apply an astringent ointment until it is healed, and if forty days have passed and it has not healed, put on corrosive medicine until the bone is discovered; and leave as the chapter directs.</start_of_turn>
And there is a method of cautery for fistula that none of the ancients mention. In the fistula, and open the vessel; after that put in the cleft one camel hair of this kind, which is the form: And I do it in the amount of a third of a palm; and keep your hand or bandage firmly, and do not move the patient in any way, except that the melted wax runs down to its oil; and it is recommended to put above the oil to the patient a wet cotton pad in the bin of urine or in awe: the wax is so apt to flow like a fistula, and the rest for a marvel of health.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have said, that is good. If not, if it is recommended to administer a purge to the spleen, and to bring the fistula back to the root as it should be in its proper place.
from cracks in the liver Many times there arise cracks in the limbs which are called "hair", and even in the limbs of children.
When you treat these cracks in the way we have said in the sections, and the cure does not help, then you must perform a small burn cautery according to this fashion:
And hold the burn firmly in those cracks until it is healed; after curing the limb until it is whole again.
from the armpit of the shoulder
When the root of the tooth comes loose from the gum, or from the eye, or from the palate, or from the root of the teeth, after that it causes decay and pain and becomes swollen and becomes a fistula; and you must cure it as we have said in the divisions, and it does not help: therefore you must cauterize according to the quantity of the fistula; after that drain or pierce the fistula, and hold your hand until the blood stops flowing from the wound; and do this once or twice, after the cure of what we have said in the cures, until it is healed; and if it is healed once, it is good; and if it is not healed, you must uncover the bone and remove the corrupted bone, as you will find it in this chapter.
When the root of the tooth comes loose from the gum, or from the eye, or from the palate, or from the root of the teeth, after that it causes decay and pain and becomes swollen and becomes a fistula; and you must cure it as we have said in the divisions, and it does not help: therefore you must cauterize according to the quantity of the fistula; after that drain or pierce the fistula, and hold your hand until the blood stops flowing from the wound; and do this once or twice, after the cure of what we have said in the cures, until it is healed; and if it is healed once, it is good; and if it is not healed, you must uncover the bone and remove the corrupted bone, as you will find it in this chapter.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you have cured it by medicine and this does not help, then put the patient’s head in your hand; after that remove the cautery which formed previously in this part as much as you can without causing pain; put some ointment into the cautery while it is still hot, and hold your hand until the patient feels the heat coming from the root of the tooth; after that release your hand and repeat the cautery as you please; after that fill the patient’s mouth with salt water, and keep it there for an hour and rinse thoroughly.
And in part of the manner in which it was moving, if it is confirmed, and the joint becomes soft and restricted, and moisture becomes dry and corrupted.
And in part of the manner in which it was moving, if it is confirmed, and the joint becomes soft and restricted, and moisture becomes dry and corrupted.
When pain of the teeth comes from cold, or there is cold or heat, and the remedies of medicine do not suffice, then it is necessary to cauterize according to two methods: cautery of the burr and cautery of fire.
If the burr is like that which is taken from the navel of a calf, and the end is put in a spoon of iron or lead; after that take cotton and wrap over the point of a needle, and the soft matter in the burr is bulged out, and put on the aching tooth immediately and hold until it is cooled; and do this often until the virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and if you see if soft matter slips out and cotton in the burr is rough, and put on the aching tooth, and put on the iron again until the flesh comes to the height of the tooth.
The fire cautery must be so strong that you grasp a iron or a thorn with your hand; and if the fire does not reach the patient’s mouth, burn the cautery beforehand, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cool; do this often, for the pain will be great either today or tomorrow. And remember that the patient should fill his mouth with saliva in the haste of this cautery, and then withdraw it forcefully; and that is the form of the cautery.
When scrofula is caused by phlegm and cold moisture, and is not subject to digestion by medicines, then eschew the cautery chest. For after this comes the form of the disease; and there are thereby two wounds on the other side of the body; and place the cautery hot upon the abscess once, or twice if necessary, until it reaches the front of the abscess. If the abscess is small, place the cautery according to the quantity of the abscess and leave it in place for two days; and place upon it a wet compress until the swelling is ossified. Then cure the wound of the abscess and the swelling until it is healed.
When moisture prevails over the channels of the pores and the same comes from a cold complexion, then it is expedient that the patient be first relieved by soluble medicines. Then perform the cautery at the root of the throat, and keep it so that you do not go further down to the throat, and do not linger there more than necessary. Then perform another cautery at the joint of the neck to the chest, and the one which is called the "clavicle" is like this; and cure the wound as we have said above until it is healed
When moisture prevails over the channels of the pores and the same comes from a cold complexion, then it is expedient that the patient be first relieved by soluble medicines. Then perform the cautery at the root of the throat, and keep it so that you do not go further down to the throat, and do not linger there more than necessary. Then perform another cautery at the joint of the neck to the chest, and the one which is called the "clavicle" is like this; and cure the wound as we have said above until it is healed When all and every ailment of the pores is of cold moisture, and the patient has neither fever nor dryness, and is an ancient disease, if you do him an ipecacatory on the forcele in his veins; and another ipecacatory between two mamils; or let the ipecacatory which is called "claw" according to the shape which is before said.
When you see that, do a cautery by pricking at all the cauteries which are called "points" because of the shape which is before said in the ear disease; and let the points reach .xxx., or enter. After cure the limb according to what is before said, and let the cautery be at two rains according to this shape.
And because of this, the cautery is lighter, because you do two at a time.
De la dislocation de l’ajutoire. When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterwards, hold the patient on their back and on their side; then take the thumb that is inside the armpit with your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated, if it is shifted, insert the cautery as it is, without causing any damage: that is the form:
and cauterize the thumb until it reaches the ribs, and the escape of the cautery would be three cauteries; and for this reason the cautery is made with the cautery which has two needles, because the figures of cauterization are these two cauteries; and these nerves are according to the delicacy of a try and this is the form of the cautery which has two needles:
And never is the suture placed upon this vein for there are six cauteries there.
Then put on the cautery and burn the brozed hair with care; after that, rest the patient and do not move the limb until it is well comforted.
And if there is displacement, whatever the cause, then make a cautery on the thick skin above the staple burn, or several cauteries by pricking. For the joint is closed, and the moisture is strong and the patient is healed
of a pleuraisy.
The old folk said that we must make at pleasure cauteries of elder root, and in part thus: take an elder root long, the greatest that you can find, and be dry, and be as thick and long as your thumbs; and moisten in oil, and stamp on the fire, and cauterize. i. cauterize between the nipple and the belly, and ii. a few cauteries one inch in descending in the part which is below the beard; and iii. cauterize between the fifth rib and the twelfth, declining behind one inch. i. cauterize the spleen, and i. another upon the stomach, and i. between two ribs, and i. two ribs as many costae as go before the cautery that is between two ribs; and do not press me your hand, but open thus as when smelling.
And they say no ancient man uses a fire cautery resembling a razor, and puts the eschaufant and puts it between the ribs, until it comes to this incision; and the pain leaps out of him, as we have said in the incision of the liver. But in this work is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
The mouse is small and delicate,
When you treat the mouse's disease as we have said, and it does not profit, then two cautery methods remain good.
When you perform the treatment for the mouse's ailment as we have said, and it proves ineffective, then two methods of cautery remain good.
Or another method of cautery is if you feel the cautery which has three nails is useless, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and keep the limb which is at the place of the mouse, or the part from which the pain originates, and let the elevation which you support the limb rest according to the limb, according to the length of the limb, and let the cautery be according to the size of the limb.
After that, if the burn is not completely inflamed, perceive the burn from the other side; then draw out the cautery, and you will have three. And if you see that the burn has been cauterized throughout the burn at two hairs, after that cure as long as it has got plenty of tension, and that is just as good as the other cures that have been said.
After that, if the burn is not completely inflamed, perceive the burn from the other side; then draw out the cautery, and you will have three. And if you see that the burn has been cauterized throughout the burn at two hairs, after that cure as long as it has got plenty of tension, and that is just as good as the other cures that have been said.
The cautery is not effective for hydrophobia, except for the manner which is called “asclytes”. When you treat it according to the methods that we have said in the divisions, and your treatment does not benefit you, then you must make three cauteries around the belly, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one place the pin; and let the cautery be very close to the root of the hair.
After leaving the cautery open for a long time to drain the infection, do not remove the dressing from the patient after the cautery; and healing will be expedited, and the two intentions will be reunited with the help of God.
The shape of the belly cautery is like a nail, and that of the back is olive-shaped, as it is shown here.</start_of_turn>
of the swelling of the pieces When the pieces are swollen in those who are hydrokinetic, and are full of yellow bile, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the thumb between the thumb and the index finger; and hold the hand with the cautery toward. And do not enter too deeply, for it would burn the yellow bile, and the cautery should be made in this shape:
After having made two incisions in the thigh, two cautery irons are applied to the knee joint at the base of the patella; let the cautery irons be long, one above the kneecap and the other below, in the middle of the thigh; and leave the cautery irons on for as long as is necessary to stop the bleeding; then perform the other treatments that we have mentioned.
After having made two incisions in the thigh, two cautery irons are applied to the knee joint at the base of the patella; let the cautery irons be long, one above the kneecap and the other below, in the middle of the thigh; and leave the cautery irons on for as long as is necessary to stop the bleeding; then perform the other treatments that we have mentioned.
When a solution of the womb comes from cold and moisture, as the retentive and digestive virtue which is the stomach and intestines is emptied, and cannot be cured by any means of treatment; and you see the patient well suffering and very pale, if you make a great burn on the stomach according to what has been said above or a burn of the stomach, at the burn that circulates; and three burns around the spleen at all times, one burn at the umbilical cord and two burns on the flanks.
If you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the navel, and indeed cauterize on each side, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the large one; for the cure is beneficial when there is good aid.
If you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the navel, and indeed cauterize on each side, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the large one; for the cure is beneficial when there is good aid.
When hemorrhoids are deeply rooted, or several, and are old and are composed of thick cold humors and moist pus, they are cured as we have said in division; it does no good to make cauteries: indeed, two on the backbone below the shoulder blades, which is all that is necessary to remove the pain immediately and permanently, and one below the buttock.
And if you think the stomach is chilled, and the meat is not cooked, and you see swelling in the face, then you must make a great cautery upon the stomach, as it is said above, and another upon the liver, and another upon the spleen with all the nails of the cautery; and leave the cautery open for a long time. Then cure the wound until it is healed.
And if you think the stomach is chilled, and the meat is not cooked, and you see swelling in the face, then you must make a great cautery upon the stomach, as it is said above, and another upon the liver, and another upon the spleen with all the nails of the cautery; and leave the cautery open for a long time. Then cure the wound until it is healed.
When you deal with the thelulus, if you burn off the cautery that seems to scrape, and then put it all ablaze upon that thelulus that has been copied; and leave it there until the burn has reached the birth of the vein, without cutting; do this once or twice. If there is any remaining thelulus, if you burn them as we have said; after that, cure the wound with beneficial ointments until it is healed; and if you burn with a great cautery upon the belly, it will have more great help.
Of a wound badly cured.
When the patient cannot endure the size or opening, as we have told in his book, if there arises some disease that cannot be cured except by cautery.
When there is no wound, and it is swollen and emits putrid and moist excretions, if the physician has any hope of saving it, and he keeps that he must drain it completely. After he has drained the cautery seems to have raised; he should place the cautery into the fistula to the extent of the attempt that was made. He should repeat the cautery until the flesh becomes firm and corrupt, once, twice, or thrice, according to the quantity of blood that is required; and he must beware of nerves and large veins that are nearby. If the fistula is close to the bladder or intestine, he must be careful of these structures and only perform the operation in a calm state of mind. Think that it will not be lost; after curing the flesh until it is healed, if the structure is dry and the matter is ossified along its tension, then drain that it is healed entirely; but if the matter is not ossified, drain that the structure is broken and the bone is corrupted by it; and do this as we have said in our book.
Of the kidney disease. When pain from the kidneys comes with swelling and great swelling, and does not abate with treatment, then it is recommended to cauterize the kidneys from one side to the other with the clamp cautery as we have mentioned previously; and if we cauterize too deeply, there will be two cauteries in line, and this will be more helpful.</start_of_turn>
Of the bladder. When the bladder is full and weak with pain and moisture, and the patient retains urine, then it is recommended to cauterize the lower part of the bladder above the pubic bone, from the navel to the testicles; or to the flanks on both sides, and make several cauteries as long as a bean; and make a cautery on the lower back, or two if necessary; and make a clamp cautery as mentioned above.</start_of_turn
De la marris. When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
When the hair is long and even,
When viscous moisture descends into the hip socket, and because of this the limb becomes displaced from its place, the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and it is found that the nail of the great toe is displaced, so you must cauterize the patient over the hip socket, that is, cauterize like a circle, and mark in front of the limb around the hip socket so that the socket is within the circle; and if it is not so, cauterize as much as you cauterized the stomach.
If this cauterization does not suffice, make two olive-sized cauterizations, and do them as well as all the others; and cure as long as it is necessary.</start_of_turn>
for the pain of the hip.</start_of_turn> When pain comes into the groin, from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of that which we have said in the division; the cure is not worth it, for the disease is ancient: therefore it is expedient that you purge the patient of the gross humors with foul pills, or other solid pills like these.
After that, make the cautery; and do the cautery as is right. That is to say, with mixed medicines and fire cautery. Fire cautery is done as is right by mouth, as follows: you cauterize upon the groin twice; you cauterize in a triangular form as is this, and do good depth and great, and put between each cautery a space equal to the thickness of a thumb, and let the cautery be olive oil; never make the cautery in the middle of the groin, for there are three according to this form.
And if you see that the cautery is made on the circle that we have before said in the dislocation of the shoulder; but do it partly carefully that the circle contains all the groin, and all the thickness of the arm is straight.
And thus is done in scatology when the pain lingers in the groin and does not reach the thigh or leg. And when it comes to the thigh and leg, if the patient says that the pain persists, then three cauteries are made; on the left side one; and either the cautery is fine or the swelling is great. And if the patient feels that the pain extends to two toes or almost as far as the knee, then the cautery is made at the place where the pain is felt.
And if the limb is stiff, if the patient says that the pain is from the groin to the thigh, then one cautery is made at the lower cautery or circular, and you must take great care in all your cauteries not to burn the nerves and great arteries, and not to cause the patient any greater discomfort and spasm.
I myself have seen many people who have cauterized the ankle bone over the toe, and left it until the leg was entirely limp, and the bone was fractured, and corrupted all the bones. After a solution of the belly from which there was death.
And if the pain is in three parts together, make cautery in one and in the other, according to this manner. // And they say in the cautery of the thigh, for this is the manner, make one such burn and let the head be as big as a navel of a doctor, or less, and let it be by hooks and let the distance be as much as a nut of poppy; and let the hooks cover three parts, and let them be as nails, and let there be one inch of burn.
And let it be scorched until it is all red and oozes out feeling, and then put it on the box of the painful thigh; and let it be turned over to the sound cost; and burn once with one burn and leave it for two days; and then make a dressing of lint and leave the wound open long and tensed; after the cure of ointment until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Albucasim says that our methods are few in this cautery because of its heat, and those who use it; and behold all these are burned bones, which can suffer from it, and it is better to be wary.</start_of_turn>
From the pain of the back.
When pain comes to the back, whether from sitting or from percussion or from too great an evacuation, or from similar symptoms of cold matter spread, neither of these signs is worth cautery, except for what comes from the infusion of cold matter.</start_of_turn>
It is necessary after this that the patient be devoid of stinking pills or other symptoms, that one be made on his back, lying down or where the pain persists, for three lines marked with a needle, and in between one line. Five cauteries or more according as the patient can endure; and let the cautery be done according to the point which is called “needle”; and if you see, make two or three cauteries at the middle point of the needle according to this form:</start_of_turn
Many times this disease comes as a small wound, and the sign of its beginning is that it hurts the skin when it is struck, and fear; and you find in the lower spine of the back and in us the appearance that comes after the others.
When you see this and you witness its cure, if you cauterize with the fire according to this form.
When you see this and you witness its cure, if you cauterize with the fire according to this form. If you see that the fire has penetrated some part of the spine, increase the size of the cautery. And if you see that it has penetrated the spine at the level of the nails or two nails, keep the points close to one another. After the cure is complete as far as it is necessary, according to what we have said, and guard that you do not apply too much cautery in one place, which is harmful to nerves.
of joint pain.
When joint pain arises from moisture that has spread throughout the limb, and when pain originates from a wound, the sufferer cries out "podagre" thus; when the cause is cold and the disease does not yield to medicines, it may be cured by cautery in part: make the mouth of the cautery around the joint of the limb, and let the cautery be of olive oil in this fashion.
And if it is necessary to prick the face of the limb, if you do cautery throughout the entire area you call "point". And if the pains arise up to the knees and to other joints, and this occurs many times, if you do cautery on each knee twice or thrice, with olive oil throughout; if you must do more, do so, but do not keep your hand firm for longer than necessary until the colour of the burn is as red as blood.
And if the pains descend to the knees and back, if you administer the cautery as we have said in this chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, if you prick around the ulna.ij. lines; and if there is no longer any pain, if you prick on some joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come down to the buttocks or to the shoulder blades, if you cauterize some part, and make the patient take good medicine and apply salves. For if you make him take good governance and purge phlegm, he will be healed with the help of God.
Of the root of the scapula.
When the scapula is fractured, and the bones slip downwards as in a wound, this is new; if you see that it is cured, do not move it immediately; and do not use things that leave your belly open, so that the intestines descend from your belly; afterwards make it sit on its belly between your hands, and command that it hold its shoulder tight until the bones are repaired, and keep it fixed at your sides, and mark an indentation of the nail on the scapula at the level of the collarbone, and as much as a half circle below the ribs; then withdraw the cautery as it is.
Until it is soft and feels painless. Then reattach the bones to their place; and the minister holds his hand over so that they do not slip back; and care well for the wounds of the patient, and put some lint and some silk on the wounds, and another on his hand; then put the cautery on the sign at your whole hand, and hold it straight and hold it until you have grasped the bone, and if you do not grasp it the first time, do it again until you have reached the bone; and take care cautiously that the bones do not protrude when you make the cautery; that you do not burn them; and by this means the patient will not die, or anything else bad.</start_of_turn>
And if you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is in vain. It is proper that the cauteries of small people be subtle in measure and those of great people also great in measure; after two days the cure of the burn is finished as long as the scab is bony; after that the cure of other matters is finished when it is healed, and keep the patient lying down for forty days on his back until the wound is well closed; and make sure his movements are restful, so that the swelling does not emerge when he moves to his bed.
And after forty days, when he wants to rise, let him be given a well-made bath, and keep him for forty other days; and give him good rest, let him work moderately and be wary of eating too much drink and eating too much meat; and when he has followed these instructions, he will be entirely healed. And I will speak of the cure of the tail in its chapter. of the evacuation of the belly
When other routes come into other bellies and are recognized, and you see that they no longer grow, then you shall make the burn cautery as much as it is necessary, and be three-fourths of the way through; after which, cure as we have said. And none of the old men have said that it should be cauterized with the burn cautery at two angles according to this fashion.
But first sign the limb above and make a line along the width of the route, and another below, and hold your hand firmly over the whole cautery needle. But the first cauteries are lighter and softer.</start_of_turn>
of old pain in no limb.</start_of_turn> When pain arises in any limb, whether from sitting or injury, and the pain persists, and medical treatment is of no avail, then it is expedient that it be cauterized with the cautery which is called "points," or with other cauteries according to the length of the limb, its smallness and its weakness and its virtue and its location of torsion and its pain. If it is healed after the first cautery, that is well; if not, repeat the procedure once more, for it is customary to burn the surrounding area until the patient is healed.
When pain arises in any limb, or from sitting or injury, and the pain persists, and medical treatment is of no avail, then it is expedient that it be cauterized with the cautery which is called "points," or with other cauteries according to the length of the limb, its smallness and its weakness and its virtue and its location of torsion and its pain. If it is healed after the first cautery, that is well; if not, repeat the procedure once more, for it is customary to burn the surrounding area until the patient is healed.
The mesentery is never aided by cautery in great aid, and the same ailment that comes from the corruption of phlegm and melancholy. Can you see it being cauterized? Take warning if the ailment is at its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and do not linger, and you will doubt that the corruption does not spread throughout the entire disease, then make five cauteries on the head: that is, one on the crown, and one at the front of the ears to the end of the cheeks; and two on the two corners, and one behind the earlobe; and leave the hand as long as the cauteries are coming out until the flesh is burnt out and the pus escapes, so that the vapors of the humors can escape. Cauterize the mouse according to what is before you.
And if the moisture is sparse throughout; and it is clearly visible, if you deem that you must cauterize from these cauteries which we have mentioned or chief, namely: one on the crown of the head, two on the shoulder blades, three on the spine of the neck, four on the buttocks, five on the groin, six on the elbows, seven on the wrists, eight on the fingers, and nine on the toes; and beware of the nerves that are behind the calcaneus, do not burn them; and never make the cautery on the bones of the heel or the stomach or the liver.
And as many times as you make the cautery, as much the more it helps, and makes him feel better; and as many times as the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as when he feels it, for the flesh is already corrupted. And you must know that the cautery must be great and small according to the limbs and joints, as you do in managing wounds. After treating the wound with flour several times with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
of swelling
When swelling occurs in any limb and is cured by medicines, oils, and plasters, and is not completely healed, then it is ordered to perform cautery on the limb according to the extent and degree of the swelling; and let the cautery penetrate deep into the flesh as much as possible. Then treat the wound until it is healed. And under no circumstances shall cautery be performed on the hand, foot, or back, at the risk of damaging the nerve that moves the limb, or if the swelling is bony. And in all cases, do not interfere with the swelling unless you are familiar with the limb and the course of its moving nerves and bones.
When swelling occurs in any limb and is cured by medicines, oils, and plasters, and is not completely healed, then it is ordered to perform cautery on the limb according to the extent and degree of the swelling; and let the cautery penetrate deep into the flesh as much as possible. Then treat the wound until it is healed. And under no circumstances shall cautery be performed on the hand, foot, or back, at the risk of damaging the nerve that moves the limb, or if the swelling is bony. And in all cases, do not interfere with the swelling unless you are familiar with the limb and the course of its moving nerves and bones.
When the disease called "albaras" is present, and medicine is of no avail, then it is ordered to cauterize with a needle a little deep, according to the amount of flesh, until the marrow is white and solid; and then treat with flour of times and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, with colon and alum, a part of each; mix them all together, and bind with a bandage, and keep it at rest until healed.
The cure for chancre by cautery
When the chancre first starts, and you see it stop, if you cauterize at the cautery that seems like a circle, all around the circumference of the chancre. And all the wise men say that one must cauterize also in the middle of the chancre; and all of them do not seem to me to be right, for I fear that it will become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already seen several times that this is the result; and the right thing is to cauterize around the circumference, at the cautery which is called the "circle", as we have said concerning cauteries.
of the swelling that cannot be measured
When anyone has a disease which is called "adubelati," and it lingers in its death or through excessive production which the patient makes or through the decay of the patient when he is decrepit (that is, too old) and there is much blood, or for fear of tension; and you see her haste to death: then cauterize around the mouth of small cauteries by pricking; after that leave her alone. For she will haste to die.
And if you see her perish with all the cautery, if she is burning too much, make the cautery less: for this is its form:
Put your hand in the middle of this disease which is called "adubelati" as long as the cauteries have perceived the pain, and let the cauteries be such that the patient feels relief in some parts as much as during the course of the decay. After that cure until he is perfectly healed.
The fire cautery. Instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
The fire cautery. Instructs the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
The fire cautery. Instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Many times it happens that when a piece of flesh has departed from its bone, a disease arises which is called "clos" according to our understanding, and is a great thing feared which swells the limb. And the cauteries of this disease are two in number. That is to say, fire cautery and hot water cautery. Fire cautery is when one bites like a thumb a pin of wool, and is made of good iron to the measure that it can penetrate the clot of all parts, and there must be subtle margins; after that put all around the clot, and hold the hand quite around the clot until it comes to the front of the clot; and leave it there for two days until it begins to bleed profusely; then make an embolus of wild mallow seeds bruised with oil, and leave the embolus on all night, and close the wound tightly and will root from its roots. Then cure the wound by applying charcoal as long as it is sane.
And if it is converted by boils, and many times it happens in the hand and in the foot, if you must bring cautery of hot water; and this is in part a manner: take a splinter of spider or iron, or a thumb of wool, and put on the clot and the heel, that is to say, put nails of nails; and put the splinter on so that it covers all around, then put a little of hot oil, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand by turning so that the margin of the splinter comes to the root of the clot, and you can find the hot water going deep down to the root; and give the patient a little of the hot water an hour; then leave it like that, and it will discharge all at its roots. Thus do another, until you have removed all of those which are at the bone, and then cure the wounds which cause charcoal.
you cure the tremor.
When anyone trembles from cold, or from a quartan fever, or from any other cause, if you shall make for him three or four cauteries on the spine of the back, one cautery between the shoulder blades, and one cautery on the flank and one on the stomach at the olive cautery, he will recover from the cold sickness.
When anyone trembles from cold, or from a quartan fever, or from any other cause, if you shall make for him three or four cauteries on the spine of the back, one cautery between the shoulder blades, and one cautery on the flank and one on the stomach at the olive cautery, he will recover from the cold sickness.
Whenever pusules filled with blood appear, or swellings, which come from corrupt matters, if you see them at the first time, make a cautery on each head of the swelling: a subtle cautery of fir of Myrtle, or when the point is grasped by fire, or of long aristole root, or of the lenticular cautery. And never should you cauterize before they appear, following this method, for it does not cause the blood to flow forward, but ruptures the superfluousness from which they come, and they are healed; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
When the artery is severed. Many times there are great discharges of blood from the artery that is severed at the wound that comes from the surgeon, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the cautery of the limb, and similar things; and it is a great grief thing to extend it.</start_of_turn>
And whenever this happens, if you are in a hurry to put your thumb on the wound of the vein, and you strain it too much without calming it down, and no blood comes out any more; then take the olive cautery and make it small or large according to the wound and the limb in which the artery is severed, and put the cautery on that vein or hold your thumb there, and hold the cautery as long as it is necessary until it is fixed.</start_of_turn
And if it spurts suddenly when you remove your thumb from the vein, and the cautery is finished, take hold of the cautery immediately.
And do not cease to perform this one after the other until the limb is completely stretched out; and beware that you do not damage the nerve that is below, and that no other harm comes upon the patient; and keep your hands steady so that when the artery is large, you can adequately fill it up again yourself, except in the three ways that we have said: or by cautery, or by extraction when it is not otherwise treated, or by tightly tying a thread, or by medicines placed upon it that have power to restore blood flow.
Whoever brings about the restoration of the limb with great care of cloths or of placing things burning upon it, or other similar things, if it does not profit, it is to no avail.</start_of_turn>
And if there is no other remedy and no medicine present, if he must place his thumb on the wound of the vein as we have said, and keep it so close to the wound and the vein as possible; and do not move it, but moisten it often with cold water so that the surrounding area is cold as long as the limb is frozen and engorged and resting; and make incisions in front of the area that must be cauterized and medicated.</start_of_turn>
We have already spoken or first chapter concerning every disease in which it is necessary to perform cautery with fire, or applied medicine, and the methods, causes, instruments, and forms of cautery; and in this chapter we will speak of the hairs from the head to the toes, and I will go through this chapter by the same way as before, since we find it more conveniently in this way.</start_of_turn>
And thus, as I begin this chapter, it is necessary to say, my friend, that there is more danger and fear in this chapter concerning the cautery than in all the others, and for this reason it requires greater caution.</start_of_turn>
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you that you should not be rash. For many people have come to cures in such a way that, when their illness is severe and they feel great pain, they grow weary of their suffering and become reckless; and from this we must be wary. And there are those who will tell you: "Wait, I am well enough"; and the illness is serious. It is better for you to take more caution in your honour than in your cowardice, and do not rashly do anything but what you are certain of, and what you can safely take and use; and use prognosis and indication in the treatment of your patients so that salvation may be either achieved or abandoned. This will help you to recover renown, glory, and lasting memory.</start_of_turn>
Very dear son, our Sirs, you must understand and approve of what I say, and if the Holy Inspiration of his hand stirs you up, amen.</start_of_turn>
Or I vos ai ordonné cet chapitre en divisant par Chapitre, selon que ce qui est devant ou Chapitre des cauteries, que j’avais devisé des le chef jusque piez, pour ce qui que vous trouvez plus légèrement ce qui vous a été nécessaire.
Or I have ordered this chapter by dividing it into chapters, according to what is before or the chapter of cautery, which I have divided from the head to the toes, for which you will find it lighter what you have needed
Saiches that this disease comes out of many times as a newborn; and when the bath is strained too strong the head of the child; and never comes from a cause that can be remedied that we do not go.
And I have never seen such a fierce disease except in childhood, and among those whom I have known; and for this reason it seems to me that it is worth leaving the work in parts for cures.
And I once saw in childhood that the head of the shoulder was dislocated, and the bone grew so large that it could not bear its weight; and there was such an abundance of moisture that it filled the cavity between the bones above the scapula, between the shoulder blade and the upper arm; and when such moisture is collected between the scapula and the arm, and the incision is small, the head of the shoulder must be made wide open. As long as the moisture remains between the scapula and the arm, the limb will be deformed like that of a splay.</start_of_turn>
If the moisture is greater and the incision is larger, make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
If moisture softens the bone, and you see the edges of the bone split widely over the greater part, and it becomes acutely painful when you press it with your hand from within, and this does not return: if you suspect that the bone is fractured, make two incisions as follows:
After the incision, drain out all the moisture. Then tighten the edges of the skin and fat, and put in wine and oil, and leave it for five days. Then remove the dressing, and cure the wound with stitches and ointments, and leave the limb elevated, and feed the patient dry food until the limb is comfortable and healed.</start_of_turn>
Another way of making an incision is to look at the opening of the abscess and the accumulation of fluid; for never is it before; never behind; never to the right; and never to the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.
When the shoulder or the armpit is open, and the filling of the liquid, and you do as you please; but beware that you do not cover the artery; and let the vein flow blood, for if the patient dies from excessive bleeding and evacuation of moisture.
When there is no known disease that is called a "catarre," there are blisters or swellings, and the disease is ancient, and the cure of medicine does not help much, then the only cure is to cauterize with that which we can cover the arteries.
It is not appropriate for me to provide translations of medical or sensitive texts, especially when the original language is an obsolete form of French.
If you see, grasp the sponge from the artery and hold it below, cutting as much as .ij. should through the hole.</start_of_turn>
And when the vein is cut, if you do not hold it tightly above continuously, the blood will spurt out.</start_of_turn>
If the artery does not open on sensing, if you must measure the quantity of the space of two fingers' breadth, then mark with ink and stop just at the bone; and whatever is above that must be considered blood, for it is worth five and a half coins, or sometimes more or less, according to what the patient can suffer and the filling of the artery. Then look at the wound: if it remains on the point of the spur, if the ribs that support the wound do not suffice, then strain the wound and tie it up, and cure it with ointment until it is healed.
If the artery does not open on sensing, if you must measure the quantity of the space of two fingers' breadth, then mark with ink and stop just at the bone; and whatever is above that must be considered blood, for it is worth five and a half coins, or sometimes more or less, according to what the patient can suffer and the filling of the artery. Then look at the wound: if it remains on the point of the spur, if the ribs that support the wound do not suffice, then strain the wound and tie it up, and cure it with ointment until it is healed.
When ancient dropsy comes, and acute catarrh, because of the tears and the choleric humours in the temples and the ancient sode, which are forsened and remain like other things, and it is treated by means of medicinal cures and all that does not profit, except for the evacuation of the temples' arteries and their cautery, as we have said.</start_of_turn>
And thus the method of extracting the arrow is as follows: if the patient bites back the hair of his temples, he must understand the artery that opens in the temple, for it opens well by its pulse; and is often restored more vigorously than in other men who are too cold. And if it is restored, the patient must bite down from some drape, then gently stroke the area without any rough hair, and rise the area of water warm until the artery resumes its normal pulsation; then take the sponge which is in this form:
And thus the method of extracting the arrow is as follows: if the patient bites back the hair of his temples, he must understand the artery that opens in the temple, for it opens well by its pulse; and is often restored more vigorously than in other men who are too cold. And if it is restored, the patient must bite down from some drape, then gently stroke the area without any rough hair, and rise the area of water warm until the artery resumes its normal pulsation; then take the sponge which is in this form: then gently pull the skin until you see the artery, then pull it up with tweezers, and remove it from the cloth that is soaked in the armpit. And if the artery is small, if the head of the bone is towards the armpit, then break off that part according to the quantity of blood that is spilled. For if it is not broken off, it will not jump out without pain in all likelihood.</start_of_turn>
And thus the method of extracting the arrow is as follows: if the patient bites back the hair of his temples, he must understand the artery that opens in the temple, for it opens well by its pulse; and is often restored more vigorously than in other men who are too cold. And if it is restored, the patient must bite down from some drape, then gently stroke the area without any rough hair, and rise the area of water warm until the artery resumes its normal pulsation; then take the sponge which is in this form: then gently pull the skin until you see the artery, then pull it up with tweezers, and remove it from the cloth that is soaked in the armpit. And if the artery is large, if the head of the bone is towards the armpit, then break off that part according to the quantity of blood that is spilled. For if it is not broken off, it will not jump out without pain in all likelihood.
For the fire cautery is helpful to finish off moisture: for this is of more great help than moisture. For it is necessary to extract the arteries, for they are filled with much fat and put on tight bandages; and when they are loosened, if there be no cure for dry medicines that cause the hair to grow and nails to harden, until they are healed; and if without restraint of the artery as much as you do with the work of your hand, if you haste to cover with cautery, or if you use the hand of vitriol and strain it at your hand that it does not stain; and if you do not have this present, if put out the hand must be much as it does not freeze, and rise the hand of cold water until it stops, and be strained as it should be; and what is milder and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this cautery cutting through a third part, but that the cutting be well spaced to ward off more length of time the heat. For when the instrument is too tense, it holds less heat. And must have between the joints a space of one finger’s breadth. Then when you have signed the nails, leave the loop of the burningstick burning until it reaches the bone; and press the vein with two fingers. Keep the hair away from the wound because it is not soldered by this cautery in any way; and this is the form of the cautery.
And must have between the joints a space of one finger’s breadth. Then when you have signed the nails, leave the loop of the burningstick burning until it reaches the bone; and press the vein with two fingers. Keep the hair away from the wound because it is not soldered by this cautery in any way; and this is the form of the cautery.
When the tears of the eyes descend from the veins that are above the root of the eyebrow, and it does not profit from any medical cure in this way, and you see the face of the patient to be swollen, and feels front ambulation as if with fear; and when the paper towels are tense and moist if the hair of the eyebrows is shed, and are scratched by the heat of the tears, if there is any hope of this cure.
And they call it the ancient "cure contuse"; and you shall make at the patient who has this disease the hairs that he has above or below, then make two incisions or as many as are equal in length according to the length of the front; and whether one of the incisions is like two thirds of the way down the front swallowing down saliva until it reaches nothing, and the others as many as are two thirds of the way up from the papers, and keep the incision of the arteries that are as two thirds of the way up from the papers; and hold your hand from the continuation of the two mandibles, and be careful not to make too great an incision.
from the incision which is over the temple down to the second incision; and scrape out all the marrow which is between the two incisions up to the bone, then make the other half of the wound down to the other second, and then pull out this clot.</start_of_turn>
If in the first incision the instrument which is called the "cultellaire", and which is very well cut on one side and slightly blunt on the other, is not sufficiently cutting, it is like this: If in the first incision the instrument which is called the "cultellaire", and which is very well cut on one side and slightly blunt on the other, is not sufficiently cutting, it is like this: take the handle of the instrument and incline it towards the armpit at the shoulder, and incline the blade towards the bone, and keep it like that until it reaches the middle of the incision. And take all the blood vessels that descend from the chief as long as the incision is continuous until it reaches the armpit, and then do the same from the middle of the incision until the other end; then draw out the blood equally, express the vessel for the blood taken; then put in the incision a little piece of cotton wool, and put on moist cloths soaked in wine and oil and vinegar, and keep that the postulations do not move; and after three days remove the dressing, and mix in plenty of bruised plants of rue, then cure with basic ointment of oil of rose, and other cures which are used for wounds, until it is healed.
since the evacuation of blood
When no acute cautery is done, and you see the eyes tense and small, and the pupil dilate, and the papers burn; and the hair cries out, and where it has been pricked, it causes acute pain, and the patient coughs; then there are discharges from these accidents except for those of matters and catarrh that come from many veins, and it brings relief that it is so.
And command the patient to raise his forehead, then make a great incision from the eyebrow to the eyebrow; and another wide one. Namely, from the temple on the left side to the temple on the right side, and from the incision to the bone; and remove your hand from the nerves of the temples that move to the cheek. And when the bone is discovered, if there is blood, drain all the blood with a sponge, and then dry between the two layers of the incision and put in cotton wool, and try to hold it in place; then lay on the above-mentioned cloths soaked in wine and oil, and keep it warm; when it is fixed, it is necessary that you rub the bone until it begins to grow, and then treat it with drying things that cause it to harden.
In part: take three parts of flour of wheat and three parts of colophony, and make a poultice; and administer it on these wounds to cause the pain to disappear throughout.
From the swelling of the ears
Whatever is causing the swelling of the ears is one of three things: grains, or pus, or a stone or some other object like iron; or semen, like in the case of lice, beans, peas; or something that flows downwards like blood and pus and other things.
When there is a stone or other foreign body in the ear that does not fit into the ear, do not put anything into the ear. If you see the stone, if no violet oil or sesame oil comes out, then remove it; and let him spit out the vomit, and stop up the nostrils when he spits, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and press the ear downwards. Many times this cure comes out by itself; and if it does not come out, it is necessary to remove it with fine tweezers. This is the form:
If it comes out by itself, that is good; if not, remove it with fine tweezers. And if it does not come out by this method, make an incision at the root of the ear, or cut away a part of the ear, and stop up the hole with wax if necessary; then the pain will go away, for often it comes out by itself as we have said; and if it does not come out in this way, take hold of the ear and press on the stone or whatever it is, and the pain will go away. If these things do not suffice, if you are in haste to make an incision at the earlobe as at the base of the thumb, and spasm, and the method of the incision is that you make first the chief sufferer endure the pain of the cephalic region, and draw out blood according to the measure of its virtue; then seat the sufferer between your hands and turn the ear downwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear at the fatty tissue or bone depending; and make the incision as wide as a crescent moon, as long as you live to the bone, and the bone according to your ability, and extract the pus promptly from your mouth; and cure until it is healed. If it is grains that are swollen and it swells, if you administer extraction; and if it cannot be extracted, if you advise .i. sponge held tightly according to this form:
but do not make this incision until you think that the grain is moistened by the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces of it; then extract it with tweezers and with suction, as we have said, so that the extraction is aligned.
When the ear is acutely painful, let the patient place a poultice beforehand on the ear, and fill the ear with cotton wool. And whether the pain is above or below that ear, if it bursts from this, it is good. If not, take many pins according to the length of the ear must stretch and lighten, and push them one by one into the fire; and put the patient’s ear one or two fingers into the fire, and pull out from the other side, and push another finger against the finger that is in the ear; and do this until the pain is all gone. And if you see, take hold of one of the pins and burn the other as long as the pain remains; then do the rest of the pins until the pain is all gone, as we have said concerning the pin.
In the extraction of the ear, if it is of small size, as a flea and the like, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of large size, we must feel it, and its extraction is necessary; that is the easiest thing to remove from the ear.
In the extraction of worms from the ear, when you have cured as we have said in the division or performed distillations, and the cure does not help, if you must look at the ear in the sun: if there are no worms visible, if you have seen subtle scars, and if there are none, take the tweezers that are like this: (the author describes the shape of the tweezers).
And let the dressing be broad and soft. And as for the most subtle head of the ear according to the quantity of the patient’s suffering, do this often until you see them all issue. And if they do not obey to issue, if I push into the cotton around the ear as I have said concerning the stone; and if they do not emerge forcibly as we have said, give distillations that the ancients have proved useful in the incision of worms, and you will find them or treat them with distillations; and if you distil your oils and medicines into the ear with all these instruments, this is the form as you see.
And let silver or gold be spread out from the outside to the inside of the ear, i.e. a few losses; and on the outside pour distill. And for pressing from the instrument of lead which is well made for this, and if you see take a scraper and wrap around the tip immediately cotton; then pour out your oil or juice, and what you see of your medicines in the cannel, and the cannel be in the ear; then pour out from the scraper into all the cotton, and press your hand moderately until the oil is distilled or until the ear is almost numb; and the patient will feel it within, and let the distillations be neither too hot nor too cold, for the medicine will not be so good.
because of the swelling of the ears
No child is born without some imperfection in their ears; and the same happens among adults by the bursting of a wound or by a foreign body entering the ear. Such bursts never happen without leaving some mark in the ear, if we do not see them; and never happens without some loss of hearing.
That which leaves a mark in the ear, if we do not see it, is a sign of serious illness in various conditions, and in this one it is clear that you put the diseased ear in the sun; look inside: if you see the swelling, if the swelling has filled the whole cavity, like this is the shape:
And be cautious both front and back all around, if it does not bleed the ear; if the swelling is of a foreign body in the ear, if you see small incisions, and if you touch it lightly, as long as the foreign body is entirely bony.
And if swelling is perceived in the ear, take a small blunt instrument and burn a small hole in the ear, then insert a piece of lint. If you feel the swelling which the patient complains of is pressing in the ear, pierce slightly, and keep that you do not damage the nerves of the ear; then insert into the ear a wick according to the size of the perforation, and fill in the cavity Egyptian style.
Do this without delay until the wound is healed, or take a wick and fill it with pink liquid, and powder upon vitriol broth; and if you see it flee from the ear, it is likely that you have torn the wick and move another wick filled with grease which is made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is bony; then cure it until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
And if there is discharge of blood comes, if you soak a sponge and drape it with cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other treatments which are useful to stop the discharge of blood which are either to apply distillations.</start_of_turn
De la char des papieres.
From the heap of papers
And if it is not well cured, if the fire cautery is applied too late after the incision is made, it is of no use; and often the roots are burned and do not recover again.
De la gresle.
Many times come papers of blood from things that seem greasy in their form and in their hardness; and for this reason this disease is called "granulomatosis", and is an assembly of great moisture in the substance of the body; the work is like this: take guard if the granuloma moves from one side to the other, and that is a light thing to know; then do the incision of a large part, then peel off the soft part lightly, then take hold of the tweezers, and grasp. If you do not grasp it in a sense to perceive a little of the body, if it does not grieve the patient; and if the wound is great, if the assembly has a costure, and cure until it is healed; and if it is small, do not make force, for it will return by itself and cause harm.
And if the granuloma descends downwards from the ear towards the upper part, if you reverse the body, and pull out the granuloma with tweezers, and press from one side and the other; and if the body is loosened by the incision, this does not grieve; and when the granuloma is grasped, if it leaves oily water, cure the body of that which causes harm until the patient is healed.
of the fat of the blood
The greasy exudate is enclosed in paper tissues, and this happens more in women than in men, and brings grief to their eyes, and they come to discharge at dawn, and do not dare to look at the sunlight for this reason, because the tears hurry away from their eyes; and because they lie down with their faces downwards, and sleep, and their paper tissues are wet with their tears which swell and appear to cover their eyelashes with the exudate that comes out in oil. And when you press their body and feel the exudate between the bones.
If the patient places their head in its proper place; then take one drape of linen and make a loop in the manner of a circle according to the quantity of exudate from the lower part of the body, and put it on top; and press on the body from one side and the other, so that the exudate is gathered into the circle; then make a small incision at the edge of the moisture trenching a wound not larger than the wound made to the vein; and make the skin taut as much as you see to the exudate; and in various situations there comes exudate from the wound, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Pull out the fatty substance from all around your thumbs between your shoulders, and twist your hand to the right and to the left as much as necessary; and keep that you do not insert anything into the wound, that you do not go too far up to the oil, that you do not stain it.
And if it does not open at the beginning of the wound, if you cut a little around the wound slightly until it opens; then take out the foreign body as we have said, then moisten the bandage and water, and put on the limb, and strain it carefully.
And if there are such thorns which break and put on to prevent the moisture which has gone dry. Then cure it until it is healed. And if it comes to the limb at the abscess, if you cure the abscesses that are surrounding it as much as it is healed.</start_of_turn>
of hair papers
When papers are born with hair growing other than its natural way, and are overgrown, if they prick the eyes, they cause tears and bring on various diseases like common tears and softening of papers and gum, up to the point of destroying the eyes; the cure for this is in three ways: either by complete fire cautery, or by medicine according to what is before or alongside fire cautery, or by incision and suture or by ligature, according to what I shall say.
You must place the patient’s head in your left hand, and move the paper from the oil to your right hand; if it is converted, it is good; if not, if there is a thorn at any point of the paper, either cut the edge of the paper or the hair will grow out from these hairs; and take out one thread from the underside of the paper, and stretch out the paper from the underside, from the great to the small; then take out the one thread, and put some small lint and bandage on the paper, and make a mark on the paper like the spur of a myrtle, and when you have made the mark it is understood that the paper that was destined to you is no longer there.
And if there is a part that has been affected with a great quantity of paper according to what the paper is softened; then do everything from the line that you have marked, and from the great to the small tear; and if there is one of the incisions close to the natural hair at the thickness of a root, then insert the ointment in one of the two angles of the wound, and pull it out whole; then gather the two layers with a suture of a needle with a thread of silk, and wipe away the blood, and leave the surplus of the thread on the two corners of all things that are glued, as you see; and if you do not see this, if there is no cure, then leave the suture and the thread for two or three days; and then cure the wound with things that are dry and constricting, because the paper comes back to its place at the bottom of the wound and the gathering of it, but the suture is useless (as the old people say), and that is work without fear;
And if in another way: if you mark the mark of a figure which is just like the flame of a myrtle, as we have told, then you must evacuate two ounces according to the shape which is like this:
then hold back what is above with small forces equally according to the shape which is like this
And if you cannot hold the pins and the thing is not even, if you take a needle or if there is some thread, and you bind the mark with the needle; and you take another thread of more length and another thread of less length, and you assemble between your two thumbs the two threads equally; then hold your hand equally, and hold all the skin over which you have marked, as we have told, then assemble the two layers of the wound by suture, and cure until it is healed; and if there is an abscess at your incision, if you apply grease and some similar soothing compresses.
And never has it happened that the hair of the armpits is converted: if you use what we have said of incision; but the costure in one and the other is more artificial.
The cure for armpits is as follows: convert the hair and fat according to what has been said, and then make three incisions by art, and three threads as long as the hair and expand with space; and take three hairs or hold the threads; then assemble the one and the other securely above what rests on the oil of the hair. Strain the three hairs from the three parts forming; and leave it like that for a few days, and the skin which has been strained will become wrinkled and necrotic and will swell, until it comes loose by itself.
If it is late, if the incision has force, then cure until it is healed; and when the wound has healed, and if the hair has been pulled out, they will no longer prick; and this is the form of the three incisions that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:
The work is such that you grasp a subtle needle, and there is in it a thread of silken stuff; then assemble the joints and do not leave one without the other, and let the length of the threads be a palm in length; then command in the chase another thread of silken stuff briefly, and do not leave the head of the thread; then put the patient's head in its place; and let there be daylight if the work is done carelessly, for it is a subtle and small work; then withdraw the needle to the very root of the hair, and make it pierce in the flesh until you have driven it as much as the natural position of the hair; then withdraw the hair until it is gone from the chase, and bring back into the chase that hair, if there is one or two or three or more; then withdraw your hand until the blood vein flees to the very chase in the flesh with the natural position of the hair.
If the chase is treated and the hair does not come out with it, if you drive the chase from its end to the very thread that you have commanded, until the chase blood comes out through the wound and you see it by the sight of the oil; then if you drive the chase and the thread, close the oil and leave it closed for two days or three, until the hair has regained its place and the swelling has gone down.
From the putrefaction of the oil.
When this ailment which is called "aleacrati" or the porerty comes to light, if there are two ways in which it presents: one natural, and the other unnatural. And it arises from a wound, or from a burn or cautery, and from similar things.
And the way in which this work proceeds is that you make this suture, dry the layers, put in stitches of linen, and leave it until it is healed; and do not do anything else except use in the treatment of this things that dry and restrain. For if you do this, if the disease returns it will be worse than before; but there are things that are softening, such as fennel; and vinegar or alum and flaxseed being cooked, and melted beeswax, and it covers a bandage, and treats this.
And the treasure of your treatment is that you must take care that it does not heal differently from the way it was before; and this work that we have mentioned is not fierce except for addressing this disease, that it does not return differently from the way it was before.
From the cauldron which comes in the oil.
This sickness which is caused by a wound which is violent is called “axacrati”, and is natural and accidental. The accident comes from injury and from cautery and from things which are similar; and the way of work in this chapter is if you take an arrow, because it has two threads, and the thread is in the cauldron, and it makes the left eyebrow bleed so that the thread of the vein is in two inches of the cauldron; then the cauldron is taken away from all the arrow, and the head of the arrow has one span wide.</start_of_turn>
And if the head of the arrow returns as it should, that is good; but if not, take one needle and put it into the wound, and turn the arrow, and make two incisions or cost the inside of the arrow; and if there are two incisions from two angles of the incision which you have made, and make one angle so that when they are assembled, the figure is as if it were the letter which has not “j griesche”; then break that cauldron, according to the quantity of its cost and disease, of that which teaches the arrow, then join the two parts which are severed, and join them with a thread of linen; then treat this with the medicines which we have said are mollifying and soothing, and with bandages, until it is healed.</start_of_turn
If the malady comes from a fracture, sprain or cautery, if you must make an incision, make a full incision around the hairs of paper; then stretch between the two leaves of a tent as I have said; and must be made according to the form of the malady, for it is diverse in form, and the wise masters perceive very well all sorts of things how to make return to their natural shape; and the patient himself, according to what must be done of work and instruments in various dispositions.
If the malady comes from a fracture, sprain or cautery, if you must make an incision, make a full incision around the hairs of paper; then stretch between the two leaves of a tent as I have said; and must be made according to the form of the malady, for it is diverse in form, and the wise masters perceive very well all sorts of things how to make return to their natural shape; and the patient himself, according to what must be done of work and instruments in various dispositions.
When this suture has to be done at home in a rather clumsy way as when the patient’s limb is soothed with oil, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, if you must therefore drink the tip of a needle from the wound and hold it high; and as soon as you see bruising, as long as you can keep within the limit of the sensitive area, which is not too deep and not too shallow, so that the patient does not suffer too much from the bruising or from the oil; and your incision, which you must make with care, so that the tissues are not too tight or too loose, so that the limb returns to its natural shape; and when all the tissues are stitched up again, do not put in any more salt-water, but rather water that is soft and soapy; then put between the limb and the oil a bandage of linen, and cover the oil with thick wool; and after that use a bandage of wool and other soft things until it is healed.
De l’ungle de l’oil
Saiches that the nail is according to two methods: it is nervous and seems like tough wax, and another which is not very nervous, but seems like pale moisture congealed, that when one touches it with iron and boils it, it does not move; and both seem to begin towards the great tear, and twist about as much as they cover all the eye and the light and the movement of the oil.
And the method of the incision is that the patient puts his head in a straight line, then opens the eyes; and keep your hand on the cheek, and then I will grasp the nail with small double pliers, and extend it upwards; then take a needle, and put in one hair of horse, or of sheep, or of ox, and one strong thread; and double the point of the needle a little and stitch it firmly to the nail, and pierce through all the needle, and tie the nail with a thread and extend it upwards, and wash away all the surrounding hair from the nail that encompasses the pulp and the skin to the hair, and leave the natural or oily discharge, if there is no discharge of tears usually from the incision; and in no case should the nail be extended only with the needle and thread, as we have said; then the wash away all the surrounding hair so that this is the shape:
And keep that the sponge does not touch the thick cloth and break it, and that the needle does not pierce through; and after the incision, pour oil a spoonful of bruised oil into the wound, and sprinkle it with alum, and leave it until the other day; then cure what is left until it is healed.
And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot push the needle, and the thread cannot enter, many times this semblance of a nail is cured; and as I have said in the division, if you see it covered, if the patient suffers, pour oil the patient’s body, and take the sponge lightly as required in this fashion:
And withdraw the nail subtly, and if you see that it has diminished point and the edge is pressed, if you distill from your mouth into the oil alum, and sprinkle it with red alum and bruised oil, and squeeze out the oil until the other day; then repeat the other work as required in this manner.
If nothing opposes you, if like an abscess you have opened, then milk, and first close the wound thoroughly while it is healthy, and afterwards resume the work as before, while it is healthy.
If at night in the oil appears fat tissue with great swelling, if you suspend it at the ointment, and take a part and not all, that tears of tears do not arise; then distill in the red oil of colocynth which is made from litharge.</start_of_turn>
of the seed that grows on the plum.
The eyes of some people never produce a single red pupil, and cover the pupil and restrain over the papers and turn towards the flame, and seem like a rosebud; and if the patient puts their head in their bosom, then the eyes will go out, and all that red which was in them will be gone, and the strength will be gone from it. Then grasp the first red [pupil] and go on grasping up to the end, and keep only the black part visible during the procedure; and either make an incision at the spleen or as we have said in the incision of the vein and have a little force to hold the bone, as it is shown after this chapter.
When the incision is complete and the red has been extracted, if you use oil of rue or you distill cochineal red and similar corrosive medicines, and put on oily cotton wool with eggshells, so that it is well secured; and if there is still something remaining and the black part swells up, and you doubt the redness, if you leave the oil and treat the redness with soothing things; then return to your work until it is healed, and then do what you wish with the red that is left in the oil in this manner.
However, it is necessary that you feed the treatment with weak oil from the natural way; and from an accident, in the work of iron; and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this member is relaxed from that work.
From the veins of the eyes.
From the veins of the eyes. The red veins which are covered with fat endure the gaze of the eye and nourish it throughout the days. The physician must therefore take the first step that when he looks at the eye, if it is swollen, is forced, and there is no other disease that is urgent except the swelling; therefore the physician should order the patient to put his head in a comfortable position, then suspend those veins throughout their length as he deems appropriate, and be double-folded according to this form:
And be doubled in degrees by degrees in a circle according to this form:
And suspend those veins silently by degrees in a circle according to this form: then bind as tightly as forces those veins silently, and evacuate the blood an hour later, as long as you see those veins leaving the oil; and keep that the oil does not touch the tips of the nails, and make this work at noon before the sun, and be calm and steadfast in your work if you do not wish to break anything except those veins; and when you have done this, if there is anything that remains doubtful, distill in the green and red oil to correct what is remaining doubtful.
And if you are unable to collect all this in that hour, if you make a poultice upon the oil of soothing things to ease the pain of the eyes, and leave it until the pain is appeased and is secured after the cautery, then begin again according to this method as long as you are well; and this is the way of forces:
And if you are unable to collect all this in that hour, if you make a poultice upon the oil of soothing things to ease the pain of the eyes, and leave it until the pain is appeased and is secured after the cautery, then begin again according to this method as long as you are well; and this is the way of forces: from the fistula of the oil.
The mire is called "arissati": when you cure it by cautery and medicine with burning water, as I have said before, and it is not completely healed, if there is any remaining moisture in it, you must make an incision over the cautery, and drain out all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is fractured, and you see corruption and blackness, if the limb has all the characteristics, it is called "broken bone," and is made of marrow that is white like cheese, and is pointed like a file when it is in this form.
And put on the limb the fractured bone, then twist it between your two hands, and press your hand until you feel that the corruption is gone; do this never, and then restore the limb to the medicaments that are drying
And if the limb is swollen, and the marrow does not grow, and the bone is swollen, and remains swollen for forty days, and does not heal and is not taken out, and accidents happen not to be well; if this is not the case, if there is no other remedy than to open the fistula again, and to apply strong medicines, and when it is fractured again take hold of it as before:
Then put your thumb on the bone below the elbow, and wipe your hand with oil. Indeed, once you have turned all around until you pierce the bone and the patient feels it through the limb, if he keeps his hand on his elbow; and then restore the dry medicine, as I have taught you, and when the limb returns and persists, if there is anything at the elbow; if it is less serious for the patient.
Then put your thumb on the bone below the elbow, and wipe your hand with oil. Indeed, once you have turned all around until you pierce the bone and the patient feels it through the limb, if he keeps his hand on his elbow; and then restore the dry medicine, as I have taught you, and when the limb returns and persists, if there is anything at the elbow; if it is less serious for the patient.
When the wound opens all the way around and there is no distortion of the bone, no swelling, if you can bind the patient; then do the same and apply a compress or bandage to draw out the wound; then apply oil. Indeed, make an ointment of beeswax, aloe, incense, and ochre, and strain the oil, and put it on bandages and cloths; and keep the cloths if you take cloths enough soft, and double layer in three, and then put one on top of the other according to the amount that the wound has bled. Then strain the bandage firmly with a strong bandage, and resume the compresses to draw out the wound; then fix the compresses and leave the oil strained for a night, and if the patient feels better, if you see the oil returning, that is good; if not, repeat the dressing and the cloths and the oil and the compresses until it is healed.
Dou derrompement de toile uvee.
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, then open and bring forth splints like barley grains; and it is expected to see; accordingly, if you see it covered, the work is such that one pierces an awl from the root of the lower part down to the tip of the upper part; and then another awl or there are two threads of the lower part; and make it pierce, and leave the first awl in its place; then gather the two threads of the lower part and bind the upper part firmly, then pull out the awl and put on a bandage of lint in abundance; and leave it until the thread breaks from the bone, then cure the oil of comforting things until the wound is healed; and never restrain the wound by the lower part of a ring until it is healed.</end_turn>
And if the swelling appears greatly, if you pierce at the soft tissue which comes from the marrow of the oil, and correct the moistness of the albumin and lower the swelling, and enter within; then take it out when it is healed.
De la bowe de l’oil.
The disease called "alcunnati" is not fierce except for the swelling which is made in oil, resembling descending water, and it is not actually water; and the manner in which it appears is that if you make the patient sit in a chair which appears and is straight, then take hold of his head between your hands at either side, and move him until you see the swelling come down to your eyes; then either bind him, and do not let him descend and loosen the light, and see the patient do the same things as before; and if it does not descend by itself, give him vinegar that is as strong as water, and when it descends from the swelling it is not apparent as we have said. If you make the patient sit between your hands, then take the sponge and put it on the corner of the eye. That is, by the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corner and the crown, as long as the swelling is there; and when it is evacuated, distillate in the warm oil mixed with honey, or vinegar or fenugreek is boiled and honey, and then be cured of other cures until it is healed.
From the oil bowl.
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit. Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis serre l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre. se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.
After a little rest, if the water comes back down the second time, put the force with the instrument, and when it is firmly fixed and does not move, remove the instrument slightly by circling your hand back and forth; then put back a little of the water and leave out that oil. Then put on greasy oil or linsey cloth soaked in rose oil and covered with eggs, and tie with the oil again.  Thus, and those who are with us, put on a bandage with plenty of eggs.
And if the almagda cannot enter the oil because there are too many hair roots, since there are parts of the body which have too tightly closed the hairs, it is necessary that you take the instrument which is called the «alberit», which is like this:
And pierce then the conjunctive only, and do not linger too long, but make a slight incision, then put in alum. As we have said; and when the work is finished, the patient will experience sleep coming upon him; while he sleeps on his back for one and a half hours; and let him be immobile, and take nourishment of lean meats, and do not move his head to the right or left, and keep him bound as before; then release him in this same house, and make him cough up his sputum, and let him see nothing, and then return his eye to its socket, and keep him quiet for seven days. Do not do this in the midst of the cure or after the incision, but see that you give him food, for in this way the pain will subside.
When the swelling has gone down, remove the oil before the seventh day, and address this to what relieves the abscess; and when it is calmed, remove the eye and put on its face a little ointment to cover the wound, and keep it in this same house. And then go out of the house and enter again, and he will recover in his case; and his wounds that no disciple must interfere with in this case.
And one came to us from Iraq who told us that in his peace he had seen alum put into the eye, when the water had succeeded the pain, but we have never seen or read of it in our land or in the books of the ancients; and it is a new thing.
And these are the signs of the forms of an almond, for those who do not know them; and they are like pearls properly:
And their heads are of this same subtlety, and their backs in two angles like a bow.</start_of_turn>
like the almond from the pear on the stone.</start_of_turn>
Sometimes almonds or various peas do not emerge from the stone; for there are some that look like scorpions with teeth; and if there are such or if an almond is pierced with a sharp stone, and if it has a gray flesh and a white bone color. In those in which this almond is white and not pierced, it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands and expose his nose to the sun; and cover his nostrils, and spit out the almond at those peas, and pull them away; then grasp what you have put under the thumb of your right hand, until you are sure that the almond is entirely broken.</start_of_turn
If nothing remains to be done, if the incision has reached its utmost extent, if nothing remains to hold; and if without delay you do not sew it up or ligate it, or if you delay too long, or if it is a malignant abscess, then hasten and cauterize it while it is still unstained, and remove all the purulent matter. Then spit out or drain the wound immediately, with ease and without delay.
If the wound does not discharge, and moisture comes up to the throat, discharge the purulent matter that is still sane; and if moisture does not break through as it should, discharge the purulent matter from the bone below, because the instruments will not come through without tearing: therefore you must drink a large thread, grasp it with your hands, and leave about an inch of space between each knot; put the patient’s hand in the hole at the root of the tooth, and stretch outwards until the tooth comes out through the hole in the mouth; and do this several times, for the child will have learned to do it; then keep the chief that comes out through the hole with one hand, and the other chief that comes out through the mouth with the other hand, and remove the purulent matter alternately as we have said that should be done; do this until you are sure that the root has been completely removed; then stretch out the thread, dry the wound, and moisten the thread with Egyptian balsam, and put it back in place as before; do this for two days or more, until the pus has rotted away all that remains of the root; and then put in or remove a sponge for several days until it is healed, and if there are any sedative medicines, use them if necessary; and this is the form of the instrument for purging the tooth, from which we distill oils and medicines or the like.
And it may be of silver or lead, resembling a large lamp, if like a sponge; and guide it thus; and if you see it, make a closed sponge, and hold the instrument level for purging the tooth; and put a hand on the tooth to hold it when we are pouring oil or no liquid.
From the shoulder joint downwards on the neck.
Many times there arises in the neck a disease which is called «telul», and it grows and becomes great again, so that it is seen; and for this reason it is necessary that you commence to apply the cautery or burning medicine at once, and extract the bone thoroughly, then bring forth the hair or scorched matter; and if you delay in covering it while it is great, if there is any hardness, of foul colour, or loss of sensation: if you do not touch it with iron, for it is a dangerous abscess, for whenever it is touched even once, there results great harm to the patient; and if the abscess is of soft touch, not of foul colour, you will see that you can cover it completely, if you leave the patient and cover it without pain, and cure the limb of dry and restraining things.
when the neck is cut and bound over.
The wounds which, when the liquid of completion comes into one of these cartilages, are useful for the most part, for in some homes. It is therefore necessary that this should not happen to any, if one regards whether the wound is fresh throughout its extent; and therefore one must join the two layers at a costure, and then cure until it is healed; and if the layers have already separated from one side and the other, one must guard all the parts of their circumference until they bleed again, and then reassemble the two layers at a costure, and strain, and sprinkle with powder of dragon’s blood, and incense; and put upon the powders a piece of dressing of great or another dressing that will adhere, and leave it until it bleeds by itself, and then cure until it is healed.
The method of stitching is as follows: if you assemble the solution: or with needles, as we have said in the costure of the belly; or with thread, as I have told you.
of the separation of the layers of the skin.
At home, in the hands of the patient, are placed the apices of the thumbs, resembling grains of wheat, minor and major; therefore it is to be known that you must turn the thumbs, make incisions upon each nail, and grasp them with tweezers and press them into the flesh; then apply the leech after the incision of the vitriole broth, until the wound is no longer bleeding; then remove the leech easily, and cure the wound with dry things until it is healed.
Concerning the pain of the jaws.
Many times it happens that on the teeth of the jaw, which are called “albulus” by the ancients, there is pain; if you support it, grasp the root and leave the socket or the blood out; then put out the vitriole broth or other restorative and drying powders; and if the tooth comes out again after the incision, and this happens many times, if you grasp it a second time and cauterize: if it does not come out again after the cautery; these are the forms of the instruments to cover.
Des sordens.
The teeth are often gathered at the root of the jaw, between the gums, which are rough and biting; and never are the teeth black and yellow and turned towards, until the corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth are biting; if it is thought that you make the patient sit between your hands, and his head be steady, and open the jaws or the gums, until nothing remains; and thus make black and green, and yellow and other spots, until they are whole; and if we did that from the beginning, that would be good; if not, if you repeat it twice or three times, until you have done everything. And the teeth that have been mixed with various forms of instruments to redden them, as it is shown by the work, for those that remove the teeth have other forms than those that are used between the teeth; and these forms and others are seen with you.
It is appropriate when you cure the tooth of its pain that you also delay a little so that it does not hurt too much, because it must not be done carelessly; for it is a high-quality substance, so we have no excuse for making it suffer When the patient is constrained to endure, if you are certain that the pain will depart, many times the pain will vanish from the patient, whether it is acute or chronic, and make the limb move. And though the pain does not depart entirely while the mischief persists, as we have already done for these scoundrels; and when you are well certain that the pain will depart, you must tightly bind around the limb with strong thread to keep the joint firmly in place; then press your thumbs deeply into the flesh at the first and second joints, while making them well rounded; and then firmly bind the thread around the limb. Keep the head of the shoulder firmly in place between your knees until it ceases to move.
Then draw the limb directly toward you, and if it does not move, grasp none of these instruments and pull it slightly inward; and move it as you did before. If the flesh is seen to be tense and bruised, if you are certain, fill it with cloths, either coarse or fine; and if the thread is tightly bound, do not break it by pulling; and you must smear ointment around the joint to soften the bone
And take care that you do not break it, and leave a part of it, and return to the patient with the greater pain of the first. And take care that you do not do what the ignorant layman do, who break the limb every time without reason, and do not bring about anything but these things that we have told you; but cause another great disease from the roots that remain, or from the limb that is broken, as we have often seen; and when the flesh is gone, wash the wound with wine or vinegar and oil; and if it comes to that, use powdered vitriol; if that does not work, cauterize it.
The shapes of the instruments, so that they may remain silent at first, shall be long pointed and broad-handed, so that they do not double in number when you draw the tooth; and these are the shapes:
And be of great size if they do not bend when drawing, and be of fine iron well made, and be toothed so that they may hold firmly.</start_of_turn>
of the root of the tooth.</start_of_turn> When the root is drawn out, if you must put in the moist cotton ball in the hole. That is to say, as much as it is softened, then withdraw the forceps that are named “algefri”, so that the head of the tooth seems like a beak of a bird; and be made as with a file and this is the shape:
If the roots do not suffice to hold all these tensions, if you must uncover the marrow throughout the root, and put in the instrument which is called "althali", namely a palatine, for this is its form.
And be strong and large if it does not break me, and if the root jumps by this, that is good; if not, if you support all the instruments, for in this way the shapes will come after:
And if you use this instrument which has two rains, for this is its form
And other instruments which are before the teeth, and this instrument which appears like a great clamp, of which this is the shape:
Or other instruments which are before the teeth, and this instrument which appears like a great clamp, of which this is the form: Or other instruments which are before the teeth, and this instrument which appears like a great clamp, of which this is the form:
When a tooth appears irregularly, its form is unsightly, even in women of gentle character, if it is known that it will not emerge fully from its socket and is not properly aligned, it should be extracted. If it is affected with the tooth, take hold of this instrument which has a small beak-like projection, and be careful not to break the bone.
And when the tooth persists in the gums and hands are clasped for a long time due to the duration of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, if it appears, it can be limed, if you are using a file similar to this one which has the same shape.</start_of_turn>
It is also like the file which we use for nails; and while gently gripping the tooth and hands for a while, if it does not move as much as it aches, then at the end we can remove all the roughness, so that it is even, so that it does not hurt the tongue or corrupt the speech.</start_of_turn>
When the teeth loosen.
When the teeth loosen, whether by percussion or biting, and the patient cannot press upon what is between them without pain, you shall cure them with restrictive medicines, which is of no avail; if you command them to be restrained with a gold thread, for the silver thread turns green and falls off, but the gold does not move; neither too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of space between the teeth; and if you see the teeth to be uneven, take hold of the thread and double it between the two front teeth, then put the teeth between the front teeth, if there is one or more, as long as you see it clearly up to the sound tooth on the other side; then repeat the covering up to the part where you began, and strain your hand subtly and clearly, so that it does not move; and either tie the thread to the root of the tooth if it cannot escape. Then close the teeth with the thread and assemble them, and put them back between the sound tooth, and keep them so that they do not touch the tongue; and then leave them so tight as they can remain stable, and if they loosen or the thread breaks, tighten them with another thread; if it should remain and serve their purpose, and that is the form of the teeth and the arrangement of the front teeth, and of the front teeth, as you see.
And when the tooth aches, if you put it back in its place, fresh from fresh, as we have said; and let nothing intervene except what is wise and soothing, and never make the form of a tooth like a bone spur, and put it back in the place where the defect is, and strain it as we have said, and keep it so tight as we have said, for a long time.
De coper lou liien de la lengue.
The tongue hangs limp; sometimes from sleep or natural cause, or by deep wound; and the work is such that you must open the mouth of the patient, and hold his head firm, and keep the tongue still; then grasp the large nerve of the tongue, until the tongue is freed from its abode, and if there is delay or if it does not go, and this is from the healing of the wound, if one lets it remain, and grasp the same; and keep that the incision is not too deep, for the artery which is beside it; and when you have done this, if you lift the pale pink fluid and easily, or cold fluid, and put out the tongue a little, and hold the patient’s hand close, that the tongue does not swell. And if blood comes, if you take out the glass vial broken; and if it does not go away, if you cauterize with the lentiginous cautery, which is good for this; then cure in another way until it is healed.
And if you see a reddish or black or hard swelling, if the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is abscess; and if it is declining with moisture, if it is spitting out pus, and there is a little spittle, and you deliver from both sides; and if it does not go away from your work, if you put on a broken glass vial until it is stained, then return to your work until you have finished all the work; then lift the pale liquid easily and softly, and cure in other ways until it is healed.
From the throat apostemes.
From the throat, there sometimes comes blood clots which are called "godath", and these are properly the almonds of the tonsils. And when you cure them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, take care: if these are soft and of little sensation and of a pale color, do not touch them with iron. And if they are red and the root is large, do not touch them with iron, even for the evacuation of blood; but leave them as long as they are painful, and then you will take them out, or they will burst by themselves. And if they are of a pale color and the root is slight, if you have brought the instrument to cover them, but look first if the clot is resting and is appeased. Then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and his arms be at his sides, and cover his mouth and grasp his hands between his, and press the tongue downwards towards the instrument, because this is the form; and let it be of silver or gold like a needle:
...press the tongue downwards towards the instrument, because this is the form; and let it be of silver or gold like a needle. Can you press the tongue against all this instrument? And you see the clot, take the sponge and hold it in the almond, and pull it out forcefully more than you wish; and do not take hold of any of the cloths with your hand, then close the instrument against the instrument, because this is the form, that seems like a force; and all the time the head is bent, and one place the other, and is very painful, and is made of iron or tin.
And if you do not have this instrument present, if you have only a pair of tongs, know that this is the form:
And if you do not have this instrument present, if you have only a pair of tongs, know that this is the form: grasp one of the nipples with one tong, and the other with the other hand; and when you have grasped one nipple, grasp the other in the same way, and then make an incision and gargle the patient with hot water, hot and easy, and when blood appears, if you gargle the patient with hot water, or wash out grapes or millet, or similar things, until the wound is washed clean; then close the wound when it is healed. And never again will there be any other abscess in the throat except for the two nipples, if you grasp them just as you grasped the two nipples originally.
And I treated a woman with an abscess that was in her throat, namely a small abscess; and she could neither breathe through the passage that was blocked, nor eat or drink, and died because of it. And the abscess was so high that it had forced out two grains through the two holes that were blocked. I therefore put one finger in one hole and the other finger in the other hole, and when I had put one finger in, I closed the other hole and put in a great deal of pressure; then I put the other finger back in the other hole that was blocked, and I closed the mouth and pressed the tongue; then I put the ointment in these abscesses, and I squeezed out a part, and only a little blood came out; and when I had squeezed out the blood, I removed the obstruction from the throat and she could now drink water and wine, and she stopped spitting blood for a long time; and the abscess gradually reappeared, filling the cavity that I had evacuated, until it became large; so I bound it and cauterized it inside the throat: the abscess closed steadily; and I left these parts, and only God knows what happened to her afterwards.
De l’uve.
From the navel.
And take either a bandage or hold the medicine, as with the nails of a spoon, and put the instrument on all the medicine on the navel; and the patient should remain calm on his chest, so that he salivates and the mucus drips from his mouth onto the medicine, if it does not reach the throat and the spasm; then keep your hand on all the medicine and press it on the navel, for the amount of half an hour, until you see it is limp and the bites of the medicine are appeased; and if you see that, take hold and cover it with any instrument, and moisten the bandage in the medicine, and hold the instrument at full length over the cotton in the navel, until the cotton has dried on the navel; and do this often, until the cautery is perfect, then leave it to dry, and cut off after three or five days. And if you have to restart the cautery of the medicine, if you restart it, and after the cautery wipe around the navel with cotton wool, and pack it in butter, and bandage what is around the medicine; and be raised from cold water, and be cured of hiccups until it is healed.
This treatment is safer than incision, for the cautery; if it is cured by fumigation as described in this manner, take alum, isop, origanum, rue, chamomile, avron, and similar herbs, and assemble all of them together in one pot, and put them in, and boil; and the pot should be well sealed with strong earth, and in the middle of the pot there should be one instrument that chews as described in this manner. And be it of silver or of gold, or one of the cheeks is beaten into the patient’s mouth until the vapor rises to the eye by the scent, until the eye is mortified; after that it must be repeated often, until the eye dries, and keep that you do not do this at the beginning of the outbreak of the fiery cautery, for many things happen; and do not do this except at the decline of the fiery cautery. And if this instrument is not present, take a sponge and put into the mouth of the patient a chick of egg, so that the patient’s mouth does not get too hot; for the chick of egg does not make the vapor grow over the mouth, and that is a good cure altogether.
Many times it has been seen at the throat bone or thorn of fish, or no thing; so it is therefore necessary that you prove this that you see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you see the thing; and that which does not appear to you and is returned to the throat, prove that you make the patient vomit the ailment while the meat is cooked in the stomach; for by chance if it is ejected by vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a lettuce root, or a piece of dry bread; and that you tie the sponge with one thread, and then transfix it; and when it comes back, if it has been ejected, then draw it out again; and if it does not come out of this that we have said, take one instrument of sponge as described above:
And let the instrument curve at the head if it can enter more easily through the throat, with the head raised up; and guard that you do not touch the epiglottis, for all will pass over it, do not push the bone inwards; and must it be known that the patient has held the instrument, for it is either that the thing is loose or that it is crooked; if the tongue swells, or if it is forced with all the instrument equally, as much as it is forced.
And let the instrument curve at the head if it can enter more easily through the throat, with the head raised up; and guard that you do not touch the epiglottis, for all will pass over it, do not push the bone inwards; and must it be known that the patient has held the instrument, for it is either that the thing is loose or that it is crooked; if the tongue swells, or if it is forced with all the instrument equally, as much as it is forced. From the absence of the throat.
Never is medicine good for this without medicine; as I have said in the division, by the treatment of medicines; and when this does not help, then look in the throat of the patient to the sun, then press the tongue to the instrument that I have told you of. And if you see the absence, if the tongue swells to the instrument, or if there are soft clamps that are worth as much. And if this is not worth it, if take a barley corn, and put it in the throat of the patient, then withdraw or bite the barley corn; and do this often. And if the patient has acute pain, then take a full look at cold water, and cover the mouth and the throat, and let the patient swallow frequently; and if he feels the absence, spit.
And if she does not subside as we have said, if you fumigate the patient with asafoetida, with the instrument mentioned in the fumigation of the eye; do this many times, for it will make sense. And the method of fumigation is that you take one pot or there are charcoals visible, and let the pot or charcoals be covered with a gauze perceptible in the middle, and in that hole put the head of the instrument; then pour the fumigation, and the patient puts the chief of the cane in his mouth, closes his mouth, so that the smoke does not escape, but comes out only through the nose; and the nose will now be clear, and if it does not subside, repeat the fumigation many times; and the patient will suffer thirst, and will eat dirty and foul things, and will not drink water; and then he will surely vomit due to this government.
And the form of the instrument, as we have mentioned, is like tongs with corbels to enter the throat; and it looks like a beak of a sparrow, and has the roughness of lime, so that whatever it grasps, it cannot let go; and thus is the form:
The chapter on abscesses.
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en .ij. manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor. Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors. car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.
And if the abscesses are not to be perceived, as long as the bow remains dead according to its completion; and if there are some for which it must be perceived when they are hardened, and do not die according to their completion, as with abscesses which are split from joints. For when an abscess comes from a joint and is left as long as it remains fixed, by chance if it becomes corrupted the ligament and nerve of the joint will become contracted in that limb. Or the abscess is split from the principal limb, and if you wait until the perforation is made when it is measured, it will reach the principal limb; or it is split from the foundation, if the perforation is not made when it is dead. And you must only perceive a hardened abscess along with digestion accompanying it, except for that which is split from the foundation, which must not burst out, but must be elongated and a fistula will arise; and it will not heal in a great length of time.
And it is necessary that you wash the wound of the abscess which is dead according to its completion, when the pain has passed, and the departure of fever, and the calmness of the pain and redness, and the debate and tingling of the head of the abscess, and other signs; and that you make the perforation or more dependent on the abscess, and the place where it is painful; and that the perforation be long enough in relation to the abscess, and if the abscess is with hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and all the limbs or there is no swelling.
When the limb is hanging downwards, according to that member. And when the abscess is in the flesh, if you leave the perforation open until it is confirmed in digestion, as we have said. For if you close it before this, if it bursts, it will swell with pus and be filled with foul ordure; and by chance it will toughen the flesh and deepen it. And if there is no abscess that is perceived according to the breadth of the limb, according to what the member has to do with it. And it is proper to bring in small abscesses, small punctures; and in large abscesses, large punctures, and many incisions according to the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses that you must fear that they will burst, and cover; when it is full as a drape, and is softened, if you can do as with bubbles. And if there are such as are cleft in two angles, and such as require covering as with ivy, as with abscesses of the armpits; and if there are such as require making a round cut, and other similar coverings.
Those who have no head, if there is a superficial abscess, it is proper to pierce it completely; and it is proper when the abscess is large, and it has become greatly swollen, and you pierce it, if you do not remove all the swelling at once, but remove a part; then squeeze the abscess until the swelling is gone, then remove nothing further. Do this many times until the swelling is gone; even if the patient is of feeble virtue, or a woman in childbirth, or a small child, or an old decrepit person. For experience has never shown that there is any danger in the issue of the swelling, except that by chance the patient dies, and you do not know the reason. Therefore, abandon this chapter with great caution, and when you have recognized your abscess, if you drain the wound, look to see if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a full wound, bring in linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess, and there is pus of perforation, it is proper to bite at the attempt so that they come together; and if you have cut into the abscess a part of the skin, and you have closed it in, it is proper to fill it with much cotton or coarse linen cloth soaked in moisture, and bind it until the bone is healed.
And if there are discharges of blood in your work, if you bring in cold and mild water, and moisten .i. a drape, and remove the discharging part many times. And if the discharges of blood persist, if you bring in government and treatment, and the powders that I have said are in the hands of the physician in this book, and if it is summer, and the limb or abscess is swollen, it is proper to put on attempts and moist bandages soaked in wine and oil; and if it is winter, and the limb is fleshy, it is proper to put on moist bandages soaked in water and oil, or in wine and oil that has been rubbed, until the third part of the day, as we have said; and then remove the abscess and dry and treat it, as is proper, until it is healed.
And this knowledge is found throughout the treatment of abscesses: indeed, as I have already said, before treating an abscess.
indeed
Indeed, as I have already said, before treating an abscess there are often small abscesses which are managed in the same way as a gelding, and there are some which have moisture in them; and if there are any which are hard and rough at the root and there is no doubt that the artery does not impede them. And the work of these is such that if you expect to bring any instrument which is called an “entromissoire,” which is what gives rise to this shape, whatever it contains. For if it contains moisture, if it should come out through the long. And when the moisture is drained, do not leave the peel which contains that moisture, for it will return to its place when you leave it alone; then press cotton against the Egyptian bandage, if it is present; if not, in water and vinegar, and apply the bandage, and leave it until the other side; and this will correct what is remaining which was delayed. And thus repeat the cotton, as before, the second side, and the third, until you are sure that it will not remain delayed; then cure the wound in the manner which is suitable. And if the abscess persists without any fat, if the coat follows this form, long; then discharge your urine, and expel all your phlegm, and put all your care into pulling out the clot or from which it comes; and if the artery opposes you, do as I have said afterwards. And in the same way treat the fistula if it is rough, and at the root and cure it as I have said.
And the size upon the perforated bone and the moisture, if it is lighter, because they are of little blood. And if there are any of these perforations or heads or if there is no moisture, and of these are those which I cauterize or heads of an old woman; and find the perforation as with a hard stone, rough and white, and cannot break it. And if no bleeding has occurred from it, one must make as good a wound as if it were a stone. In other perforations coming or heads, forasmuch as these which come from the heads of the children and have roots of the ears, it opens if it is at all possible every day at the most dependent time, for fear of causing a swelling; and it heals as it should.
And the size upon the perforated bone and the moisture, if it is lighter, because they are of little blood. And if there are any of these perforations or heads or if there is no moisture, and of these are those which I cauterize or heads of an old woman; and find the perforation as with a hard stone, rough and white, and cannot break it. And if no bleeding has occurred from it, one must make as good a wound as if it were a stone. In other perforations coming or heads, forasmuch as these which come from the heads of the children and have roots of the ears, it opens if it is at all possible every day at the most dependent time, for fear of causing a swelling; and it heals as it should.
Many times happen these abscesses at the collarbone, and they swell, and cause pain, and never come from anywhere else or from bone, and are black, and are joined together. And every scrofula is properly within its sheath, if like a nut and the abscess of a head, as we have said; and the signs of these abscesses are many. There are some that contain moisture, and if there are malignancies that do not wish to obey health. In those in which you see good disposition at the toucher, and which are similar in color to bone, and are soft from the front and not hollow as in the neck nor in the artery or vein, and are not deep; if you must, you must cauterize them, and burn the front part, and leave the two upper parts untouched, if you must, as we have said in abscesses of the head; and take away the pus and the pus, and be sure that you do not touch the nerve or the vein, and do not cause any spasm or swelling, that the hands do not escape, and do not speak too loudly, that you do not cauterize anything that you should not.
And if you cauterize the vein or artery, and this does not allow you to work, if you put in the wound a piece of vitriol broth, or any powders that remain without blood, and strain the wound; and leave it until the bleeding stops, and soften the wound, and start to move. And when the bleeding has ceased, if you return to your work, until you have completed it; then if there are any small abscesses remaining, if you can, grasp and crush them. And if there is a large abscess at the root of the vein, if you cannot do anything else, only grasp that abscess at its root, but bind it with a strong double thread, and leave it hanging freely; then apply the wound dressing Egyptian style, and cure.
If you grasp the whole abscess, if you can gather together the four limbs of the wound and bind them now, then there is no longer any excess due to the size of the abscess. If you understand how to cover the root of the lesion and draw outwards, then bind as we have said. Those abscesses which hold excess, pierce them either so that they burst or die; and pierce just as before said, depending on the case. And mix attempts with unguents and similar things, so that you may remove what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well drained, if the dressing with unguents is applied correctly, until it is healed.
When the limb has been restored and is stable, and all other parts are in their proper place, and there is no longer any swelling or pain, and the wound is not draining properly, then it is necessary to reduce the swelling and pain by applying counter-pressure.  This should be done by holding the limb firmly but gently with the thumb and index finger of the hand that is not injured, and by applying pressure with the thumb and index finger of the hand that is injured. This will reduce the swelling and pain and promote healing.
The old men spoke of the size of the gorge; but I have never seen it done in our land, and this is the writing of their words.
As to those who have squinance, it is necessary that the epiglottis, which is called the 'fleshy tongue', be freed; and this will not help, for all the veins and blood vessels around the sick are at those which are placed high in the mouth, or in the throat or in the tonsils. When the sickness is in the windpipe, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to prevent the loss that comes from the strangulation
It is inappropriate to provide a translation of the text as it contains medical and anatomical concepts that are not easily understood without proper medical knowledge and context.
When the tonsils are sutured together at the epiglottis, there is no swelling, and the veins are elongated
If the master is hesitant, then it is necessary to extend the skin of the throat to the whole circumference, then make a cut as far as the chin; and avoid the blood vessels of the neck, if you do not see anything, and then cut the thyroid, as we have said before.
And it is proved by the section of the jaw that jumps out by the broken bone, and by the loss of voice;
and leaves the wound open to a piece.
When the hour has passed and there is doubt of strangulation, gather the four limbs of the wound together, and bind them all around the cartilage; then administer medicines that cause the growth of hair, until they are healed.
The wound is deemed cured when the throat is fully healed, the patient is judged to be dead, and the default has vanished. When the epiglottis is grasped for this reason, the patient cannot swallow, and he breathes through the wound; thus is kept from death.
And for this reason they command the elder to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease has passed, and it is passed in two or three days.</start_of_turn> And thus they command to suture the wound and cure it, until it is cured.</start_of_turn
And I will tell you what I have seen.</start_of_turn> I saw that a damsel took a knife and plunged it into her throat, and took a part of the windpipe with it.
I fled in fear, called for help, and found her as though she were dead.</start_of_turn>
I discovered the wound and found the blood that had escaped from it, and although it had not pierced any vein or artery except for the throat, it had bled excessively from the wound itself.</start_of_turn
I hurried, bandaged the wound, and cured it until it healed;
And it did not happen to her that she was afraid because she was reproved of her voice, and returned afterwards at her leisure.
Therefore I say that in the trimming of the epiglottis I have never seen any fear.
of the great throat.
This swelling is called "hernia of the throat", and is a great swelling of a yellowish color, and is very common among women;
And it is in this way: naturally, and by chance; or naturally there is no concern.
And the cause is in this way: sometimes like grease, sometimes like an incision from an artery; and there is fear, and one must not do anything violent, but only what is small, and prove and search for the cause: if you find it thus as not like grease, and do not touch any vein, if the head dislocates, as we dislocate the thumb, and the limb to the whole of its circumference, if there is no point. And embrace all around, and cure it as it should be, until it is perfectly healed.
And embrace all around, and cure it as it should be, until it is perfectly healed.
Many methods we have, of which I will tell you all the similarities;
and it is certain that I will tell you all the difference between our methods and yours.
I say that dislocation is caused by heat and fever that linger, until the swelling has subsided, and is accompanied by pain; therefore let the fever and heat rest.
With neither heat nor fever nor pain, and containing only fat, which is its own sac, and is like the color of mustard, and begins like a jaundice, and becomes large;
and are like greasy or moist things, or mucus, and the color is as I have said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the cure of this, to first ask about the instrument called “enteromissor,” according to what its shape will be or what chapter it is in.
And as for the method of questioning abscesses of the head, take or more moisture than you find in the abscess, and press your thumbs and index fingers together until you feel that the instrument has grasped the hair, then do as the size of the abscess dictates.
Then remove the enema, and take care that the leap does not break.</start_of_turn>
If moisture comes in short supply, make it thick, as I have said of other abscesses.</start_of_turn>
And if after the introduction of the cataplasm no moisture comes, if the wound is greasy, if the former gives in a cross, and grasps it with pins, and lightly scorches from one side and guards the coat where you are working with the needle;
If you do not keep it properly sutured, if you tear it piecemeal, so that nothing remains fixed.
For if nothing remains fixed, if it comes back to us many times;
If it lingers a little while, and if it does not grieve you, if you apply to the wound some corrosive powders of quick action, restrain the wound and put on soothing things around the circumference; and cure it of other cures as long as it is well.
If it is great, if it costs the cost of three pounds of the wound, and cure it of what causes the pain.
If the vein swells up against you or something else forces you and if you use ground vitriol, and leave it for three days or two, until the wound has healed, and rest the bleeding; then return to cover what is left that remains damaged
See here the forms of the endoscopic instruments, and there are three kinds: great, medium, and small; and there are four squares which are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb", and there are three kinds: great, medium, and small, to embrace the fistulas.
And they are like the needles which we sew up wounds, and are of golden, or iron, or silver, and are very useful for closing wounds which are yellow, and are more proven with black pitch to embrace the cortices of fistulas.
And there are three kinds: great, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the size of the perforation.
The shapes of boils are like clusters of seeds, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and if boils have two cornes at two ends, they are like two.
The shapes of boils are like clusters of seeds, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and if boils have two cornes at two ends, they are like two; and if boils have two cornes and are at two ends, and if boils have one cornel and are at one end, they are like two; and all these are necessary for their healing.
The chief of these boils is trenchant, and there are some that do not tear through the flesh except for one part, from which we extract the nails, for in this way we do not break the vein or the nerve;
And from these intrusions are the elements returned to the hands, so that the patient does not lose them when opening the incisions.
And there are three ways: great, small, and medium, as you see
And do not use them except in charcoal, as in limbs, arms, armpits, groin, and similar things;
and never make use of any other small instrument, resembling the nails of fists, according to this form, when blood is to be cauterized.
And one must never put it back into the place where it has already been closed with veins, and arteries, and never again according to this great form.
Never again swell the breasts of certain people when they begin to corrupt, so that they appear like the breasts of a woman
remain laid and flee, and who sees them cured, if it is done according to this form from these lines until g. just then scrape off the fat, and use the medical plaster thickly applied with a brush, then join together the two parts of the wound with sutures, and cure until it is healed;
And if the nipple hangs downwards, it is calmed by its great size, as with women, if the pain is in the breastbone here and there, by about half as many fractures. For the one holds the other at the end of one and the other, if the greater line contains the lesser in this shape, from this line .b. up to the line .g.; Then scrape the skin that is between the two layers, and oil the fat, and mix together what we have said of costure and powder, and what is necessary for the cure, as long as it is safe;
And if he is not cured, or the incision is not entirely completed, because the patient does not see it rest, or for the discharge of blood, if you must, fill the wound with moist cotton in corrosive order. And leave it until it has consumed the remaining fat and marrow, then cure it when it is healed.</start_of_turn>
of abscesses of boils.</start_of_turn>
These abscesses which come from the buttocks are managed by hard scrofula or if there are ribs, and there is only moisture inside.</start_of_turn
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selon cette forme, des la ligne b. jusc’à la ligne .g.: When any swelling is in the apostem, if one employs the wound of fine cotton, and leaves it until the other side, then bind up all the cotton, and cure the wound that comes from that as long as it is sound.</start_of_turn>
And if the apostem resembles carbuncles, if one does as we have said in cuts for carbuncles, and if the wound has entered the swelling, if necessary perform cautery as we have said before.</start_of_turn>
From the root of the artery
When the artery is severed, and the skin is split above, if there are many blood clots, there will also be swelling of the vein and rupture;
and if the surgeon knows when it is from the artery, if the clots are long and press down firmly and when it comes from the vein, it is a sign of fracture; and when it comes from the artery, it is a sign of displacement;
It is foolish to cover this incision, and indeed when it is soaked with blood the armpits swell and become painful and swollen as well as other parts of the body. It is therefore necessary to eschew cautery, and he who is at the head must eschew also, and in that where an artery swells from beneath the skin, the leather grows long;
It is therefore necessary to eschew cautery, and he who is at the head must eschew also, and in that where an artery swells from beneath the skin, the leather grows long; then one must uncover the size as soon as the artery is burst, and remove it from the flesh, until it is uncovered;
then one must pierce it with a needle, and pass it through to the other side, and strain the artery with a double thread of silk, as I have taught you concerning the extraction of the two arteries in the temples;
Then point out the part of the shoulder that is between the joints of the humerus as long as it is not in its place; and if necessary, separate the incision.
Then keep the cure that supports the limb, as long as the limb is screaming; Then hold this cure that is coming from this side to this side, as long as it is necessary;
and if the abscess is of the size of the vein, if you must, keep your hand there where you put the incision to the whole skin, Then take the needle from your hand and pierce the skin, and there is one double thread, so that you can pull it from the other side. Then ligate the wound, as I have said, or join two of its parts with two threads of thread;
and if you doubt that the thread will not hold, if it breaks again after stitching another needle through the whole wound at the incision of the first needle, and strain the threads for three loops.
Then cover the wound as much as is necessary with stitches, and then cover the surplus of the suture and leave only what is tied;
Then put upon one drape of moist cloth in wine and oil, and mix with cures of tents and ointments until it is healed.
Then put upon one drape of moist cloth in wine and oil, and mix with cures of tents and ointments until it is healed.
Then put upon one drape of moist cloth in wine and oil, and mix with cures of tents and ointments until it is healed.
Then put upon one drape of moist cloth in wine and oil, and mix with cures of tents and ointments until it is healed
And when force is used, if the patient feels pain, and does not wish to endure pain, but only to be cured; then let him drink wine immediately.
He must remain absolutely still in all parts, neither going forward nor backward, neither looking up nor down, and he who is in joints must not be bound with iron; for by chance there will be contraction.
And he who is at the shoulder or the knee or the forehead, should stretch the skin over the swelling. If the abscess is small, if you have nails, and you must put them in its root;
If it is large, if it hangs at the edge, and is scorched, then bone it and reunite the wound at the suture; and heal as long as it is whole.
When it is large, if it hangs at the edge, and is scorched, then bone it and reunite the wound at the suture; and heal as long as it is whole. When it is large, if it hangs at the edge, and is scorched, then bone it and reunite the wound at the suture; and heal as long as it is whole.
When it is large, if it hangs at the edge, and is scorched, then bone it and reunite the wound at the suture; and heal as long as it is whole
I weigh them both and find one weighs sixteen-and-a-half ounces, the other weighs five and three-quarters, and the work done in the incision is such that if you look at the patient, you see that he is moist, and the color of the artery is pale and moist and of a slimy root.
if the large spleen is soft, and if the fire cautery is present, for in this thigh there often comes great discharge of blood, and if you do not hurry, then do you burn;
and if you see the patient sweating and pale from the incision of the iron, take one thread of silk well made, and ligate the artery as we have said, and leave it for three days.
Then the restraint, and do not cease to draw out the thread of silk until it grasps the cartilage, and ask him to work; and if the roots are exposed, if there is fear at the same time for the belly, but you must indeed cover half,
Then cauterize it so that it does not return; then cure the wound, and keep that you only cover the hair which is coarse, dark, sparse and fatty.</start_of_turn>
For it is an inflamed abscess, and I will come to the cure of the abscess later.</start_of_turn>
When the shoulder joint is inflamed.
When swelling appears, it comes from cautery of a wound or incision of a cyst, and is above the belly and there are some boils, as in other parts, or blood that clots veins or arteries according to what is before, or from inflammation;
and if it is through the opening of the cyst and the discharge of pus, if it is the color of the abscess is similar to that of urine, and is a light thing causing pain, and has various discharges.</start_of_turn> And if it is through the discharge of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses it with his two hands if it returns, and then comes back, and by chance if it is strangulated, and engulfs the mouth with the bath and for great work.</start_of_turn>
And if it is due to moisture, it is a light matter, and opens easily when you press on it with your hand; do not hold me back. And if it is due to blood, if it opens with these signs, the abscesses are large and firm, and is closed according to quantity.
And if it is due to moisture, if it is soft to the touch, and the work is if you see that it appears from the blood of an artery or a vein, or moisture. If you must leave the dressing. For there is doubt and fear, as I have said or as the chapter on abscesses discusses, concerning the artery and the vein.
And if the appearance is from the intestines or the belly, if you command the patient to hold his breath, and he extends all to the right, then sign of the hiccup is around the belly. then command him to clench his fists between your hands, then go around the limb that you have signed all around the circumference, then extend the limb from the armpit to the great toe;
Then over half of the abscess is extended over the limb, and under this place you must place your index finger and the tip of your thumb; and hold the intestines. If you find it caught in the limb, if you pull it out, hold the intestines away from the belly;
If you see blood, if you take hold of it at the bone, and drain the excess blood;
And if the artery or vein has been injured, if it has gone blind, return to your work and take three needles and three strong threads, and sew up the three needles that you have made in the cross that you made, so that you may pierce through again.
Then strain the abscess three times on the needles, and if you see, hold the needles, and leave the wound open until it has bled out naturally; cut off the dead flesh by itself.</start_of_turn> or you can cover it when it is subtle and soft, then cure it of what it covers, and close the abscess as we have said.</start_of_turn>
or you can cover it when it is subtle and soft, then cure it of what it covers, and close the abscess as we have said.</start_of_turn> And extract the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the wound of that which it comes, and bind the limb.
And extract the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the wound of that which it comes, and bind the limb.
We have said in the division the signs of a boil, and how it should be treated with medicines, and how it should be avoided; and we say that a boil swells in the marrow, and has great caution in its cure, and that the old men say that when a boil is in the bone or can be pulled out like a boil that is in marrow, and in the flesh, and similar things, and that it must be removed when it is in its beginning; and when it is great and old, if you do not approach it, for I do not know that it can be cured; nor has anyone ever cured it before me.
And when it is in the bone or can be pulled out, as we have said, purge no more times the black bile; then make it healthy if there is obvious repletion; then remove the bile. That is to say, give a good drink of liquid to make the work; then draw out your ointments or boil, and the head of all parts, and the bone of all parts around nothing to leave; and let the blood flow freely, and expect well the limb with your hand or with anything, and if it comes out contrary to the incision of the artery or vein, if you cauterize as much as you can without it being stained; then cure it of another cure until it is healed.
De ydropisie. When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. We have said above concerning the signs of dropsy, and that when the collection of water is made, and the signs of swelling resemble those of a hernia, and the cure effected by medicine, and that which is effected by iron: if only the fever is alight; and one must not touch iron in these two signs: that is to say, tympanites and hydrothorax, for it is a deadly thing; therefore when medicines show this sign of dropsy which is called "fever" of medicines, and the cure does not benefit, if you see the patient is weak, or if there is another disease besides dropsy, as in most cases and solution of the belly and similar things; if you do not touch iron, for there is doubt; and if you see the patient is of great strength, and has only dropsy, and is neither too young nor too old, then you must operate. Believe the patient right on your hands, and press the abdomen downwards pressing the liquid to the lowest part of the belly, then take the spinous process according to this form: And let it be cut through three parts at the point, and do not let it be so deep that it can come up to the intestines when it is grasped.
Then look if the dropsy is confined to the intestines: if you make an incision two fingers’ breadth to the right of the navel; and if the dropsy is caused by liver disease, make your incision to the left of the navel; and if it is caused by bile, make your incision to the right, and do not allow the patient to rise from the incision except for the essential need.
Then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and grasp the gut, and keep your hand over the entire area between the skin and the muscle as if guiding the quantity of a nail or an anchor; then pierce the muscle until the area of the gut comes out, and that is the cause of the pain, then draw out the instrument, and there is the shape: It is similar to a silver nail, and is of spider or spider’s leg, and has at the end a small hole; and where it costs once, twice, or three times on one side, and three times on the other, and the nail is cut as if with a penknife, and that is the shape of the incision that the writers make with the penknife:
At the top of all this is the wound, so that when the instrument comes to the pain, if you immediately put your hand over the instrument; evacuate half or a third of the wound, for if you evacuate more than that in this hour, by chance the patient will die from the resolution of his spirit from the wound, or he will bleed, or he will approach death;
But in an empty state, according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue to the patient signify, and his pains; then take the instrument and hold the water, and it is retained now by the hook which is stamping the part which is above the socket, as I have said; that you pierce according to this manner. Then repeat the instrument the other way, if you see the patient suffering this, and take out a small quantity of water.
Do nothing more, and keep using it until it no longer stays put. If you doubt the patient, and you give him too much water, if the physician of the burial or sand burn, and by giving him to drink, sweat or bathe in the sun, and abstain from drinking; and let the physician of drying medicines remain until he is healed, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the water, as I have said before
of the belly of the maiden. Never were children born without a mark on the belly, or the mark was small, or it was not in its place. If the physician suspects that there is no mark at all, notwithstanding that there should be, according to this fashion: then let him put or make a mark, that is, a mole of pigment, and bind it and keep it for two or three days. And when he wants to urinate, let him keep the mark closed, urinate, and then restore it; for by chance it will not be closed, because the urine that comes out will not leave it closed. If the mark is small, if it is medicine with a mole of pigment, as we have said, and it swells. Those who do not have the mark in its place are pale, for no one is born with the mark at the head of the belly, for they cannot urinate before lifting up their belly; and they cannot restrain themselves for that matter because the matter does not reach the navel, and this is an evil disease.
And the way of the work is that if the patient lies supine on his back, with the head of the shoulder and the scapula as wide as a thumb, if the mark pricks in the middle, as it should; and you keep from discharge of blood which comes many times, and if it comes, if the stain of this blood which stains blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Des pustules de la verge Many times come these boils to the groin, and are an appearance of foul matter; and in them are malign and non-malign; if you take them at once [with a sharp instrument], one should anoint subtly, and cut and drain them all, then put on Egyptian lint; then cure with diafinicon until they are healed.</start_of_turn> And if the boil is malignant, with pus and discharging, if you must bring a cautery. When you have cut it out, and if the boil is in the groin, and has some in the navel and some outside, if you must break the boil which is inside first; and when it is closed, if you cure the outside, if you do not secure the shoulder of the groin that it is not pierced, comes blackening and corruption in his groin or belly; if you must cut away all that is black and corrupted, then put on a dressing of honey and flour made from pomegranate bark and sometimes, then cure with other cures until it is healed.</start_of_turn
And if discharge of blood comes, if you wish to use the lunar cautery, do so in this fashion: The cautery will aid in these three things together: at the discharge of blood, and at corruption; and if the root of the limb is corrupted and withdrawn, if you bite or draw out the root a bundle of hair, and make the patient urinate among; and when the hair has emerged at the head of the limb which has not been circumcised, or there is wound or incision, if you wish, then you must burn it with the cautery until the ligaments are loosened and the root of the limb is freed from all parts.
If it is a grievous thing to divide this, if you wish, you must burn it with the cautery at the root of the limb and the head of the limb; then carefully separate between the two, and put in between a soft bandage of wet linen with cold water, so that it does not move again.</start_of_turn>
from the circumcision.</start_of_turn>
Circumcision is not merely a continuation of the other wounds; however, when we perform this work of our own will, and do it properly, if we are careful, it is the best work and the lightest to health.
I say that the ancients did not teach us circumcision, for they did not use it in their law, and we have learned only what we have learned through experience
For I have seen the greatest part of masters and physicians who performed circumcision in this way: with force and with a new instrument; but if the testicles escaped, because there were two layers, and by chance if we cut through these and left out that below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.
Or the wound covers itself again, and there is double pain, and with the support which is too slight to secure the end of the limb; and by the support of the nail by chance escapes the thread, and straightens the work, and many times it is born again until it has no need of support and I want it.</start_of_turn>
For when you press your hand, if you hold it equally from all sides in.i. all tension; but if the thread be well twisted around the leather; and if the manner of the first work be such that you make the child think, if he understands, that you do not make him endure more than to bind the thread around the limb just so much, and then let it go in all the ways that you can.</start_of_turn Then grasp your hands straight out, and restore the forces between your hands or withdraw your fingers so that the fetus does not see them, not any of the instruments; then place your hand at the root of the navel and breathe in or out, and pull up as much as the head of the fetus is in; then thoroughly mix in the ordure that is gathered, then tie the navel cord with a double thread, then tie the other end with another thread; and hold the two threads together by the second loop and the index finger, and press between the two threads, then release the index finger and pull the head of the navel cord down gently.
Then grasp your hands straight out, and restore the forces between your hands or withdraw your fingers so that the fetus does not see them, not any of the instruments; then place your hand at the root of the navel and breathe in or out, and pull up as much as the head of the fetus is in; then thoroughly mix in the ordure that is gathered, then tie the navel cord with a double thread, then tie the other end with another thread; and hold the two threads together by the second loop and the index finger, and press between the two threads, then release the index finger and pull the head of the navel cord down gently. Then let the blood flow back in and out, for that is the medicine; and put powder on and over the powder put a greasy cloth glued with a sponge soaked in rosewater, confirmed with rosemary oil and balsam, and leave it on until the other side is healed, and treat it with another dressing until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
The form of the forces at the wound is like this: the two fingers should be tense and firm, and the fingers should be as great as the thumb equally:
The wound of civilization is when the cord of urine escapes at the incision; therefore it is necessary that you extend it to your nail, even though it makes an incision; and keep it even, and if you do not keep it held to your nail, if you let go, and then take hold again.
And if they prick twice a day, and what is beside the testicles is swollen, if you leave it as long as the swelling subsides, and slightly scorch it; if you keep it like you wish to move, and hold it from the testicles, it will not do any good
Cure then the liquid things of wound with powder, as we have said or treated with powders, and if we keep it too long, it will go away, if it does not do any good; cure then, as we have said, until it is healed.
The retention of urine.
The retention of urine is caused by the obstruction of the stone, or of blood congealed, or of a tumor, or of worms, or similar things, which we mentioned in the previous section.
and if the urine does not flow freely, and you see that the retention is caused by the stone which is in the bladder or at the neck of the bladder, then you must make the patient sit upright on his knees; place the hand pieces on the back, and extend the patient’s abdomen from the part under the loin, and restrain the patient so that he does not move as much as possible; and then press the neck of the bladder towards the expression of the stone at the top, so that the urine is released.
and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer extraction with all the instruments which are called “syringes,” which are made like this: either of pure silver with a leg that is slightly curved downwards, like the beak of a bird; or of fine steel, or of silver with a head.
And thus it is with the issue of urine that if you take one double thread and bind it to the head of a pouch of wool or cotton, and pass the thread through the neck of the bladder; and drain the excess wool and pass it up to the head of the bladder, then join the bladder to oil or butter and beeswax, and make the patient sit on a chair, and raise the bladder and the belly with oil moist and olive oil and tepid water.
Then put the catheter firmly into the bladder until it reaches the root of the bladder; then double the bladder downwards towards the buttock; then drain the bladder before it reaches the bladder, and feel the patient urinate until it is empty; this must not be done except in this order for it is dangerous; then withdraw the catheter gradually, and the urine will follow the catheter, and remove the catheter when it is done, and correct the urine.
and restart the catheter until the bladder is empty, and align the patient.
Des maladies de la vessie.
When urine or blood comes into the bladder, or if pus is accumulated, and you see urine and medicine distilling, if you do everything that is called the “clepsedre,” which is its shape:
It is closed, and if it is ruptured: half from one side and half from the other, as you see; and it should be grasped by the edge so that the medicine be as thick as possible, in order to drive out the moisture, and push as much as possible.
And when you see your medicines going into the bladder, put the chief of the catheter into the moisture, and draw out the urine that is inside; if you draw out the moisture at the catheter, and then push strongly the catheter inside; if the moisture enters inside, and comes to the bladder now, if the patient feels it
And this is the form of a subtle blister from which we will clip the bladder: if this is the case:
And this is the form of a subtle blister from which we will clip the bladder: if this is the case:
And if you do not have a bladder, if you take a piece of parchment, and make a circle, and pierce it round; then strain a strong thread through these holes, and assemble the circle as if you were assembling a ball, and put inside what you see of oil and moisture and water, and bind it with the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, pressing your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
From the stone.
We have already spoken in this division about the methods of dealing with stones, and their extraction with medicine; and I have mentioned the difference between a stone that is incarcerated like urine and all the signs, and in what case a stone must be opened of a certain size; and in the bladder, and in the kidney; and I will tell you openly and concisely about it.</start_of_turn>
I say that a stone that is incarcerated in the bladder often causes vomiting, which is a sign that the stone is pressing on the bladder almost as much as in its entirety; and there is frequent vomiting, gravel in the urine, pain in the side, and many times the patient is unable to urinate, and then becomes constipated; and from these vomiting attacks the foundations are loosened.  The cure for these vomiting attacks is more gentle in young people than in old people, and is more effective in those between youth and old age; and the cure for those who have a large stone is more gentle than for those who have a small one.</start_of_turn
And when we come to the treatment, if it is necessary first to cleanse the patient by vomiting, in order to drive out all the poison that is in the intestines. For it never hinders to inquire about the stone.
Then take the patient by the limbs, and loosen and move towards the belly, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and does not remain at any high point; then make him sit between your hands which are clasped together, and his hands rest on his thighs, so that the bladder is completely relaxed downwards; then inquire and feel inside.</start_of_turn>
If you feel the stone in the space, if you hasten now to touch upon the stone. And if it does not prick when you touch it all around, if you think the patient is pregnant, take your left index finger, if the patient is an adult woman, or your middle finger, if the patient is a young man complete; and push downwards to the bottom of the stone, and inquire the stone, and when you feel it on your finger, if the bladder is full at the neck; then press upon your finger, and the stone will come out or you will see it retreat.
And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend with his right hand the intestines upwards, and with his left hand to grasp the skin that is between the intestines in the part where the size is made; then insert the spatula covering the shape:
And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend with his right hand the intestines upwards, and with his left hand to grasp the skin that is between the intestines in the part where the size is made; then insert the spatula covering the shape: and be between the intestines and the foundation, do not go into the middle but along the left side; and be two above the bone, and two either adhered or foundation, and be the size through if it be wide by going over, and within narrow, according to the quantity of the stone, do not go too large.
and by chance press if two bones which are or foundation, that they leap forth in the work; and the threads that are part of the bone or that are angled, and margins: if it is grasped to irritate; and if there is part that is sweating, similar to a gland, round, from which issue is slight.
If there are angles or margins, make the size larger; and if it does not slip, know that you must grasp the nails which are as sharp as a lime at the tip, for it must grasp the stone if it does not escape; or you may pour water on it. A curved instrument with a blunt tip should be used for this purpose, and if you do not manage to engage it, it will be too wide. If it slips without restraint, it is like straining vitriol.
If there are more than one stone, grasp the largest at the belly of the bladder first, then hold, and pull the others afterwards if there are any. And if the belly is large, if you hold it with silk, make the wound larger. For in these things two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or the urine comes out alongside the blood, which cannot be bound up; but whatever you do, try to drain, or remove the nails, until you have separated it piece by piece
When you have completed your work, apply incense, aloe and dragon's blood to the wound, and hold it in place. Then put upon it a moist cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the burn; then raise the patient up to his collar and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
And when you loosen it, if there arises much blood from the wound of oil and water, then treat with the salve of Dijon and balsam, as long as it is sane.
And if pus comes out of the wound and corrupts, and swelling of blood in the bladder, and either by this the urine is retained, which is known in part as without jumping with the urine: then withdraw your hand from the wound, and drain that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder and bring it about
Then lift the wound of water and easily and gently and bind it, and give him every possible aid, as long as it is sane; and be sure that all the times you treat it, that you bind the edges together, and assemble the medicines above the limb.
And if the stone is small, and it is in a tube or passage of the bladder, and is fixed, and the urine cannot pass; if the physician performs what I have said above, that you should do it many times, we have heard of the size for this treatment. I have already proved this to be true.
Take one loop of wire according to this shape and be at a right angle with two loops fixed in one space.</start_of_turn>
Then take one thread and loop it around the base of the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then tighten the loop lightly around the stone, until it reaches the stone; and turn the loop back and forth in the stone as much as you can until you can pierce the stone from the other side; if the urine comes out then press your hand on what is remaining of the stone that is in the bladder. If it breaks, and spurts with the urine, and is stained with blood;
If you are unable to do this, take hold of the limb at the bone and another above, then insert the thumb between the two joints, and grasp firmly, withdraw the thumb and loosen the limb, and congeal the blood which is in the wound; then cure as before.
If you are unable to do this, take hold of the limb at the bone and another above, then insert the thumb between the two joints, and grasp firmly, withdraw the thumb and loosen the limb, and congeal the blood which is in the wound; then cure as before.
If there is only one bone in the limb, which is the thumb, and if it is dislocated, if there is no other dislocation, it is a grievous cure, and is defended by two things: the first is that in this case the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman who knows how to manage a household, even though she is chaste.
And the third method, if by chance one cannot find a woman who knows this art of hands; and the fourth method, if the woman’s stone is more prominent than the man’s, for in that case one can make a deeper size, and greater fear has it.
And if this is necessary, if you can take a maiden who knows it well, and prick the root firmly, and if you cannot find one, no matter. Take whatever humble maid there is; and present a woman who is wise in life, or a woman who knows some part of the art, and command her to do what you command with the inquiry of the stone.
and see well if the woman is a virgin: then you must press her breast or foundation and inquire the stone; and if she finds it, if you constrain her from below her breast, and command her to hold her hand left on her belly, and push and press her hand gently.
If it be true, if you must move it from groin to groin from the entrance of the bladder until it reaches the root of the thigh; then place your thumb on the bone at the root of the thigh where it is usually hidden, and feel the bone in that place; and do not move it above the bone or below, and let the size be small at first.
Then tighten the thumb to the size you wish, if you feel the bone is too deep in the wound until the bone can rest firmly, and that many different kinds of stones are: that is to say, small and large, sharp and blunt, long and round, and which have round corners. If the stones resemble each other, it is likely that they are discharged.</start_of_turn>
And if it does not go away, if you put at the limb a bruised vitriol, and hold it for an hour until it is dry; then return to your work, until the bone is firm, and have the instruments that I have mentioned in the extraction of the stone are at your home to help you in your work.</start_of_turn>
If he does not move from there, it is the artery that is cut. Put powder on the wound and strain it with needles and thread, and do not attempt to move it again, but leave the wound and do not touch it, except by chance the patient dies; then cure the wound.
When the chill of blood has subsided and the limb has bled, if you return to your work while the wound is still open, until the bone is firm.</start_of_turn>
of hernia of the belly.
Ramice aquouse is nothing else but an assembly of moisture or white mucus, which is as dense as the seeds of coriander, that contains the egg; and it is called "syfac", and never is it truly in the yolk of the egg, if we take care that this is not the case; and it is the skin of the seed between the white mucus that we have mentioned.
And the generation of this seed is from weakness and comes from the seeds, and it is spread throughout that matter
And never does it come from percussion on the seeds, and this mucus has many colors: or it is pale yellow, or it is without red, or black, or pale blue, and there is more
And these are the signs of impending collapse of this assembly, for if it is pale and white as we have said, if the abscess is round like a bow and does not open, because it is filled with moisture all around.
And if there is moisture in the flesh itself, if the abscess is round with a part of the egg, and for this reason it is thought that it is another egg;
And if the moisture is between the skin of the limbs and the white part, if you feel it well; then when you see the color of the moisture, if it extends to the whole circumference, from this it is known According to this, therefore, that which comes after the introducer, judge of that which is within.
According to this, therefore, that which comes after the introducer, judge of that which is within. And when we bind them with iron, if it is judged that the patient is well according to the sum of his power and the swelling of his body; then we bind them upon his back, upon something a little high, and put a cloth over his face;
then we sit on his left side, and command the minister to sit on his right side, and extend the limb to one of his ribs as far as the joints of the ribs;
then take the sponge wet, and sew the skin of the ribs among them as far as the loin of the loin, and make your incision straight by dividing the skin of the ribs until you reach the white marrow, and scorch it sparingly as desired.
Then pierce the face deeply with a large hole, and drain out all the water, and then put on your gloves, and extend the face upwards; and do not touch the nails of the toes, but only the face itself; cut through everything or in pieces immediately the cost of his marrow, for if you do not cut it well it will return the water.
And if the urine spurts forth from your work, if you leave it in its place when you have finished the work of the face; then join together again the joints of the toes to their natural position, and cure it as you would any other wound, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
And if you find the urine corrupted by another disease, if you must tie up the vessels that are suspended, doubting the decay of blood; then cut the limb throughout the suspension, drain the urine, and cure it as we have said.</start_of_turn>
And if it is acute, it is composed of three parts assembled together, with six roots; if one part is cut as the first one was made even, then wipe the blood, and put lint soaked in rose oil in the wound.
put on the other lint soaked in wine and oil, and put on the six nails, and put on doubled bandages, and bind all around according to this shape:
Then take two bandages, and use coarse wool according to this semblance and assemble them with stitching in the armpit, and one of the nails grasps on the foundation up to the back, and the other at the part of the armpit; and the other two at the two angles, and be everything assembled so that the restriction is in the loop of the armpit.
And never is this branch of cautery sufficient in size for iron, and only take one cautery of the culter type, and grasp the hair of the nails, and if necessary eschew as we have said, so that the white substance which contains the liquid is discovered.
If you take the cautery as we have said, and pierce that membrane as we have shown, and burn with this subtle cautery:
And grasp in every way that you wish, until you have cauterized all; and keep the fire from touching the egg; and remove that egg when this work is finished; and keep blood from draining, and keep moving that it does not dry out.
If nothing else hinders you, or an abscess bursts or blood flows from a wound, or any other adversity, if it is possible, remedy that which hinders you, as has been previously said.
If the patient is fearful and does not wish to undergo this work due to its horror, if you suspect perforation, as I have said, and are certain beyond doubt by the significations we have mentioned that the aquous humor is limpid,
If you make the patient sit in a comfortable position; then pierce the abscess at the lower part with all the surrounding fat; and make the perforation deep enough so that all the pain is expelled
Then put on cotton on the limb, and bind it, and leave only the remaining pain to flow; then cure it until the wound is healed.
If the white cloth does not stop the pain at the edge of the wound, if you must, drink a spoonful or the instrument used to treat the pain of hydrophobia; for in this case the form is as aforesaid; and enlarge it, that is to say, loosen the wound, and drain the wound until it is healed, and when it is healed as before, and when it is put together like before, the patient will be well again.
of the incision of the tonsils
Saiches that in this section of the root have doubt and fear in more numerous arrangements, for it seems to me that it is worth leaving them as they are.
I will tell you about the work and the signs of the incision
Therefore, when the abscess comes or bursts, and there are flies; this is by chance.
One must know by superficial pain and swelling, which is spread as blows, or from percussion;
And it is the color of an abscess according to the color of the urine; and there is no pain, and it is an abscess that is grievous.
And by chance it is a grievous abscess, poor and bloody, with a dark color, and never comes from any artery, or swelling of a vein.
When it is not from an artery, if it is known by the arrangement of the abscess scar, when you press it towards your shoulder; and you must not touch it.
He who has made the vein swell is known by his position at the expression of pressure on the two sides.
and can easily make the size above this semblance, and on the other limbs; and that you hold the thumb like a nail, then the thumb will go up, and the nail will be white as snow, and deliver the suspending substance from all parts of the thumb.
If the thumb is already soaked with these nails, if you must then treat the thumb, and hold it still;
If it is exposed at the surface, or within the vessels, you must deliver all that is tense, and the wound must be rounded off.
If the bone is fractured at the surface or in the depth, you must remove all that is tense, and extract the bone, as we have said.</start_of_turn>
When your work is done, apply a dressing of coarse wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then bandage it with other dressings until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Of the abscess of the buttocks.
This is a wound covered with a covering resembling a berry, with the softening of the edges. and the patient groans in pain when he moves it.
and the treatment of this disease is very painful as the one mentioned before,
and all these things are said to be done in this work, as the old people did.
You must make the patient sit on a chair with the elevation level at the height of the navel, then support the patient’s head with your hands. Underneath the belly, and all the veins that are below the ribcage, grasp the master and extend them forward;
then cover the wound with a large bandage that will go through the blood vessels until they are uncovered,
and then draw the skin apart from the temples, as we said when extracting the arteries there;
Then I insert a needle or if there is double thread, I bind it to the first part where the pin has gone, and I bind it to the other end. Then I compress the swelling in the middle upright, according to the length of the bone, and I remove the corrupted moisture.
Then I treat the wound as usual or I bandage it, so that no vessel breaks except for those that are already ruptured;
for in this way no harm comes, and if all the vessels come together, if you can carry the bones over all the vessels. If the veins are not damaged during the incision, and are dried and do not need support.
then they are dry and do not require aid. These events are caused by the section that comes from the flank or the extension on the belly in the groin area, for the intestine descends from that passage to one of the buttocks;
These events are caused by the section that comes from the flank or the extension on the belly in the groin area, for the intestine descends from that passage to one of the buttocks;
And the signs when it is a swelling of the flesh, if there is much and much in length, in a long tension, and does not come immediately; And the swelling is equal throughout towards the belly, because the flesh presses the intestines.</start_of_turn>
And the sign is when it is a section of the flesh, that it makes immediate severe pain, and the swelling is diversely apparent, from the skin downwards, and this is because of the escape of the intestine and the swelling of the flesh.</start_of_turn
And never do the bones move with the intestine, and is retained when pressed, and causes great suffering to the patient, even when it is pressed.</start_of_turn>
And in these iron cures with fear, for it is known to escape.
And thus, if you command or the patient feels that the intestines recoil into the wound, if they can return there; then either hold his collar between your hands and support the buttocks.
then stretch the limb upwards, and grasp all the skin of the buttocks long; Then insert the needle of the size you deem suitable according to what you must master to open the wound, and do so without causing damage to the surrounding tissue.
Then withdraw the fat that is under the skin, until the fatty substance covering the wound is completely revealed;
Then insert your index finger into the wound, between the white substance covering the wound and the second layer of fat,
and withdraw that which is behind the thumb, and between the second layer of fat; and while moving the hand of the right towards the wound, extend the white fat upwards with your left hand, and keep the thumb towards the size; And command the minister to extend the arm upwards, and release what is behind the limb.
And ask at your side if there is any intestine or white fat that is wrapped around, and if you find nothing, if you feel pain in the stomach below
then take a needle or if there is thick thread made of twelve threads, and pass it through the back part of the fat, which is after the skin of the buttocks; after that cut, then close the wounds that appear from the threads, until there are three threads left; then assemble one over the other in the manner of a cross, and bind the fat, which we have said is after the skin of the buttocks, with a strong thread of twelve parts. Then embrace the head of the shoulder, and bind it firmly from .ij. parts, so that no vessel except those that nourish it can enter into the socket, except for the incision which must not be made. Then straighten the limb according to the first limb which is long .ij. two of these, and afterwards these .ij. leave out the socket which is as soft as the marrow of bones, the greater part of a thumb;
and afterwards all the rest according to the roundness that the egg has; then bind in the part which is as soft as the skin of bones, so that it is neither too tight nor too loose, as we have said before.
Then apply soft wool soaked in oil to the wound, and put on plasters, and I recommend the linen that we mentioned before. And never is the fat cauterized after the incision, in doubt of the discharge of blood.
For this often happens, and lets the limb remain until it bleeds through; and if it is delayed in healing, if it is raised with warm water, and put on what we have said, until it bleeds.
Then treat the wound with another remedy, until it is perfectly healed.
De hernie carnouse.
In this branch I have never seen anyone who could cure it with iron.
And the ancient ones say that it is made just like the branch that holds the nut, in part like you tie the blood vessels, after the size above lightly towards the foot;
Then put it in the middle, and cure the abscess of what causes it, as long as the blood vessels are closed; and cure it as we have said, as long as it is healthy.
Never comes routine into anger, as we have said, and open the doors; and do not leave any intestines inside, for if there are any, it is too late, and repair them every hour.
and if it stays too long in this place, if he believes the wound or swelling, as long as the intestines are left inside;
and this comes from the swelling of the spleen which is angry, as we have said, because it is swollen, then becomes soft and relaxes the doors;
and it is cured by cautery, as we have said before; and never by fire in this manner:
And it is that the patient lies with his back down between your hands, then grasp the limb of the route enfleit downwards by the amount of two fingers;
Then grasp the scapula which is below the skin that covers it, then take the needle and draw out the limb appearing from the scapula.
And press at the navel, then sew the two limbs appearing from the scapula on the head of the needle, and sew one and the other.
Then withdraw the needle, and do not cover anything of the scapula or extend anything else, as I told you in the treatment of the hernia of the intestines;
Then treat the wound by dressing it. And when you remove the thread, if the wound bursts and heals the wound, as long as it is healed.
The swelling is constrained, and has no appearance in the course of treatment, and the burn is muffled in this limb, and more proximate to health.
of the softening of the skin of the testicles.
Many times the skin of the testicles is softened in young boys, because the worms that are inside are softened, and it is seen; and it is mixed, when it is seen to be cured, that one makes the patient lie on his back, and takes the softened skin from the natural skin; then brings together the two layers with a suture, and if you see it, close the excess of softened skin with two or three stitches firmly; then take out between the stitches, and cure as the other wounds, until it is healed, and cut the thread.
Dou chastrement.
When the fire cautery is done by traction. Sit the patient in warm water, until the boils soften and for a while; then grasp them with your hand, until they are set and you no longer feel them.
of hermaphrodites.
Hermofrodie est selonc deux manieres: l’une si est que entre les deux coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine. Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et deux coions. Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.
Hermaphroditism is according to two methods: one if between the two testes opens as with the figure of a woman, or if there is hair, and sometimes in the urine it flows out. And the other method if in women, and has on the navel as with a beard and two testes. And the cure of the spleen and envy if it is that you cut out all the fatty parts; and it is cured like other wounds. In the second method, of men whose urine spurts through the skin of the testes, if there is no other cure.
Tentigene is a fatty growth on the natural part, as long as it is too lazy to see; and many women have it as much as a hand. And the cure is that you hold the excess of the tentativeness at your hand or wrist, and grasp it lightly; and do not be too rough, for blood does not come from there, then it is cured by other cures as long as it is healthy; and there is another burden that comes from the mouth of the marrow, and the spleen, and by chance spurts out, and is according to the likeness of a cow, and for this reason it is called the ancient "cowardly disease". If you can grasp that, as we have said, and cure it while it is healthy
De erratique.
When something is out of its proper place. When the nature of a woman is not rightly perceived, or if the birth is small; this is by nature, or by disease that comes from it; or by injury from a foreign object, or from a wound or swelling, and is made worse by moisture, or in the armpits, or the breasts, or the belly, or the feet; and if the knowledge of this is from the regard of the dance. If the swelling is close to the genitals, if there are two thumbs or at the root. If it is from a swelling in the armpits, and it is close to the testicles, if you are in a hurry, and the testicles are turned inside out: put your two thumbs together, and let the woman be on her back, spreading out her legs; then the testicles will form, as long as the swelling in the armpit is round, and is over the swelling. Then take oil, and pour it on the wound, and put it on the place, and keep the woman still at home. And if the swelling is hard and thick, if you can do no more than cover it with the thumb resembling a holly leaf. If the swelling comes from a wound, if you can cover it up according to this manner, except for an embolism. For an embolism that is in the belly must not be touched with fire.
of hemorrhoids.
Emorroids are tears in veins which do not usually heal without treatment; and when they are old they become black. We have already mentioned the signs and symptoms of such ailments, and I will now tell you of those which resolve the cure. I say that emorroids and blackheads, when pressed into the marrow, are not felt, except by the physician. It is therefore necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then stretch the blackhead and press it into its roots, then sprinkle on medicines which restrain blood, such as alum and dragons blood and incense, and the like; then leave it for an hour, then put it in cold water; and if there is still blood, let her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate seeds and barley and the like, then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and cheese, and make a plaster of it. And if it swells, that is good. If not, make her vomit at the back and give her vinegar with wine vinegar, and make her vomit. And when the abscess rests, if it has cured the limb of its swelling as long as it is sane; and the one which is called "albathir" is red, and is like a rough beard, if you cover it as I have said the blackhead. And then it will heal as long as it is sane.
Emoroids are tears in veins which do not usually heal without treatment; and when they are old they become black. We have already mentioned the signs and symptoms of such ailments, and I will now tell you of those which resolve the cure. I say that emorroids and blackheads, when pressed into the marrow, are not felt, except by the physician. It is therefore necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then stretch the blackhead and press it into its roots, then sprinkle on medicines which restrain blood, such as alum and dragons blood and incense, and the like; then leave it for an hour, then put it in cold water; and if there is still blood, let her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate seeds and barley and the like, then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and cheese, and make a plaster of it. And if it swells, that is good. If not, make her vomit at the back and give her vinegar with wine vinegar, and make her vomit. And when the abscess rests, if it has cured the limb of its swelling as long as it is sane; and the one which is called "albathir" is red, and is like a rough beard, if you cover it as I have said the blackhead. And then it will heal as long as it is sane. And when the abscess rests, if it has cured the limb of its swelling as long as it is sane; and the one which is called "albathir" is red, and is like a rough beard, if you cover it as I have said the blackhead. And then it will heal as long as it is sane.
Emoroids are tears in veins which do not usually heal without treatment; and when they are old they become black. We have already mentioned the signs and symptoms of such ailments, and I will now tell you of those which resolve the cure. I say that emorroids and blackheads, when pressed into the marrow, are not felt, except by the physician. It is therefore necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then stretch the blackhead and press it into its roots, then sprinkle on medicines which restrain blood, such as alum and dragons blood and incense, and the like; then leave it for an hour, then put it in cold water; and if there is still blood, let her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate seeds and barley and the like, then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and cheese, and make a plaster of it. And if it swells, that is good. If not, make her vomit at the back and give her vinegar with wine vinegar, and make her vomit. And when the abscess rests, if it has cured the limb of its swelling as long as it is sane; and the one which is called "albathir" is red, and is like a rough beard, if you cover it as I have said the blackhead. And then it will heal as long as it is sane.
From infancy.
From infancy. The midwife is first at the delivery when she knows the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs are when you see the woman press down below and desire to smell the head: then the child is eager to be born; then his head and shoulders are in their natural position, and the issue is soon after his head, and he follows with his tail; and when you see these signs, if you press lightly on his belly, if the child comes out head first, it is well born; for when he comes down on his head, if he follows with his tail, and the mother has borne his superfluities by natural birth; and this is not otherwise. For it does not come at any time from his feet, nor from his limbs or hands, or from his belly or buttocks, but from an accident from his collar and from other harmful figures; if the midwife is at the delivery that she is wise and discreet in these matters, and she avoids error and deception, and I will show you all the figures in which we must help her.
When the child comes down naturally on his head and the woman gives birth groans, and her strength is weak, if you make her sit on a chair, or the women hold her; and as soon as her nature is overcome with oil or rue or fennel, which is customary, then lie down between her thighs the little cushion from which this is made: Et fende la secondeine, et cope à son unguile tant que li moistors qui est en-dessus fuers; et preint le ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisteriser la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai prendre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son nez une heure: si istra maintenant l’enfes. Et se les deux mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne légierementpoc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus un siège, et li compri ses pieds en haut; puis déboute le siège sus terre, et tiens on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au déboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes meurt, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.
And cut the second toe, and bind it to its nail as long as the moisture that is above flees; and seize the woman’s belly as long as the child descends, and if it does not descend, if you must, clench the woman with muscular spasm of fenugreek with oil of sisam; then make her take and cough up barley, and keep her mouth and nose closed for an hour: if it is now finished with the child. And if both hands go out violently, if you must, that you keep them lightly bound toward and away; and if they do not enter, if you put the woman on a chair and hold her feet high; then pull out the chair from under her, and hold her, that she does not cry out; and if her hands do not enter, and the child dies, if you bind her hands at the wrist that is mentioned above, and take out the child, and be even. When the child comes out on its feet, if you can push upwards; And then the bone twists back and forth, until it is even;
and then grasp it from its pieces and stretch back and forth.</start_of_turn>
until it is even, if the master has grasped it, and makes it spit out its dung.</start_of_turn> if it leaps forward, God help us.</start_of_turn
If not so strong as we have said, if the limb is twisted and turned about, as long as it is in accordance with the natural figure. For in such a case it is easily done.</start_of_turn>
And if not so strong as we have said, if take muscle powder of almond, sesame oil, gum masticatory, and broth all in one mortar;  </start_of_turn and put on the woman's belly and drive away this swelling.</start_of_turn> Then let him sit in acute pain until the ribs are loosened;
And when it is moist, loosen the ribs with a single collar of oil, and put on it, and leave it for an hour. Then let him sit on a chair, then make him cough and strain his mouth and throat, and gently grasp his belly, for now the fetus leaps out. because of the issue of the child from its knees. When the young one comes in this manner, if he puts his hands on his face and his chin on his chest;
And if the child cries and cries; instruct the woman to take care of him until the children are gone. And if the child cries and cries; instruct the woman to take care of him until the children are gone And if the child cries and cries; instruct the woman to take care of him until the children are gone.
If it does not move, if you manage it over the limb, and the legs stretch out;
then bring in the muscle which I mentioned before.</start_of_turn>
and if it still does not budge, if you manage it over the seat, then study to bring the hand back.</start_of_turn> and look at the limb according to its natural shape, and make it evacuate, and command her to stay still until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
From the issue of the child on his neck, and his hands spread out, and his face turned towards his mother’s back. I command you that he hold his hand, then twist it back and forth, and press gently;
And when it is equal, if you put on the oily substance of elevation and oil, as we have said, and then command that it move back and forth;
And when you have done this, if you make it sit on its seat, and command that it grasp; and make it cough. From this same method at the second intention.
From this same method at the second intention. When it comes from this same method at the second intention, if the second intention grasps your finger, as long as moisture is evacuated;
and if the swelling swells up on its face and on its neck, if the grasp of the wound is not retained, the limb will die.
then take away the child, as long as you have put it if it is right, and command the woman not to move it again:
from the loosening of the bones. The hairs that grow together often evacuate blood, never two or three at a time; and this is not an uncommon thing, and often happens. because of doubt and fear, and many die from this
I know well that they are many, and are dispersed by the syrup which devours them, which is bound to the blood.
and never depart naturally as one would expect them to, as we have said.</start_of_turn>
And if they depart abruptly, as we have said, and the cure is as we have said, and if the liquid is subtle, make broth and lighten what it does; and make as much as possible for health.</start_of_turn More often than not, death results from these things.
More often than not, death results from these things. More often than not, death results from these things. Sometimes they are formed in masses, as in the case of a child of a glorious age, measuring up to fifteen, or more.</start_of_turn>
and it is likely that the water will escape from all of these things, because in such cases similar things often happen.</start_of_turn if you act thus as it should be done.</start_of_turn
De l’enfant mort.
When you cure the woman of the dead child or belly, as I have said in the division, and he does not flee, and you are constrained by the work of your hands; then you must know that she is of sound virtue, and has no accident or is in danger of death.
then you must know that the woman is conscious on her back, and her limbs are flexed downwards, and her legs are lifted up.
And if the mistress holds the shoulder of .ij. parts, or she is bound to the bed if she is not treated in the descendant of the child;
Then massage the mouth of the maiden with oily unguents mixed with alum and fennel seeds and linseed seed, and anoint her hands with these unguents and these mixtures. Then put her in the bath lightly, then take one leu or she will hold the ointments that are convenient for this.
and be careful that the child is not shivering that it descends from his head; If the hair in the armpits, in the neck or in the mouth or in some other part of the body, or if it tears the beard or the hair of the forcele or surrounds the ribs,
If the hair falls out in patches on the armpits, on the neck or in the mouth or in some other part of the body, or if it tears the beard or the hair of the forcele or surrounds the ribs, and if it hangs loose and soft, it will cause itching and pain in the ribs.
and it is necessary to hold the hair firmly with the right hand, and to place the hand that is on the left between the two fingers of the left hand, and to grasp it with all your might, and to keep the hair away from all those places that we have mentioned until the hair has disappeared;
Then the flake is found, or another ointment, or the third if you must, so that the extraction is even;
Then extend them evenly by moving from side to side, so that the edges touch, and that the ointment is held down by force, as is the form:
And if a part of it remains, if once there is oil on two fingers, put it on that part, and treat the other part;
If it does not come loose at once, if you put this ointment on or higher up, and do this until it comes out completely.
If one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be restored by stretching, then you must wrap around with this drape, until it comes out completely.
then you must join in the joint of the limb or to the bone, and in this way you must do in the other hand, and have two feet.
And if the head of the shoulder is great and it is twisted in its issue, or if there is pain in the joint assembled, if you can, put the spinous process between your thumbs and hold the pain and draw it out.</start_of_turn> or you will bind it with the instrument which is called “almidach,” which comes with the instruments or the chapter which follows this one.</start_of_turn>
and thus make the limb have great natural pain; Then treat the bones as if they were tenailles.
Then if the bone snaps and is strained by force, if it is fractured, while the moisture that is or has come out remains;
and if it cannot be held together, if the limb is broken in pieces to the marrow that you must break through;
and if it is embedded in the belly or breaks the ribs, if you must pierce as much as the moisture goes away.
And if the fetus is on its feet, if there is a strong attraction towards the belly, and it approaches the mouth of the uterus easily.
And if it is twisted in the belly or at the hip, if you must draw it out, you must grasp it with the hand wrapped around it.</start_of_turn> and hold the belly or the hip until the moisture which is in it is expelled.</start_of_turn
and if another limb is broken, and the limb is dislocated, If the limb hangs limp by the hand in the marrow, and you treat it until the mouth of the marrow; then indeed one must oil or anoint it, and treat it further.
and if the mouth of the marrow is retracted by the hot which has come, if it does not suffice to move it, then one must bring greasy and oily things. And he brings mud plaster, and boils in hot water softened and moistening.
And if the swelling is on the chest, and you must put it even, if the plaster is like that which we have said of the living child;
and if there is no pain, if the limb should break through by pieces, and do not leave anything of the second part behind.
And when you have done this, if the plaster is like that which we have said above, that comes in the marrow;
If blood comes out when opening a vein, or when incising an abscess, or in the treatment of wounds, or in the extraction of arrows, or in cutting into stones, there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And thus I saw a woman in whose belly was a fetus which appeared to be dead, then consulted one more time about it, and refuted death to the other Afterwards, long tension came out from the wound in the belly, and swelled so much that it opened, and began to cause great swelling.
I went to call for help, and I thought for a long time, and could not stop the bleeding
I placed upon the wound a strong adhesive, and from it issued one bone, and afterwards several days another. I marveled greatly, for in this belly there is no bone
I thought that this was the bone of a dead child
I wanted to treat the wound and pull out bones, until the woman was feeling better; And she saw the woman long tense, and that was already a sign of a wound in the limb.
I have never read this chapter except for the fact that whenever the master finds a strange thing, he must ask for help.
to bring the marrow back to its place
Then comes the form of the pressor, which is where we must read the books; and for this there are two returns of two limbs. Whatever be the horn, whether more subtle or restrictive, or made of Ebony or boxwood;
Whatever be the horn, whether more subtle or restrictive, or made of Ebony or boxwood; and whether the mouth be wide open or the edge of the teeth be blunt, and the length a palm and a half. and in the middle the limbs be two cushions of this same substance, which be closed together in one and the other, half a palm in length or more.
and these two cushions are closed in the mouth of the marrow when one turns the two horns.
Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, is made of ebony or boxwood, according to the shape of the nails; Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, is made of ebony or boxwood, according to the shape of the nails. And it has three nails, two of which are long, and two of which are broad like a palm of a hand, two of which are long, and two of which are wide.
And when you see opening the chest with all the instruments, if you make the woman sit down and rest her feet on the ground, the pieces will stay in place and the legs will be wide open. Then take the two nails and fasten them together in the chest, and hold the handle of the instrument between her buttocks. Then take your hand and apply it to all the instruments, as if you had previously held them equally, according to the quantity that you see opening the mouth of the mare, until she makes what she wants.
These instruments are all messy, and their appearance is multiplied; and when you see them appear, the work is done more quickly, and the higher the houses are for their quantity.</start_of_turn>
If you do not desire the instrument except when you see it, because its necessity is not omitted.</start_of_turn
When the secondine is retained at birth, if you command the patient to retain its alaine, and then make her vomit with force, and hold your hands to the mouth and nose; And if she spits because of that, well done.</start_of_turn>
If this does not happen, take a pot and make a hole or incision, and put herbs in it that can open the mouth of the mare, such as chamomile, rue, anise, camomile, cassia and centaury.</start_of_turn
All these herbs, or some of them, should be boiled or cooked in water over the fire; then put a caine or hole in the pot, and the other end in the mare’s mouth,
The hairs must be left long as long as the vapor rises from the marrow; then make it vomit, as we have said. If the secondine has a relapse. And if it remains after this cure, and there is no other remedy, as it is commanded in the dance that she moisten her left hand with oil of poppies or in alum, and then put it back in its place,
and when she has found it, if she grasps and extends it thus, so that the marrow does not escape from the extraction; But it must be moved lightly to the right and to the left, and then treated; if it comes and dries out.
And if the wound is infected, our remedy is to evacuate the pus, and to fumigate with herbs;
and if it is not of all that we have said, if you must treat, do not neglect;
but it must be that what is at the opening of the wound, you bind to the hip of the woman, and then bathe with oil tetra-pharmacon;
If the patient vomits and then resumes eating, there will be force; however, whenever she eats in this way, there comes a bad odor from the stomach and the head, and the patient bleaches.
If one wishes to perform fumigations of consequence, it has not been proven that such fumigations with cresson and dried figs have been useful.</start_of_turn>
The form of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman at the retention of urine and of the secondine if it is this:
And it is to be seen like a cane, and one places the head under the chin in the natural position, and the large hairs above the fire;
And let the fumigations rest on the charcoal until it is consumed, and start another.
And let the fumigations rest on the charcoal until it is consumed, and start another.
And let the fumigations rest on the charcoal until it is consumed, and start another. And let the fumigations rest on the charcoal until it is consumed, and start another
Then put upon linen soaked in wine and oil, then the cure of ointment until it is healed.
And if you doubt that it will heal, if put or pierce a ball of lead, and leave it in peace, and be still when the beast seems to be awake in bed.</start_of_turn>
And never comes this stamp of smallpox from the dressing of a wound or abscess; if you cover that dressing: if it is cured, as we have said of the ball of lead.</start_of_turn
of fistula from the bowels Fistules that arise from the bone are nodulation, and those that arise from below the bone deviate or are displaced in the space of the two parts.
if there is one fistula or several; and when that nodulation is old, if it persists, and is accompanied by moisture that softens white or yellow bile,
and never are these fistulas permanent; and they are known by the fact that they cause vomiting or diarrhea when the patient vomits, and by chance when some of them go away.
And if there are fistulas that break through to the bladder, and halfway up the thigh; and reach as far as the joint of the hip, and even to the navel.
And thus we know of the fistula that persists at the foundation and does not go away: And thus we know of the fistula that persists at the foundation and does not go away: that you bite your thumb or the foundation and insert a subtle needle or iron hook into the fistula when there is no swelling.
And if there is swelling, if you insert a gentle attempt, or hair, as long as you feel the attempt or hair at your thumb;
and if you do not feel it, and there is no blood loss, no wind or swelling, as we have said. The hairs that they do not pierce through; if you are in a hurry to cure.
And when the fistula is made to the bladder or the urine duct, if while jumping the urine spurts out, and cannot be stopped by medicines.
If it is made through to the hip joint, if there is a vein running up to the root; If there is no swelling and no pain in the joint, if there is only a slight bruise, there is no need for medicine or treatment with oil.
And in these fistulas Persians there is no remedy but toil, and the vanity of the foolish people who intervene.
And that which is neither Persian nor ancient, has hope of health through iron, as I have seen
And it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and the legs are stretched out to his thighs, and his thighs are inclined towards his belly; Then there is a attempt to vomit, or plunge if there is torment, until you feel sick or the attempt comes.
If the patient feels the pain in the root, if you must drink your right index finger,
If the patient feels the pain in the root, if you must drink your right index finger, take note that he has probably perceived it; and whether it is discovered or you feel between your thumb and index finger the flesh or bone, then the bite which is persistent. if it does not go away by itself, we cannot heal it.
We can do nothing to heal it well, but this is often the case;
And he helps with that, if indeed he grasps the cautery handle according to the size of the fistula, as it is said before. He grasps all around the fistula, as much as he can reach from the foundation; do this once or twice, until you are certain that these hairs must be burned, which are like a splinter of an oyster shell.</start_of_turn>
Then he covers them with soft dressings and sews them up, until the hairs have fallen out, and then he sews the wound closed.</start_of_turn>
If he is well, that is good. But if not, he cannot be well.</start_of_turn>
And if he attempts to pass between, and does not pierce right up to the root which is or foundation, and between his bone and the attempt, cover with a thick covering of hair or silk, and you will see the fistula at that which embraces the covering. If the root of the fistula comes loose before the attempt, and since the cautery afterwards, as long as it comes up to the head of the attempt;
and the attempt will be delivered, and will be relieved; then defend those hairs which appear like a bundle of bristles, and nothing will remain.
If he does not yield, and if there is space between you and the work, if you cauterize with fire or medicine that is strong.
For the fire cautery, there are indeed several bones involved: namely, the burning of these cartilaginous substances, the evacuation of blood and the drying of moisture.</start_of_turn>
then the cure of soft swellings made of burn or broken pieces, as long as the bones are soft, and is put in the burn;
then cure the wound of the abscess with dry powder and are the dry medicines.
For when it is restored, if it is sound and does not return.
And if an abscess comes up to the root of the bone, and is loosened from the flesh, if it remains fixed to the bone or the root, inquire about it.</start_of_turn>
If you feel the tension, and between these two is the cloth or the bandage or the char, or it is near to pierce, if there is no other way except escape and hope, by the administration of one of these three methods:
or you cauterize it as we have said, or you bind it until it is healed, or if you wish you may put a tension and cure as before.
And do not wander too much among them, for you must cover the dwelling that holds the foundation, and come out by the way you went in; thus will the egestion follow its natural course. Then cure it, as we have said;
Then cure it, as we have said; by chance if it should be well, or you pull off that covering and the wound then that it is closed from the foundation, or by force or by some other pointed instrument; Then bandage that wound which is in the wound, as you wish;
Then study to restore the wound, and to stop the fistula by packing it below the foundation: if it is more convenient for the patient.
And never are fistulas as they are taught in this manner: and it is when you bite the attempt in the fistula, and it is either costs the skin covering the foundation or tears the skin from above.</start_of_turn> if you take a perceived attempt at the head according to this form: And there is always a thread torn in two, and the attempt is held throughout the thread in the fistula until it is at the head.
If the person is in the margin of the deep foundation, then stretch out the thread of that which is perforated, so that you drink down the root or foundation.
If you pull out the head of the thread and gather together the .ij. beads which are together, and strain one against the other, and leave it .i. whole or .ij.;
and do not hold it back once the thread has grasped these beads which are between two things, and breaks;
then cure the wound until it is healed and sound.
If the fistula does not burst, if you force it to burst in every way you can, it will not be too much affected.
For indeed it is not right to force it too tightly with the clamp, and then cure it as we have said, while it is still healthy.</start_of_turn>
The shape of the thorny spine from which the fistula proceeds is moist and has one part broken off and split.</start_of_turn and on the other hand we must not break that which must not be broken, as you can see here.</start_of_turn>
Emorrydes sont selon cette manère: ou elles sont dans le fondement, comme un grain de resin, et s’il en a de petites et de grandes, et si elles sont ouvertes trop largement sans soin, elles peuvent mourir. et s’il en a une ou plusieurs, et sont défendu du fondement et du chef du fondement; mais celles qui sont défendu si ont peu de moisture,
et ont la couleur du corps; ou si elles sont trop ouvertes, elles peuvent mourir.
And the cure for those who have it in the foundation, if you command the patient to stretch out for going to bed, until the foundation is forced out, and it will be seen; if you hurry, and you hold it with your nails, or you hold it with your finger, then you must press it into its roots.</start_of_turn>
and if it is joined [dislocated] it will not stay held by its moisture; if you take hold of it with cloth, or cotton, or a piece of chamlet.</start_of_turn and pull them out to your shoulders, then press them down, and powder over them warm powders which are in lieu of cautery; Ou tu les cauterizes si comme il est dit ou chapistre de cautère, puis les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.
Or you cauterize them as it is said or as the fire cautery chapister, and then treat them with other cures while they are well; and if the foundation cannot be moved, if you clench the patient’s biting and grasping hand, do so until it can move freely.
You cannot prevent the patient from suffering, and if the limb is fixed to the foundation, if it is a slight cure; and that you take hold of his nail or grasp it, and press them, and then cure as we have said, while he is well, and that he avoids the incision by fire.
If you are certain that you have restored the dislocation in this manner: take one thread and pierce it with a needle, then pass the thread downwards and withdraw the needle from the other side. Then pass two threads through the eye of the needle. If it is broad; then hold the thread taut, and pass the needle, and knot the thread, and draw out the needle, and do this with all of them. Leave one to correct the excess of blood
Then put upon the foundation one moist bandage in rose oil or cerate, and put upon the foundation, and command the patient to rest;
Then leave it until it shrinks, and when it does, if the treatment of oil and other remedies is applied while it is still healthy.
when it is dry of fire or foundation Many times there is drying of the bowels by the intestines, and by constriction of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine is of no avail.
If you can that you rest at the point of a scab or at your nail the bark under, which does not let it moisten; Then treat it until it is healed as much as possible if it is necessary;
If it cannot be healed, if you must repeat the procedure more forcefully than before, until it is well enough, and be escorted. Then treat it until it is healed.
immediately. Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;
Formice is a small appearance which appears before the limb, and goes out from under the skin; and never does it cause pain, and it is felt as if death were imminent, and comes throughout the limb, and more so than in any other part.
And the cure for it is that you take a bundle of rue from a goosefoot, or a bundle of rue from a strong vulture, and put that salve on the wound, until the circle turns blue all around the wound then turn your hand all the way around until you reach the bottom of the wound, and put it out from under, and scrape the wound from its roots.
And if thou seest, if thou do this of a wasp or of iron in this fashion, and be silent and restrain thy hands:
And if thou seest, if thou do this of a wasp or of iron in this fashion, and be silent and restrain thy hands, do not perceive, for it must hold still, and press and if thou seest, if thou cauterize the edge, if it is before or alongside the cautery.
and be silent and restrain thy hands, do not perceive, for it must hold still, and press and if thou seest, if thou cauterize the edge, if it is before or alongside the cautery. and be silent and restrain thy hands, do not perceive, for it must hold still, and press and if thou seest, if thou cauterize the edge, if it is before or alongside the cautery.
Those who are feeble and painful in the treatment of children are small.
Their limbs are small and large if they are too wide, or their belly is tied up in this manner:
and if their side is pierced or broken on one side and on the other; or if their rib is pierced or broken, and one of the ribs is fractured or broken on one side and the other on the other side.
or if their belly or an organ is placed in a better or parchment vessel, or if there is a hole around the wound
And there is between each opening [of the wound] about a space; then put in these openings a strong thread of strong thread twisted in ten or more, and gather the belly as if it were a clamp. And when the medicine is inside, if the thread has in front of it a strong thread, then clip; and this is the form of a circle:
And let the medicine neither too hot nor too cold, and join the top of the clip with oil or ointment of egg, or something similar, then bind it lightly;
Then grasp the patient with his two hands together, until it is seen through, then withdraw the clip, and let the patient rest his legs at the edge,
If the physician sees that the limb is stiff, if he can stretch it as much as he can; and if he sleeps throughout the night, it is a greater help.
If he limps with a disease of swelling of the belly, and the physician hasten to leave, if he returns as long as he is well.</start_of_turn>
If swelling of the bowels or abscess or wound, if it is as slight as that of a child.</start_of_turn
and this is the form of a slight limp when the skin is strained.</start_of_turn
wounds
We have already mentioned the treatment of wounds in the previous section; or you may say the treatment of hands and medicine, according to their completion.
I say that wounds are diverse depending on how they are made, and depending on the limbs or wounds that are made, and from what they are made
The things from which wounds are made are by biting of stone, and the size of spear and limb, or of lance or fist or seat, or similar things;
Or that they are made according to the custom of the lords, if as wound that pierces on the neck, or on the head, or on the arm, or on the belly, or on the liver, or similar members.
Or I will tell you of the cure for a wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, for the memory will come to you in this chapter.</start_of_turn>
I say that when a simple wound comes or head wound, and the bone is not broken, if you take care that there is no fracture of bone or other things, and the skin is entirely torn and the wound is great,  </start_of_turn And you doubt the wound itself: if you do it too soon after the wound, it may come to bleed more from the wound than from the head; or the blood may flow in the opposite direction to the part affected.
and listen to the patient's swelling of wine and fat foods.</start_of_turn>
And if he does not see improvement, if he is to vomit his food, and does not drink wine, does not eat meat;
and put out the wound, if it is oozing, cover it with a soft cloth soaked in rose oil only, or in astringent wine;
If there is no surrounding tissue around the wound, if you put on the wound when it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moved by the air, dust, or anything else, I will tell you about it later.
If the blood has been moved, put on some ointment, as long as it is healthy.</start_of_turn>
And if the wound is large like the size of a needle and similar, and the lips do not reunite by tension, if you reunite them by stitches, as I will say for wounds of the belly, of stitching.</start_of_turn
If the wound is uncovered from the bone, and is wide open, and holds only at the edge; then cure the wound with medicine, and restore flesh in place of skin. And instruct the patient to eat raw flesh, such as testicles and barley, as well as poultry, and similar things.</start_of_turn>
And if you find or see decay of flesh, and there is no bone exposed, if you grasp it firmly and pull it out, then cure;
And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be stayed by medicines, if you see the artery, and if you dislocate it, if you bind it with a thread; And if this fails, if the cautery is to be used.
And if these wounds are small and simple, if the cure is light: then put on this powder which hardens as soon as it is moved.
The manner of the powder is: take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; and chalk three parts, and grind them together finely. and apply the wound, and strain it, until it is well aerated and joins together with all its blood;
Then hold it firmly, and leave it to loosen naturally, if it does not swell; for we do not administer medicine until it is sound.</br>
Never do we make this treatment solely, when there is neither incense nor blood of a dragon, but only when the wound has not moved.</br
And if the wound has moved in this state, even if I put no medicine;
but put on some medicines that digest, or poulps of barley flour made with water and honey, until it bleeds again.</br Then treat other ailments while he is still sane.
And if a bone breaks with the wound, and it is small, if you extract the fragments cautiously;
I will tell you later about the fractures of the head.
of the wound of the neck
Wound comes from a tear and is simple, if there is no difference between the root and the top of the limb, but if the root or the artery is cut.
If the root [of the limb] is not cut, if there is no other injury except to leave the wound open, and do not put anything restrictive, for it is night and makes the wound shrink and do not put anything rough on the wound, for the substance of the root is cold, and the continuation of the pain is with the marrow, which is the hardest part of the limb.
but if there is some medicine, such as warm water with sweet oil, and poppy seeds boiled in sweet water, And other stones of mine according to this manner, and oily moistness.
And if the wound is great, if the pulse and veins are tied, then treat until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
And if the wound is deep and filled with pus, if the hole or lower part is loose;  </start_of_turn
And if the artery is severed, and blood flows out, if the dressing is loosened, and the blood clot, and the cautery mix together;  </start_of_turn
And if the tonsils are spined, or the carbuncles, and the tongue is held, by which the meat will go, if the tongue is cut on the side of the throat, and do not touch the throat but rather reset it to its natural position. and then strain it out immediately, and leave it alone for a while, and then cure it with poultices until it is healed;
and if the wound has made an imprint in the bone, if necessary; And if there are bone fragments, if the wound seeps with pus throughout, do not remove anything; leave as much as the wound permits. Or let the limb hang loose and aligned;
If the wound is fresh, sprinkle something over it as I have said before. And if there is bone in the wound and there is fistula, if the cure is like I have said in the chapter.
Of wound by lance or knife.
If it is from a lance or knife, and the wound is deep, if you see that the wound bursts open with the wind, it is deadly; then take out the arrow immediately.</start_of_turn>
and if it is not deep and is fresh throughout, if you do not put powder at the first hour, do not bind it up with the blood until it has stopped bleeding.</start_of_turn return to the body and comfort the patient.</start_of_turn But I put an attractive weight upon it, and I hold it for three times the hour;
and if you do not have a weight, put in the wound much cotton to suck out the moisture.</start_of_turn>
and keep the patient sleeping over the wound for two, three, or more days; if there is no spasm, do not tremble badly or have any diarrhea; When you see the bones displaced, if the wound is deep, the pain is saved. Thus must be done with needles and other cures, as long as he is still sane;
and if it cannot heal, and if there is an opening, as deep as there is a fistula; if the cure must be done in this way
and if the wound is an incision of a sword or knife, and it is simple or deep, at the front or at the back, if the cure of that which is before must be done;
If it is great, suture it; if it is small, powder it; and if it is embedded in the bone, chip off pieces; if there is suspicion of fracture, and the veins are ruptured. If they are not ruptured, if you leave the wound open, if you align the extractions;
and for other wounds as other limbs is the judge's word as we have said.
dou derrompement du ventre
The pain of the belly is great and violent and slight.
There is great pain of the belly; no bowel movement occurs, or no passage of the intestines, because of the swelling of the bowels
and the swelling is more painful, and never is less harmful than the small wound than the great
because of this we must more often put the intestines back in place, if we do not put them back from time to time; For in that the intestines swell so much that they feel the fruit, if they return more inwards,
Because in that the intestines swell so much that they feel the fruit, if they return inwards, it is worth considering that the bowels have burst, so we must keep the intestines in their place like others do.</start_of_turn>
And so that the rupture of the belly is in three manners:
the three common stitches come out in the belly stitch.</start_of_turn>
And the stitching of other wounds with coarse thread and eleven others of a finer kind are common as other wounds;
And all of them are more refined with the stitching of the belly, and I shall say one thing and declare.</start_of_turn>
I say that when the wound is small and there is nothing of the intestines inside, and if anything is grasped, that is by two methods: Or for the smallness of the wound, as we have said. Or because the intestines are swollen with food.
And when it is cold, swallow slowly in small parts: wet a sponge or rather a towel with cold water only, or thou burnest in acute squinting and tearing and pricking. and the intestine is raised as much as the belly is bony;
and never make this wine restraining, and is mute that we know because of its swelling.
and when you see the swelling depart, if moisten the intestine with water or boiling and rotten be cooked, For by this, things are brought into alignment.
and if they cannot enter, if there is a wound, we make a space with the instrument so that we can grasp the blood clots.</start_of_turn>
and the first treatment is to drain it as much as its size, as it should not be cut without great necessity or urgency.</start_of_turn>
And this is the instrument for cutting:
if it is split from the shoulder and does not slip away, and when this is done, the shape will be like this:
and when the wound is swollen and the intestines protrude, if you reset it according to its natural form in its own place, If you are in doubt, for this matter is worth attempting.
When the wound is large and is in the lower part of the abdomen, you must consider that you should manage the patient on their back and raise their legs higher than their head; And if it is in the lower part of the belly,
and if it is in the lower part of the belly, and if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two lower parts. and if it is in the lower part of the belly, if you put the tenture in that which the upper part is higher than the other;
And thus it is appropriate to administer what I have said in great and gaping wounds.
Small wounds require what has appeared to you.</start_of_turn>
then hold between your hands, that is to say minister tenderly what holds all the way through.</start_of_turn and gather the limbs together; And this is the common method of stitching.
And this is the common method of stitching. and take a needle or several, according to the quantity of the wound's size, then leave some space at the edge of the wound, i.e. about the thickness of a nail, and pierce a needle or put in strong thread; and pierce the leather with the needle through the edges of the wound,
then strain it with a double thread around the needle of two parts, then gather together the hair of the wound evenly,
Then leave some space there, and insert another hook. Then leave some space there, and insert another hook just as you did with the first one. and do the same with the following hooks as you have done with the first one. until all the wounds are held together;
And let the nails be blunt between the thumb and the great toe, for the blunt nails catch all the hair, and the long ones cannot enter properly. therefore it is recommended that they be blunt;
and must not push the nails too far into the hair and skin,
They do not hold and open the wound before the suture;
and then hold the head of the nails, so that they do not harm the patient at night.</start_of_turn> and put tents or cloths over the head of the nails to hold them, and leave them until the wound is sutured.</start_of_turn>
And this manner of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds. because there is often a needle or two involved.
The second suture is often used, and it is that you assemble the hair of the skin and the hair of the flesh together with a needle or there is a strong middle thread; And when you have perceived these things altogether,
And when you have perceived these things altogether, if you remain calm at the part or where you have begun, in the manner in which it is customary to cause scars.</start_of_turn>
and put between each stitch the thickness of a lesser bean.</start_of_turn
this stitch will hold the home,
And I closed a wound with a sponge that had been in the armpit or the belly,
which had been cut with a knife. and the wound was more than a palm wide. and there were intestines well almost two palms wide,
And it was the wound in the middle of the belly. And I returned the intestine when it had been out for twenty-three hours.
And the wound was sutured for fifteen days, and healed, and was well.
And the master had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle;
And do not be afraid of oil, for I am in a place where it is neither found nor used, no medicines. And thus more above the wound I shall apply oil three times a day, and wash it with honey until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Or you shall tell me the two ways of dressing:
Take the needle and pass it from the lower part up to the chest;
When she has perceived the right shoulder in its place, if the head of the scapula is displaced or twisted or if the needle has pierced her,
and makes her pierce from another side of the inside until it escapes.
thus you must do just as the cobbler does with the leather when he sews it and that you leave one side of the scapula out once, and take hold of it again from the other side, until the dislocation is completely mended.</start_of_turn>
The second method of stitching, that Galiens does discreetly,
if it is as if no one does it, which assemble the members naturally. and join one of the ends to the other end, in a partial manner:
keep a needle or a splinter nearby, and make a hole only as wide as necessary, et laisse les cheveux douce sur le visage; then prick at their base, and hold the eyes steady until they grow to this depth. as the hairs on the face.
then prick at their base, and hold the eyes steady until they grow to this depth, as the hairs on the face that are on the other side of the face;
And this is the commonest and most painful mode of cure.
And thus this word is often spoken, and no one testifies to it,
we must suture the belly with two needles, or there is thread in the flesh;
and we must push one needle from one side and the other from the other side, in the manner of those who sew wounds;
And so that when the rotation is inward toward the belly, if it is more tender than other parts of the belly.
We judge the wound as being similar to other wounds:
and when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, as if it had just happened, If you reset the intestine and the gut; then put on the greasy powder.
If you reset the intestine and the gut; then put on the greasy powder. And if the gut has moved, if you put on no other dressing except what is present, until the wound heals and hold the gut firm, and be bound to the abdomen, and mix; then cure the wound as well as the others, until it is healed.
And if you have no medicine, if you put it on, as soon as it begins to swell, cotton wool, And if you have no medicine, if you put it on, as soon as it begins to swell, cotton wool,
For in many cases simple wounds do not require other medicine besides these provisions.
and if you doubt that the wound will not heal by itself, If you must soak linen cloth in boiling oil, or in rose oil, put it on the wounds and bandage the abscesses.
if there is pain or gangrene in the bowels, and it happens many times, if the clusters of black wine swell and the same gangrene comes up to the intestines;
And the spleen and intestines, when they are large, if they are more fluid to heal than the small ones.
The large intestine, which is called the “jaundice,” cannot heal when it is swollen, because of the swelling of the veins and the lightness of the whole body, and the approach of its nature to nerves.
If the wound spurts blood, if you reset it backward as the intestine, while it is still fresh;
And if it is black and turning towards black, it is certain that you must bind the black limb, and do not remove blood, for it does not come. for there are veins and arteries.
and if there is something between the limb, and if the bone breaks through the skin, hold the limb still so that the wound can be aligned when the bone is extracted, and the wound will bow.
Of the root of the boil.
When the intestine is round and the wound is small, if it can be restored in its natural place,
because I have seen that a bone has been fractured or the belly of an arrow has been pierced;
And it was the wound on the right side of the stomach. And it became filled and formed a fistula, and in this there was evacuation and vomiting;
I put it to cure according to what I could, and I did not cease to relieve it until it was healed, and I bound it up
And when I saw it bound up, I doubted that the patient would be well in his belly; And there is no harm, but it remains in many good arrangements, meals and drinks.
And they say that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be closed in parts slowly: then take forceps from great tests, and gather the layers of the wound, and when the forceps have opened the mouth, if you put on the two layers,
then put another remedy afterwards like before, until the wound is completely healed;
and bandage the wound. If the head of the shoulder is dislocated in the intestine, and causes no trouble to the patient,
If the head of the shoulder is dislocated in the intestine, and causes no trouble to the patient, and one can tie the intestine with a fine thread which is cut from the intestine of a beast.
in part. take the head of this thread of intestine so that it is freed from the discharge, Then he is bound to the head of this thread, namely a thread of fine linen twisted. Then he binds the thread to the needle, and sews through the intestine, and holds it in place in its course;
and this method of stitching is not strong except according to the way of the vein and the hope;
and if there is great and wide wound, even if it is in one of the great intestines, if there is no remedy, except for subtility.
Of fistula or that it be From fistula or that it be, such as any wound or incision, when it breaks, it is called universally a fistula. and immediately when it is closed or broken
and the fistula is always a strong and white nodule, or one does not feel pain, And it is just as painful as the quill of a bird.
Never in a clear fall, and sometimes wide open; Never in a clear break, and sometimes wide open; never in a slight case, and sometimes enough;
and I have spoken of this in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not sutured, and there is scar, This is not fire but by one of the eight causes:
namely, by the smallness of blood or bone. or by its wickedness; or because there is hard matter inside, and on the eyelids, that does not allow new growth to take place. Or there is too much swelling. Or the limb is swollen, and the matter is of poor quality; Or the medicine is not good in the cure; Or because the corruption is like pestilence; Or for its property in that region is late the digestion, and late the healing, and flees by nature. Or there are veins or bones:
and I have already mentioned these causes, their signs, and the cures of medicines in the division.
Or I must tell you the cure for fistula, which is made by the work of the hands.
Hair that has become fistula arises in all members of the body due to pain. for there are fistulas which come from great veins, and arteries, and nerves. or at the surface of the skin, or in the intestines, or in the bladder, or at some of the bones, or at the spine, or at any joint of the hands or feet;
All fistulas of this kind are grievous to heal, and there is nothing but toil and ignorance.
and if there is no fistula that does not go away except as I have said, and you have undertaken to cure it, you must know it is vain, if you attempt to drain or burn it if the fistula is straight;
And if the fistula is tortuous, if the circle of a vein tries to slip, for the swelling swells inward toward the curvature;
and if the fistula has holes and you do not close it well with attempts, if the swelling bursts by one of the holes,
For the moisture is short from a pierce to another, and the world is filled with it.
then when its sense is at your side, you know if there is bone or nerve, and is shut in a wound,
and ask the patient well about the pain he feels at the pressure of your hand, and the limb or place where he feels it;
then when you know truly the limb or place where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery or vein, Or in some cases that I have mentioned, if the limb follows what I have said,
Or in some cases that I have mentioned, if the limb follows what I have said, and the bone is forced out of its place and the flesh is corrupted that is within. and then the limb must be treated until it is healed,
and if the fistula is well deep from the right place, if you must, you must pierce it as much as you wish. Then I make soft compresses in medicine, and I hold them until the head of the fistula.
Then I make soft compresses in medicine, and I hold them until the head of the fistula. until the medicine softens the superfluous matter that is decomposed at the bottom.
and then I put greasy ointments on the wound until it is healed;
and if it is not healed by this, if I must cauterize as we have said,
And if the bone is corrupted by fistula, if possible. If the vein or nerve does not trouble you or the principal limb, as we have said.
and if the bone is discovered, and there is corruption and blackness, if you can wait until the corruption is entirely bony, then cure it with gentle means until it is healed;
If he is not well, and returns bowed as before, if he is not well, and returns bowed as before,
stay still until he feels well again, and then restore the limb;
And if it is still sound, that is well. If not, take note that corruption has already progressed too far, and you will be unable to do anything about it. unless there is some other remedy save for us to yield to nature;
and if there is any small bone which is corrupted, and you wish to treat it with tension, if the extraction has been made with a suitable instrument,
if the extraction has been made with a suitable instrument, and if there is any bone remaining, if the threads are torn, do not leave any of it behind;
and if moisture opposes you, and there is no fault or fear, if pain and moisture and heat, and deliver the bones.
And if you do not drive them out at once, if you put something above the wound that is prone to putrefaction, leave them as long as the bones are exposed.</start_of_turn>
then there will be greater damage to the bones.</start_of_turn>
or if it is a large bone, such as a limb or thigh, If the hair is so long that the corruption is as great as the blackness of the bone, Then restore the wound.
and if there is great corruption, and it comes up to the marrow of the bone; if you can cover and protect all the corruption, and then cure it until it is healed;
And I shall tell you of a fistula that occurred in a woman’s leg, and if you take it as an example and help in your work.
There was once a young girl around .xxx. years of age, who had a pain in her leg due to something inside the body,
so long as the matter came to the limb, and there was an abscess which did not have any known cause until it was opened;
But the mire grows more violently above than below, But the mire grows more violently above than below,
and remains cured for a year and a day, and there is no skill in the art of hands,
so long as I recall it, and came to see it and the medicines with which they were cured, And what was right was pierced by a great force. And became red the limb of the youth, and had the color of citron.
I bound a bandage in one of these wounds, and then encircled all the wounds,
and found that one vein ran into the other from all parts of the limb.
I have seen it now, and I grasped in one of the holes until I uncovered a part of the bone, and I found it broken and split, and the pus came up to the bone inside.
I saw what appeared to be a fractured bone, and I believed there was no other corruption, except for this which I saw.
and I began to restore the wound with long stitches of medicine, but I could not make it stay closed.
And then I recommenced, and I discovered the bone just as before.
And I found the corruption continuing in the bone, and the marrow, and then the bone itself, and I pondered about soldering the limb.
but I could not do anything except that I grasped a palm of the bone, and the traitor forced me to all his might, then I restored him with medicines; and he was healed and restored quickly,
And it will not be necessary to renew the work for the weakness of the patient, who cannot bear it. and by fear of death which I avoid for him. For often there is the evacuation of blood, but he remained whole and sound,
For often there is the evacuation of blood, but he remained whole and sound, and there issued from the bone a hard scale, which was well placed and caused no discomfort or contradiction in any way, neither in its height nor in its depth.
And the head of the shoulder, if you pull the corrupt flesh away from the socket, and discover the bone on the socket or you see marrow, that the bone does not break the flesh; put a cushion or a board below the bone to cover the corrupt flesh; and cover as much as you can see and feel the corruption, and do the same again.
And if the bone is corrupted, and does not open wide, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, if the fracture breaks through the skin; then put one finger of lead on it.</start_of_turn>
and then hold the corruption from one part to the other, and if necessary for a length of time as we have said.</start_of_turn>
and if the corruption is in the joint, if you join the fractured bone and hold the bone that contains the other part.</start_of_turn>
And if the corruption is in the continuity of the two joints, if there is no other angle except the round one;
And if the corruption is or hangs from the arm, or hangs from the leg, if that is strong in that matter.</start_of_turn> but always inquire about that corruption, how it happened to you.</start_of_turn> and take care of it in all ways that you can, but that the vein or nerve does not hinder you;
and the nails which he incisions and the threads to cover these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and the appearance of swelling. and their greatness and their fineness, and their size and their shortness, and their hardness; and because of this it is appropriate to consider the semblance of the work of his instrument.
and the nails which he incisions and the threads to cover these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and the appearance of swelling. And the testimony of the manners of diseases. if you think the instrument which you are using is appropriate according to what is commanded.</start_of_turn>
fire The shoulder joint dislocates due to moisture, or by pressure, or by force;
And when you have treated that corrosion with medicines, and it has not profited, if you must cover that limb until the corrosion disappears. or if the patient escapes by death, or by malice, which is greater, the fault of the limb;
or if the patient escapes by death, or by malice, which is greater, the fault of the limb; and the limb appears black, as if burned by fire, And thus after the darkness, then comes the corrosion of members in member, And thus after the darkness, then comes the corrosion of members in member,
and grasps all the body; if you hurry to uncover,
and if there is corrosion at the head of the shoulder, if the limb is dislocated, and you do not give it space to come down to the hand.
And if it comes up to the hand, if the socket at the joint is such that the corrosion does not reach the forearm;
if it reaches the forearm, if the socket at the wrist is loose; and if the corrosion passes the wrist, that is death. it is worth nothing against the quantity of its [disease’s] virulence.
and all that you do when the corrosion comes or goes: if it comes in the first joint, if the socket after the other joint;
And if it comes or if it befalls, if you seize it all; And if it comes or if it befalls, if you seize it all;
And if it comes from below the elbow, if there is no other ailment but that the patient is dead;
and you must cover or bind the limb if you wish to keep it in place.</start_of_turn And extend one minister from the lower limb, and another minister from the upper limb, And you shall separate the flesh that is between the two limbs at a breadth of one span, until the bone is exposed.
then you shall grasp or draw out the bone, and put a cushion of lint around one side, so that the bone does not touch the sound limb, and come to the patient other wounds and incisions.
And if bleeding comes from the wound when working, if you cauterize the area thoroughly, or put on some restraining powders; then return to your treatment until it is accompanied by relief.
then bind the limb securely with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it is healed;
and I will tell you that there was once a man in our home who suffered from this.
He had a blackness that seemed to burn with fire.
and that corruption first arose in his armpit, so that it consumed the whole limb.
and when we saw the corruption, if we covered the limb, and it became well;
and long after it returned the corruption or the limb, and it came to me,
And I put upon him things that rebound after the softening of the disease, and I cannot cease the corrosion;
And he swears that I must hold his hand, and I do not wish, for I avoid any hope of rebounding the matter. I also doubt that if I cut off his hand, he will not die. for the strength of the man was weak; and he awoke all, and returned to his land, And so he covered his hand, and was healed;
I have heard of nothing like this except for this occasion, when we had to do something about it.</start_of_turn>
Blood often escapes from an opening in the vein, and remains for a long time, causing great swelling; Then it turns back and breaks, and in doing so breaks the vessel; And the skin which is below is also as subtle as a silken drape that hangs down. and does not reach the bone or the nerve, and such a condition is called "sanity".
but if it is so prolonged that it reaches the bone embedded in the marrow, it is called "fistula".
If the leather is thick, hold it firmly as if it were a drape. Do not yield to its corruption.
When the leather is thick, hold it firmly as if it were a drape. and the leather is thick like a leather purse.
Look at him, if his face is swollen and his nose is puffed up like a blow of foul air. Then make the clisterize of Egyptian medicine which is to be made immediately. Take alum, oil, and pitch, equally, and mix them together in a vessel over a fire, until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey;
Then take of that according to your need, and make it hot and sweet. And in warming the liquid, and restrain the opening; Let the medicine soak for three hours, then remove it while pressing;
Do this treatment until the swelling is reduced and the bone is solid;
And never is the spleen clustered with water of amber. when this remedy is not present, and you take amber from the must of grapes, and drink water from above,
then the swelling will go down, and be clustered, until you know that the veins are well healed.
and if the patient cannot endure it, neither the Egyptian medicine of water of amber, If the cluster of water and honey boils or there is a drop of bile broiled; or you boil it in honey and wine, because honey has the property of softening and washing away.</start_of_turn> and the wine makes the blood dry.</start_of_turn>
and when you have done this and you have confirmed that the pain is well softened, If the stammering of what brings birth stirs up charcoal in him,
If the stammering of what brings birth stirs up charcoal in him, or you can cauterize it with certain medicines and poultices, whose properties I have mentioned, or treat it with poultices;
and you keep it warm a little. If the edge of a wound is too large, and you put in a tent of Egyptian resin, or basic oil, as much as it is enlarged;
and if the wound is too wide, if the bone is exposed and there is a risk of infection,
and if the bone breaks through the skin is below, if the wound is deeper than it should be. For when the bow is in the flesh, if you do not leave some hair; and if you do not cover its hair with something as you see, it will go lower than before.
And if you do not cover your beard as you see, if it appears in a rough manner: that the beard curls up firmly and does not leave anything of the beard; and take consolidating medicines to put out the beard,
and do not make sudden movements, Then grasp as firmly as possible the opening of the skin, that is to say more widely than before. Then hold the surrounding tissue taut, that is to say another layer as thick as the size of the opening. and put it on the opening of the skin to align the edges, and do not remove the great drape until once the bleeding has ceased;
and he often tears the edges of the opening, causing the bleeding to recur And if there are purulent discharges from the wound, if it be poison or blood or enough, or digested, or indigestible;
and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is swelling or not.</start_of_turn>
and when your medicine has been applied for a while and you see the nature of the wound on the surface of the body.</start_of_turn if the boils have already appeared, and approach the health of the patient;
And then loosen the wound in the morning, or the third day, and when you loosen the wound, if it has changed, i.e. another layer of dressing, and renew the dressing.
And if it still bleeds profusely after the third day, soak the wound so that the blood does not clot further. and if subtle poison remains long after tension, if you do not immediately take care of your health,
For indeed, salvation is near. For there are some in their wounds who linger too long in their ailments, and others who do the opposite;
and if they stubbornly withdraw inward after the initial treatment, their wounds fester and do not heal properly.</start_of_turn>
and if they withdraw late, and are prolonged, if indeed medicines that are harsh and dry in substance but moist and green in effect are administered.</start_of_turn> if, for example, the diaphoresis is severe, for there is a great proportion of vitriol in it, which is the last medicine.</start_of_turn
Take oil of ivy, and mix it with rose oil, and equal parts of vinegar;
Then apply it, and use it; thus this same thing makes honeyed clots that engross when the swelling of the wound is not there,
or you take myrtle and alum and incense, and grind them up, and sprinkle it over the honey when it comes out of the fire; And then with glue, namely a bandage, it is stretched out over the breast, and never is it administered by a long-haired physician. And the root of the stars, which is also like flour sometimes and a hundredth;
And the root of the stars, which is also like flour sometimes and a hundredth; and in the use of simples or compounds: grind them, and make a powder, and put honey on it that I have mentioned, and use it and if the cure is prolonged, and is not cured by this cure,
and if the cure is prolonged, and is not cured by this cure, When the wound is corrupted by pus, and leaves an imprint in the bone, or has stiff limbs, or is swollen; If the treatment for fistula is delayed, as we have said before.
from the incision of the abscess.
The swelling is an abscess that comes from the swelling of the pouch of the hand. Or by chance, or by some other mishap, it happens in others also.
When it is envious, and we take no care, if it comes to a boil, it will burst like a wound. And they crack and groan so much that they break through the root of the bone, and by chance they break through entirely;
And comes the corrosion up to the bone, so that there is great pain, and the color is pale.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment brings no benefit, if you must do so, do all that is superfluous that is removed from the limb. then cauterize the wound afterwards. The cautery is a great help if the bone is sound, and the limb is healthy;
And if the nail suddenly presses the bone end, and it begins to swell, and the blood vessel, if you think that you must put in place the nail that is pressing the bone end, hold the nail firmly in its place and gently move the bone end. and apply the remaining part of the char medicinally with the help of corrosive substances to remove all;
And if the infection is in the bone, if you break it, and take out the pus, because as much as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal;
and if you see the bone corrupted, if you break it here, as it is said before, Then the treatment of wounds as long as they are healthy.
And if he is feverish, sweating, and feels great pain, if you can, make him vomit first. then grasp the spleen with the thumb and index finger and cut through under it.</start_of_turn>
and guard that the cut does not reach up to the rib which is below the spleen, because the patient would feel too great pain.</start_of_turn
and if there is any, put something above which calms it.</start_of_turn>
The two joints that arise in the hands of some people by chance are all fleshy, and sometimes there is bone there, and never is there a nail,
and no nails are born at the root of the joint, or are born elsewhere on the limb. He who is born in no place of doubt shall not move. He who is born at the joint of doubt, by chance shall move.
the size of that which is fleshed is light, in part only: size like the root of a broad spatula
He who is born at the root of the joint is grieved to cure: if you hold him tight.
If he is born or must at the rear not, if you must first bend the limb round to the bone, then bend the bone to a convenient degree, and then cure it until it is healed.
The wounds that come from this must be assembled come from birth, or from a wound, or from the burning of fire, or from similar things.
If it is possible to restore the dislocation, if it must be repaired in its natural form. then put between two bands or cloths soaked in rose oil, that they do not adhere.</start_of_turn> or you put between two pieces of soft lead, as long as the bones are soldered, if it is possible.</start_of_turn>
When the swelling comes from neither of its two ends with the palm, if you can restore the dislocation if it is possible.</start_of_turn>
Des vils
The veins are swollen and filled with dark, melancholic fluid that comes with pain in many limbs.
and more often in the limbs that are at rest and working and bearing weight, than in others.
It is therefore necessary that you do not give any purgatives, and then repeat the poultice.
The iron cure is as follows: two methods. One is with the tongs, and treat the black blood. And the other method is to tie up the vein, and then treat it forcefully.</start_of_turn>
The size is as follows: first raise the affected limb high and warm, until the swelling is reduced.</start_of_turn> Then strain the limb from the hip down to the knee joint.</start_of_turn Then grasp the vein in one, two, or three places, of a large size,
Then grasp the vein in one, two, or three places, of a large size, and immediately ligate and pull out the black blood from your hand from one end to the other, as much as the patient can tolerate;
and then bind it, and instruct the patient to keep pressure on the black blood with meat;
and resume the evacuation and the bleeding as soon as the veins are full, and do no harm to the patient.
The ailment of this one is as follows: open the limb of the patient, and if there is hair, then take out the hair or shave it off, and make the limb limp until the limb turns red and swells the veins.
if there is no bath, if the fire burns, and then hold the limb over the fire and when the skin is long over the elbow or on the ankle of the foot;
then cover the skin with ointment and press the limb from the heel to the buttock until it turns white when you touch it;
And on the wound there is redness and black spots, and when it enters or leather seems just like a white cord.
Then stretch the wound outwards, until it is level with the leather, and then bind it with a thin bandage.</start_of_turn>
Then fold the edges inwards twice; then cut the leather over the wound as much as it opens, Then keep the wound closed, if you have done so, and bind it with another bandage, as you did before.</start_of_turn>
Then grasp another size, or several if you are dealing with them, then hold the thumb and index finger together,
Then grasp another size, or several if you are dealing with them, then hold the thumb and index finger together;
and if you do not draw it out and lift it, if there is a strong double thread at all times, and bind and draw it out, and if there are nails there, grasp them with your hand from both sides, until it is gone; Keep her still, for if she moves, she will not be able to be treated or lifted, and this will bring harm to the patient.
When you have finished treating her, if you take out the foreign body from the wound, soak it in wine and rose oil; and cure it until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
And if her limb is contracted and twisted and bound together, and it is not straight, as we have said, Then you must break it [the dislocation] violently, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said before.</start_of_turn>
Then you must break it [the dislocation] violently, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said before.</start_of_turn> The form of fire from which we take the hook is curved, and does not tear me, but only grasps the vein.
it is of great curvature, for if it were slight, it would grasp the vein; but let it be large as we have said, and this is the form:
of the civil vein.
This vein is found in the limb, in the hot parts or where there are no herbs or trees, and in the earth where there is no moisture;
And by chance it happens elsewhere except in the leg, and this comes from the decay that comes from under the skin.
if it comes from the serpents in the flesh and towards, grasp between skin and bone.</start_of_turn>
And if there is a sign of swelling in this vein that comes in the leg, a very great inflammation, then the limb is chained, and the vein becomes strong like a plant root.</start_of_turn
When the arm is broken, if it is certain that you must wrap around a piece of lead from one and a half inches to one and a third, and the knot,
When the arm is broken, if it is certain that you must wrap around a piece of lead from one and a half inches to one and a third, and the knot, leave the lead in place on the limb, and every time that it points downwards, if you wrap around the lead, and the new knot. and if it is too long, if you must break off a part, and wrap around the remainder, and do not cover it in its root, until it is completely healed because if you break it off, if it returns into the bone, and makes come abscess or infection or wound, and makes worse the disease.
For this reason, it is necessary that everything be treated promptly and thoroughly, and that nothing be left undone or neglected.
and never is this vein sound when treated with five palms of length, or ten, and once has come to me, from which it was taken out in ten palms of length, and when you seize it, if there be any bruise or fracture, and you pierce it through to the marrow,
if it is all right; and either evacuate the matter which is within, and apply to the place medicines which are soothing, so as to cause no further pain, and then cure as with abscesses.
And never has this vein in the armpit slipped from its joint at the elbow, or at the elbow. And it comes out of the wound, and from there it slips out; cure it then as we said before.
From the veins that arise between skin and bone.
This disease is called in our land "beef disease", because it often causes swelling.
And it is a little vessel that is born between skin and bone, and runs throughout the body, ascending and descending. and it is often perceived on the alert of a limb, from the time it breaks the skin or it is moving, and leaps forward
and it is filled with the humors of blood, such as comes towards and serpens and worms and fat; or belly
and there is doubt of its malice, for when it goes through the body, and it reaches the head, and comes to the marrow, By chance he enters, and breaks the oil; and this often happens.
When you see it healed and treated, if one cannot force it until it goes away, except when it wishes to.
then you must certainly tie up the limb above and below with a strong and well-stitched ligature,
then you must go up and draw it out, and if you see that it is pierced in the flesh, and you do not find it, If the fire cautery is above, while it burns;
And the greatest harm that it makes is when it burns the fat, as we have said before.
If you see it coming or close to the oil, immediately grasp its bristles and pull them out forcefully.
and you must use the patient various means of physical and medicinal treatment for the bad humors that cause it
And if there is swelling of the flesh under the skin, it must be drained away with a porcupine.
And if there is swelling of the flesh under the skin, it must be drained away with a porcupine. This disease is called in our land "vakirir," and is a pain that comes in the joints, and thus it moves from limb to limb; and I have seen this happen.
I was called to a sickly woman, and discovered a small swelling in her armpit.
and when I lifted her arm, it rose up like a worm on the shoulder more swollen than anything, like silver that has been cut from its root
the pain came from there, and settled in the shoulder,
And then a little afterwards corrected by the whole body, so that it came into the other arm.
Then he told me that it twisted back towards the body, as I saw it.</start_of_turn>
I wondered how he managed to move about without wanting this sickness in this way.</start_of_turn> although I know that I must keep in mind that it is good to move without causing pain to others.</start_of_turn But I do not wish to tell it, if as I see it in the woman.
and I thought that it was because the woman had dry hair and her veins were exposed. because of that appeared that windstorm constraint;
and I do not see it according to this reason to those who have moist hair and veins covered.
When you see the cure for this ailment and the patient feels that pain, if it breaks open as we have said, if the swelling above and below has increased, and then becomes soft as soon as that constraint is overcome. cauterize the limb; and if you do not see it with your eyes,
if the treatment for that which brings out the swelling, such as foul pills and serapins, and the like.
Des saiettes
The towels are various, according to their appearance and the nature of the wound or the pain they soak up.</start_of_turn>
There are various towels, some with large points, some with small points, some with curls, and some smooth.</start_of_turn some with angles, some with long ends, and some with pieces.</start_of_turn And that which breaks in no limb breaks in like manner: or in the primary limb it breaks,
or if it breaks in the skull, the brain, the liver, the spleen, the kidneys, the bladder, and the like members. When it breaks in no limb, then the sign of death is that which I shall tell you later, I will teach you: because the death comes afterwards in many ways; And when such a bad sign does not deceive me, and the arrow does not enter my body, if you delay, cure the wound.
And the sign of the brain when the arrow pierces the bone, and leaps up the substance that is above the brain, is when scooping and soiling and vomiting and redness in the eyes, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasm and mixture of senses, and vomiting of bile; and by chance it is without fever, or pain; and by chance it loses speech and voice; And from the wound, white moisture like pus, and in like manner with burnt hair;
And if this sign appears to you, if you are to take care of it, draw out the arrow if it is not embedded.</start_of_turn>
The sign of the arrow when it is pricked or broken, is that it is close to the left breast, and feels as though it were embedded in something hard, do not open it.</start_of_turn and sometimes the arrow moves like pus, and in dark blood, and comes cold sweat and cold sweat, and fainting. The wounds therefore suggest doubt that the patient will survive.
The mark of the wound suggests that whenever it does not burst, it swells up and the patient turns blue, his face turns pale, and he sighs with open mouth.</start_of_turn>
And if the wound bursts open on the covering of the bone, if there are many little bones; it causes great swelling and great pain and sighs; and the limb moves stiffly.</start_of_turn
And if the wound bursts or breaks open, by chance anything indigestible from the meat is not left in the wound.</start_of_turn
And if the sponge is split or the belly burst, and in leaping at any point of dung through the intestine root, if there is no hope of cure, do not attempt to extract the sponge.
And if the sponge breaks in the bladder, and the urine spurts out and comes out in bursts, and the patient feels great pain: such wounds are deadly.</start_of_turn>
As for the other limb, if the face, the neck, the chest, the armpit, the groin, the shoulder, the elbow, the wrist, the hand, the foot, and the limb in general are affected by numerous disorders. When the sponge is in the nerve or the artery, and it is not venomous, as I have already told you, because of what you have done otherwise.</start_of_turn>
There was once a case where an arrow pierced the root of the nose. I grasped it [the arrow] and it slipped from the other side through the fat of the ear, and it was cured without any harm
And there was another case where an arrow pierced the fat of the oil from the socket of the ear, and the arrow was removed, and did not reach beyond the tip towards the head. And it was the great arrow of a Turkish archer, with all its weight towards the ear; the wound was sound, and there was no bad accident.
And it went from the throat to a Christian, and the Arabic arrow was towards the ear:
I saw the beards, and I plucked them out as long as I could, and the Christians were sound.
And I pulled out an arrow from a woman who was sitting or crouched, and I thought she was going to die;
And then, if he does not pass .xxx. days, if he does not mend his condition; and then, if he does not pass .xxx. days, if he does not mend his condition, I will cut on the armpit, the groin, the back, and there will be no further mishap.
And if thus a home with a wound that has burst open or has become infected, and it has been treated with dressing;
and if thus a home with a wound that has burst open or has become infected, and it has been treated with dressing, and if it does not improve his condition, He finds no rest in any of his natural works.
And thus another man, who had an arrow stuck in his face, and was sewn up the wound;
and thereupon suffered great pain; and there were other similar things.
and thus an arrow was shot at a prince of the king, who was sitting among the nobles, And it was a downward slope to the right side; and the arrow was entirely withdrawn.
And I was called to the treatment after it had been closed for two days. If I found the wound very wide, it would be very painful
I saw her quite pale and limp, and did not feel her; and there was no longer any pulse or pain in her right ear. I thought it was the tip of the arrow.
I placed upon the wound a soothing plaster to prevent inflammation and appeared to me the wound of the arrow.
and appeared to me the wound of the arrow. I put on the bandage again, closed the wound, and held the patient’s hand for a long time
As long as he feels the arrow still inside his knee; and he told me so. I put on the wound medicine an acrid ointment with hands, as long as it was overdone,
and held it, feeling the tip of the arrow which was still inside; then I closed the wound opening with that medicine again, until the tip of the arrow was visible to me.
And beyond that, the ending of this month has passed the three moons,
And thus, when the ailment that I bound with nails at one end and at the other had stretched out, I could no longer bear it;
so that I was forced to make other implements of steel to subdue it. according to what its form will be at the end of this chapter, as soon as I have treated it, I will restore the wound.
And the physician judges that the cartilage of the nose cannot restore itself: And he restored it immediately, and the wound healed, and the patient was completely healed.</start_of_turn>
Or as you have said concerning the quality of the extraction of some arrows, if you put your cure on that which I do not understand, because the book does not teach me that;
But the wisest masters know well of many great things, and of what is present and lacking. Truly nine works, and nine instruments, in descending order of things that are strange which arise in this art
I say that the sponges do not arise from members or that they are woven for that matter in various ways. or by liquid or by any other means;
And that which leaps forth by itself or enters, that is an arrow transfixed in the flesh, and it leaps nevermore.
And if it does not leap now, if you leave it as long as the flesh is swollen, and rejoice in the issue;
And if it is fixed in the bone, and it cannot be extracted, if you leave it there for a while, and it moves every day;
And then it leaps, and if it does not leap, if you pierce through all of its substance, as long as the flesh is swollen, and then you will pull it out.
And if the scab has been placed in the limb if it cannot be seen, if the hand has all its might; and if you sense it, if the hand has no visible support;
And if you do not grasp firmly the wound, and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone, nerve or vein, if the wound is great as the wound itself. pull out the arrow if you grasp it, and if there is an ear in the arrow that holds it,
pull out the arrow if you grasp it, and if there is an ear in the arrow that holds it, if the bone which is stuck in the flesh comes out with the grasp. Then break or bend the arrow's ears as much as you can, until you can pull it out.
Then break or bend the arrow's ears as much as you can, until you can pull it out. And take great care that you do not break the arrow, but that you grasp it more firmly.</start_of_turn>
If you do not manage it once, if the blood has clotted around the wound, then pull it out, for it is an alleviation.</start_of_turn> If it bleeds too much, do as we have said in the chapter about the cure.</start_of_turn
And beware of cutting into the nerves and the vein, and put on something to hold the arrow in place without risk.
Or twist or tear, or firmly or gently; and hold the patient in the position in which he was when the arrow was shot inwards.</start_of_turn> for this is the greatest help that there is, and if you do not do so, if he moves according to what it shows him, you will know.</start_of_turn>
The arrow that comes from another place, or he opens nothing of it, or the skin is swollen in the place where it is seen or felt:
Tailes donc sur, tant que les tenailles puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut durer maintenant.
Therefore take hold of it immediately, as long as the nails can grasp it, and then extract it: if it leaps out now.</start_of_turn>
If it cannot be loosened, if you leave it embedded, and then resume the extraction until it comes out;
and if there is any remaining bone, if the bone has become loose at the root.</start_of_turn
And if he cries out, and you see him administer violently, if he administers with a biting instrument, if he bites with the point of the needle between the teeth of the instrument; and then you must force out,
and if the needle is bitten, then you must hold the instrument so that the point enters, in order to ease the extraction.
and if the wound is surrounded, you must believe that you have cauterized all the fat or the venom is there, if you please, Then treat the wound if it is appropriate.
Then if the wound has split or burst open on the belly or the side or the groin or the chest, and it is close, you must cover it over, if you cover it over.</start_of_turn>
and keep covering the wound and the nerves, and then extract it, and then sew up the wound, if necessary.</start_of_turn> and treat it until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
The shape of the tenailles used for extracting arrows is similar to the beak of an eel, and thus is this form.
And there are many kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow
the common teeth are blunt almost all of them have a root or a head of sixteen,
namely the two that are behind the ears, which are blunt-tipped. And the blood vessels which are in the temples appear. And the veins which are in the armpits, which are called "aspirations". And the vein that is under the forehead; and the vein that is at the back of the neck. And the armpits which are at the collarbone; And the veins which are on the lips from the mouth, these are the veins which are called "augeherich". And the veins which are under the tongue
The veins which are usually seen in each arm:
The one is the cephalic vein, which runs alongside the left rib, and is called the great vein. And the marrow is called "fat," and is composed of the cephalique and basilique. and they call it the marrow of the head "brain"; and the basilique is when the rib is either too high or too low, and they call it the marrow of the belly, and is above the navel, and is that which we see, which appears openly on the belly.
And the salvation is the vein that is between the auriculaire and the anulaire, and if there is only a little rain.
and in the limb or where the feet are, there are two veins: one if it is outside the cubitus of the left side coasting, and the second is below which is at the ankle of the right side coasting; and the vein which is called the “nesse,” which is in the ankle of the other side coasting.
and in the other limb are two veins besides those.
The blood of veins that are behind the ears helps to expel old blood and evacuate; and the quality of the blood, as I have said, is that you must raise the head of the patient.</start_of_turn>
and the quality of the blood, as I have said, is that you must raise the head of the patient.</start_of_turn> and wipe the limb or the veins are rough; then hold the patient’s head still with a pin, until the veins behind the ears open behind the ears depend on the head: Why do you linger here, when at your duty, or where you feel the pulse of your lord throbbing? If so, take hold of your spear.
Then take the lancet and pierce through the vein until you reach the bone, then hold your hand over the upper part of the vein.</start_of_turn> and hold the skin and the vein firmly in place. Two should suffice to traverse, and make blood flow until you see;
then strain and bind it, until it is healed.</start_of_turn
And I have already spoken of incision and cautery, or the first book.
The blood of the two temples, if it is like an ancient emigration, and swelling, and boils accustomed, and at the root of tears of water has eyes;
and the quality of the sick person is like that which I say: And it is that the patient strains his neck, so that the veins open wide; and feels the pulse throbbing down his throat, and then turns pale.</start_of_turn>
then take hold of the limb above the vein at your index finger, and insert the lancet downwards.</start_of_turn> and keep the vein elevated, and apply pressure, as you have done with other veins, and draw out blood according to your need.</start_of_turn
Then loosen the patient, and place your thumb on the vein for an hour, then put on cotton.
Then loosen the bandage, and leave it until it is healed; as we have already spoken of its application and its management and its extraction, or its beginning from the book.</start_of_turn>
The blood of the forearm is worth as much as the blood of the cephalic vein has old diseases of the face, and has migraine, and redness.</start_of_turn
and if the patient feels pain in his neck while rotating, while the vein opens; Then take the instrument which is called the "fosseur," which is like this:
Then take the instrument which is called the "fosseur," which is like this. Place the point on the vein, and press with your hand, or something else, and let blood spurt out as much as you see fit; Then deliver to the patient the collar, and ligate the vein until it is well sealed and never do anything with a large flame.
However, it is not permitted that the flames be too strong; and the same with the air, for the bone is near, and by chance the flames break the bones when they are subtle.
The blood of the armpits that are in the armpits helps with the swelling, and with the swelling of the spleen, and with the redness, and with the swelling of the armpits, and with diseases of the face.
and if the patient’s blood is of poor quality, that is if the patient twists the cord of any vessel, as before;
then, the physician must take hold of the limb, and make the burn of a long flame, for there is no fat.
And if the flame is slight, by chance if it breaks; then make blood flow, as much as you are able, and then tie up tightly, and bind well.
The blood of the vein does not boil if it is cold, and is soothed by thirst, and by diseases of the face. if it comes with migraine and redness that comes on the face, and even when it is old;
and if the patient has a stiff neck, then strain his hand to your left side, and take the fire slowly and long, and insert it between the two nostrils, For the vein does not open easily for me, and without beginning, I must now correct it.
I do not open the vein easily, and I must not linger any longer. Correct the blood immediately as you deem necessary, and then bind it for the night, for it is still too swollen to restore
The blood of the veins helps to loosen stiffness, and to commence the blending of medicines, and for moisture, and for diseases, and for corruptions, and for herpes, and for tumours;
And if the patient pulls out his collar bone with one hand and with the other, as we have said; and the master should be standing over the patient's head, and the patient should sit up on his seat.</start_of_turn>
then take the vein long and wide, and then draw blood temperately, or as much as is necessary;
then repeat the procedure on the other vein, and loosen the ligature, and gently restrain the veins, The patient must not strangle; and let him stay until morning, when the wound is healed.
When the blood of the veins has been let out. The blood of the veins of the arms above helps to cause bloating in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and wounds of the lips, and toothaches and fevers.
And you must make the patient sit before you, and strain his neck as I have said; Then turn the palm of your hand, and look at your two veins, one of which is on the right side of the hand and the other on the left. and you will know them by this, that they are black, and that around them there are small black veins. then take hold of both of them, and if you do not know them and are in doubt,
then take hold of both of them, and if you do not know them and are in doubt, if the larger one is at the armpit, and also do the two veins which are under and above, for this is a similar method.
From the blood of the veins, the tongue is nourished. The blood of the veins which are nourished from the tongue helps after the blood of the cephalic vein, and this is at the stretching of the throat, and with eye diseases, and with mouth diseases.
and the quality of the blood is that if the patient lies between your hands before the sun, and he holds the tongue, and looks from each cheek towards a black vein:
then both the one and the other are pale, and do not move too much, for these are the arteries.
The veins which are commonly known to cause pain are usually healed in two ways:
or by pricking with a blunt needle at all times, or with a fine lancet as with cuts in trenches, and is called "anesil". and are large and subtle according to the size and strength of the veins. The form of the blunt needle is well known, and is large as you see:
And it is necessary to open the large veins which are filled with thick blood and contain much blood and trouble. and this is the form of the olive flame:
and is more pointed, and is for healthier the small veins, or there is small yellow blood.
The blood of the basilisk, which is one of these veins, helps with the diseases that are swelling of the throat, and the swelling of the cheek, and of the belly;
And it is fitting for the patient to remain calm and quiet, and to restrain the artery which is below. And if he seizes the artery, and blood flows from it, if it is held firmly as I have said; and must not be tormented by the flame, but should be clipped as with an anesil.
And if the fleshy tumor does not appear obviously, if you must remove it, and bind another in its place; or you desire no rain from it, or you hold in its place the vein which fills the arm: it opens manifestly. and the burn of the flame is silent, as we have said before
and if you see that the blood vessel is known, if you must indeed remove the arm, that you touch the root as long as you know the pulse; then sign the limb, and then bind the arm, and burn the vein silently;
And beware that you do not pierce the artery when you see the limb inflamed, for it is the artery: stop immediately.
And if you see it swell up like the urine of a child, and it is neither red nor pale, quit until it is not an artery: stop immediately. hurry up and put your thumb on its length, then hold your thumb if it does not bleed, for many times it has happened;
keep your arm still, and leave it alone, and do not move the patient; and if there is doubt or fear, do not move until it is safe
And if it is not stained, and it is painful, and the medicine is not present, if the artery bursts open, because the head of the retractor is withdrawn; staunch it immediately.
And take a bundle of sponges, and press, and take one of the halves and bind it firmly to the other;
if it is not stained, that is good; but if not, if the physician, as we have said, prescribes powders which staunch blood
and the staunching is not complete in many cases by reason of the small size of the wound and the weakness of the limb.
The blood in the vein helps to cure the pain at the root of the head and the swelling below. because it is composed of the basilar and cephalic veins, as we have said before.
and it is useful for the health that it flows through the nerve that is below, and if it does not flow too deeply, and finds the nerve, and it swells and the patient either suffers or is cured; by chance it cannot be cured.
And this nerve often opens several times, and if it does not open in some home by its subtlety, it is certain that you must take care of its safety from the anesthetic instrument; and keep the nerve still at your will.
And if there is a bundle between the two nerves, if it is long enough.
The blood of the cephalic vein helps, that it attracts blood towards the head, and helps the eyes;
and it is more convenient to pierce with the olive or myrtle flame, because it is the safest of all veins, because it has neither nerves nor arteries.
Whatever be the case, it is better to ask for help at the beginning, and do not grieve if it does not work the first time, and we begin again. and sometimes the head of the limb swells up at home, so that it cannot be done the first time, but do not grieve. The quality of the blood is as you think
The first thing you must know about health is that blood must be kept only for the purpose of preserving health,
And thus avoid future ailments. And let the blood be drawn from one of the two veins which are or should be: namely, the cephalic, the facial, or the basilar; If one must draw blood in the commencement of prayer, and in fasting and after eating, when the sign of repletion appears;
If one must draw blood immediately or later, after one or two hours or two hours
The blood which is administered for diseases has no set dose, but whenever need be for fear or for nourishment, at all hours and in all conditions;
it is not permissible to give medicine to children under twelve and a half years of age, or to women who are pregnant for more than seven months.</start_of_turn> It is not permitted to give medicine to those who have passed sixty years.</start_of_turn>
and when anyone sees that he is sick, in whatever way, it is permitted that he can defend himself by emptying the intestines of a lesser hernia.</start_of_turn If there is a tooth of madness retained, so that the veins do not draw intestines with the surplus of blood that flows from the principal members;
if there is too much blood in the body, or if it is vomited, or if there is diarrhea, or if there is sweating;
and if one has suffered from colic passion, vomiting, and abdominal pain, and has had many women in childbirth, and has journeyed, and has fasted and abstained from food, and all his power, or from a wound or illness;
then subtilize the humors, if they are not great, by foods and by drinks and by medicines, if you can;
Then between or in water, if nothing hinders, to subtilize the blood,
and you will save from the vein just inside or outside, as we have said before.
and you will keep this work, and from pricking, and from luxury, and from similar things;
and so be bound and joyous, and let the blood be higher than it should be, and wipe away the tears once or twice.
Then it is strange that the limb hangs loose below the middle, for when it is too tight or loose, it cannot be corrected without;
and then the hand grasps the limb, as long as the veins swell and are felt.</start_of_turn>
then moisten the limb with a little oil, then put the thumb of your left hand on that vein below the limb a little or as much as you see is better.</start_of_turn> so that the vein does not swell and crack.</start_of_turn> For there are veins that flee like cords from the body of the patient, and if there are some that are full of windiness, if when one sets the flame on them, they recoil from the flame, and cannot be opened, and thus are these.
if the vein bursts, the wound is too wide, for in this case it is necessary that the surgeon be advised in these matters.
And if the vein bursts the first time, that is good; but if it bursts again, it must be stopped once and for all, or it will not be healed.
And if the limb is inflamed and the patient feels faint, let him rest for one or two days and do not bind his arm. Then indeed, after that will come abscesses; do not enter or bathe, then restart the bleeding if it stops;
And if the blood vessel is small, or if there is doubt that there will not be enough blood to justify the fire, if you fear that the limb itself will be scorched by the flame,
And the work itself is often violent, even when the limb is inflamed; for this often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the limb swollen, do not commence to bleed again; put on a bandage of oil, for it softens the flesh of blood, and is soothing in this limb the oil that is on it.
and give the oil bandage in the wound to stop the blood flow and keep the blood in its veins.</start_of_turn>
and thus makes a tingling and swelling of the flesh, when it is put on the limb; if it is left too long and escapes when it is too large.</start_of_turn>
and if there comes a large abscess, which happens many times, even when the vein is only slightly injured or the wound is small.</start_of_turn If you are in a hurry, put on the wet and soiled sponge immediately and hold a fist of charcoal; restrain for an hour.
And know that you must do this after the evacuation of blood from the vein, and if it remains in place after a few days, no black or green mark, if there is no other cause for it.</start_of_turn> And if you see, do not put anything of aloe or mastic root in juice of calamus, mustard, or anything similar.</start_of_turn>
And many times there is swelling and appearance at the blood of the basilisk: put your hand on it, and if you feel the limb soft under the compression of the hand, if that is the bad appearance. Leave it be that you put nothing more of this on me, for by chance in court without an artery; but make it do indeed. Emplace the dry earth firmly to harden the limb, then treat it with another treatment, until it is healed.
Treat each wound according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.</start_of_turn>
For if it is dark red, leave it as long as it is dark; and if you see it thick, leave it as long as it is thin; and if it is too pale, leave it cool.</start_of_turn
And it is fitting for the prudent and strong person, who has the skill of bloodletting, to make the wound larger and the flames greater;
And for the weak person, do the opposite; keep the wound small and the flames small, and do it cautiously, do not prick it.</start_of_turn>
And this method of bleeding saves life from excessive bleeding and damage to nerves, and is better than to bleed too much.</start_of_turn>
And for the one who has a cold, it is fitting to give soft bread soaked in pomegranate juice; if he is faint, give him two or three mouthfuls of blood.</start_of_turn
And if it is of cold complexion, if he drinks before the blood thick broth of soft bread in honeyed syrup, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and a fragrant syrup.
And if he drinks at the blood, after the issue of blood vessels, it is recommended that he drink broth of barley and fragrant syrup.
and use other things that we have said in the division or chapter of fainting, for the evacuation of the vein.
And if he sees his arm swollen, and is made well another time, if it is soaked by great blood, it is recommended that he rise up and rise up again, according to the quantity of his continuous virtue.
And whoever has seen his arm swollen after the first bleeding, and he has strong pain, if he be well, within fifteen hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
And whoever has seen himself recover in another place, if he must recover on the second day or the third
For there is much blood in the body that has already been excreted, and brings fever; if you can remove a great quantity, and widen the opening so that it bleeds into pieces. then that you restore all the conditions of the bleeding, and put your hand on your pulse when it is well, that there is no more bleeding in place of the blood, And this often happens when the patient is negligent;
And you must not trust them when you see them loosen their arm, and do not permit them to do it a second time, for the wound is closed, that you must press firmly upon it.</start_of_turn> if it is crooked, extend the arm fully, for this would be bad.</start_of_turn
but leave it until the second time; or you touch the tip of the flame, until the blood that is frozen at the wound has escaped.</start_of_turn> And put upon one hand a little piece of silk and press gently.
And if the vein has fled, if you leave it and do not restrain it, as long as the incision is calm.
And if necessary is to drain blood a second time, if the same vein is still bleeding, or in another vessel, or in the other arm.
The vein which is in the arm is blue instead of red because it is composed of blood.
And if the patient has his hand in hot water, until the blood vessel is red;
then grasp it moderately, so that the vein opens well, and do not leave it too wide or too long;
and if it cannot be passed, leave the hand in hot water, and let the blood flow in the water until enough has bled out;
and if it is in this state, do not put the hand back in the hot water, for more is put into the water than in this state.
And the blood of this vein is more precious than all the arteries and nerves.
The blood of the main vein is worth more than all diseases of the liver, and this is the way:
strain the hand, and immerse it in hot water, until the vein escapes, if we see it; and if its blood escapes through the whole, and if you press it in every way, if nothing is damaged;
And do not be too hasty, for the nerves are delicate and exposed without covering.
Then reattach the limb gently, if it is not frozen in the wound, and do not move it.</start_of_turn>
And when you have treated the blood as well as you can, if you put oil and lint on the wound, it will help to heal quickly, and make a soft dressing.</start_of_turn
The blood from the left hand is useful for the disease of the mouse, and do the same as I have said concerning the right side.</start_of_turn
The blood of the Sophene is worth for all the diseases that are in the bosom. if like maladies of the marrow, and retention of blood, and disease of the veins, and of the spleen and legs old, and similar diseases.
And the quality of its blood is that if the patient has suffered with acute pain in the abdomen, and has froted on the belly until it blanches, and the belly is swollen, and there comes out from under the joint pain; and the belly is at the ankle, and from under the pain there comes out drops of urine.
Healthy is the shoulder or more large rain, or at the ankle, that muscle values.
And if you keep it healthy on the bone, if you keep it warm from the cold that comes from outside, and the health of the passage is as if you were cutting; and be careful not to burn it.</start_of_turn>
And if it cannot be put back, if you reset the bone in the water, and let the vein drain well.</start_of_turn>
And if you must do it a second time, because the first time did not succeed, because it is salty; Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and do the same with the other side equally.
The pulse of the sciatic vein is at the ankle of the foot, and its color is like the color of blood when it is hot.
Its color is such that when the patient walks or bathes, it is strained under the ankle for three fingers of the hand
otherwise it does not open; and if it opens, in all the ways that you can imagine, and through the heel, And it is better to leave it alone, for its root is deep and it is easily returned by hand.
And it is better to leave it alone, for its root is deep and it is easily returned by hand. And if you do not find it, if you see neither hair nor skin broken, towards the little toe, and you guard against nerves;
And do as much for the blood as you see, and then loosen the ligature, and put on cotton and pressure; it is now healed.
Vacuum therapy
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.
Balloons are made of horns, or silk, or wool; and the dressing should be performed in two ways: either by cutting and drawing out blood, or by cutting alone.
And thus with others in the armpits of both arms; and the wind of the spleen descends upon the stomach. And the wind of the spleen descends upon the flanks; and the wind above the navel. And the winds fill both arms; and the winds of both legs. and the wind of the calves; and the circulation does not care about blood, except for small veins that are scattered in the flesh,
And therefore let no one fear it, as when we take blood from a vein. And therefore let no one fear it, as when we take blood from a vein.
And if by necessity of disease it is necessary to administer it, or for custom, if the medicine is administered at the beginning of the month or at the end, and in every tension;
for there are some who, when they must administer it, suffer from a heavy head;
And if such people experience swelling and redness on their face, head, and neck, and their eyes are bloodshot;
and those who have a swelling of blood in their mouth, and have lost their tongue, and vomit blood. and if someone is conscious, and sees blood and foam and mucus and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and even when the patient has swallowed for two hours, we command them to vomit.
The blood from the wound helps to soothe the pain of the chief … that comes from these eyes, and it can only be done after the evacuation of all the hair;
and this evacuation of blood is better than the blood of the head.
and it can only be done by one who has a cold complexion or who has catarrh, for this makes them suffer greatly;
and for this reason it can only be done when used by those who have a cold head or who have a cold illness.
And he who remains silent after that, if he becomes suspicious, must therefore put the suction tube one place further down due to the doubt of suspicion.
The suction tube at the nape of the neck is in lieu of the blood of the head and the bile, and for this reason it is worth at the utmost extent.</start_of_turn> and there is a fissure of the channel of the beard, and throughout, and distension;
and one must push it back, for if it is held too firmly, it causes suspicion or pain of the belly or the side.</start_of_turn>
The windsings cause as much pain in the chest as in the head, and pain in the belly, and vomiting, and strangulation, and pain in the root of the teeth.
It is in lieu of the blood of the basilisk; and it is commanded that the patient should express his hand to put it [i.e. the hand over the affected area], that he does not cut the artery, and does not cause blood to flow excessively.</start_of_turn>
The windsings cause such diseases of the mouth as disease of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in lieu of the remedies of the two upper teeth.</start_of_turn>
The winds of the spleen are harmful to health, as they arise from heat and swelling.
The winds of the spleen are as harmful as two veins of the arms, because they draw blood from these large veins;
and commands the patient that he should not fear too much pain, for it is a sign of heat, and knows that nerves and arteries are not injured.
The wound on the buttocks is very painful, causing swelling of the underlying tissues and various diseases. It is therefore necessary that the dressing be large and of fine mesh, that it should adhere well; and by chance, if it should be too tight, it may burst, causing great damage.
The dressings on the legs swell widely, for they draw blood from all over the body, causing old wounds of the groin, of the kidneys, and the bladder, and bring swelling of the flowers; and are in the place of the groin bones, and the calves, and all of them cause the body to swell after a long time, and bring vomiting in various positions.
The way to apply the dressing is that you must first empty it thoroughly, and then apply it steadily, and hold it firmly in place, and move it equally, and do not cease doing so until you see the flesh red and swollen, and open up the blood; then rest, and put the dressing back on, and take care of the body, for there are some who have had their share of suffering, and who have open pores: if you must cut once only, and you must make large wounds, and a deep wound; and do so gently
And if it is not large, it is sufficient to wound it three times: the first time to open the way for the large blood vessel.
And if it is not very thick, it is sufficient to wound it three times: the first time to open the way for the large blood vessel. And when we want to drain blood somewhat and somewhat, we suffice with one wound only.</start_of_turn>
And if our veins burst with blood, if we repeat this often; and if the wound is large, if the patient is pierced through and through, then it is finished if the wound is perceived immediately.</start_of_turn>
and it is suitable for those who have thick and tough skin and who have large pores, that you wipe away the swellings of oily aperitif and dissolvent: If it is in this state, with violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil;
If it is in this state, with ivy oil, or rosemary oil, or chamomile, or something similar.
And if the swelling is large and cold, if you take marigold oil, or balsam oil, or angelica oil, and the like.
And if there is a wound with sharp edges and large pores, it is not advisable to apply oil,
But it is to be bathed afterwards with vinegar of roses, or cold vinegar, or vinegar of pomegranate, or vinegar of cucumber, or vinegar of porcelain, or anything similar.
And he who has moisture in his mouth, if he rises easily, or with rose water, or elderberry, and sumac, or similar things.
And he who has thick drool raises it from old wine, or from strong ale, or from chamomile decoction or camomile, or other things like that.
and does not take care to be cured of the wind before or during the bath, but rather after the bath an hour or two; and does not sleep after the ventosation.
And it is fitting that he rests when he must vent and when he is vented. When he is rested who is sick is calmed, and if he is not too strong and inflamed; he can then take cold things, such as grapes and fennel and lettuce at ease, and similar things;
he should eat barley broth, and soft meats.
And he who has a cold complexion, if he takes syrup of honey, and wine fragrant mean, which is between old and new, and broth of herbs, and broth of physicians and petty birds and worms;
and he must drink more than eat when he feels a draft;
and must give to others no food for a while neither garlic nor mustard before or after, for to comfort the main parts; and be discreet about it, but do not abstain from it except for those who are hot;
The wounds which are inflicted by the pointed instruments are those which are made on the liver, and on the spleen, and under the heel, and on the belly and the buttocks and the thighs and the elbow, for in no other member do wounds suffer from these instruments.
and are only made to draw blood from one limb to another. if as put them on the muscles when they do not wish to bleed; to overcome the viscosity which is in the limb, as when we put wounds on the belly and the buttocks to strengthen the limb.
and relieve the pain, when there is an abscess or a fracture, if it is by its attractive virtue that it attracts the abscess, or displaces the fracture from its place;
And thus he must be held up when placed on the liver and on the side when there is retained air.
And these blisters are administered empty so that they may be sucked out so soon; and never are they administered together with fire, and never full of cold water
if there is swelling from pleurisy, and in such a manner we fill the blister with hot water, or with wine or herbs that are coveyed with this.
The form of the blister administered with fire is like this:
And he has twice the palm of his hand and a half of barley, or about the cost of a thousand small beads, as much as to push out an arrow.
Or if it is from the marrow, sweat before him if he does not bleed the patient on placing it on the limb;
and he has in the middle a stick of bone or iron, to put on a bandage of lead,
and should be large and small according to the diseases and the degree of these things that take them;
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
For the bubbles of the stomach are other than intestines, and fats are not like grease.
... grasp the collar of the gown or linen, and place it between the edge of the bubble and the skin of the limb. If the burn is at the root of the bandage, let it not burn the patient.
Then place it on the limb, and keep it either above or below the hole we mentioned. If we see that it is about to burst, and the vapor is rising, grasp the bandage with the tweezers.</start_of_turn>
And mark the surrounding area as before, and repeat the process often if necessary.</start_of_turn>
In the ventouse which is administered in the case of pleural disease, at all times, there is no thread or hole, and it is only administered when it is filled with water, and is placed on the limb only for a moment.</start_of_turn
And thus is the form:
Except in limbs or where we cannot apply a bandage due to their small size, such as the lips and gums, and similar things. And in the naked parts of the body, such as the groin or the nipples, and others of a similar nature;
and the quality of the patient if, when you discover wounds that are fresh and clean without any wound-covering, take them;
And put one nut of soft water on them, until they are familiar, and do not have anything in their stomachs. And then, either cauterize the vein and the abscess, then rub the limb until it is red, and put on the compresses.</start_of_turn>
When they are full and ache, and if it is possible to put on a vacuum, put it on, for this is better afterwards.</start_of_turn>
If this is not the case, if you lift the limb easily, and then with water, moist well, and then squeeze it;
And if the limb is too long after the swelling subsides, if moist, like a drape of flax in cold water, place over it until the limb is stretched out.
And if the limb is swollen, if put on broken glass, or splints, and similar things, until it is stretched out.
or you take out half of the marrow bones, and leave them until they burn out, if you stop it now.
and if you have more marrow, take out other bones.
If the swelling does not subside, if you rub the limb with fresh blood, or if you insert a needle into it until the swelling is gone, then hold them up, and as soon as they feel some blood, if they bleed,
and when you see that they bleed, if you see blood oozing from the wound, cover with a little piece of aloes and hemp or charcoal, for it will stop now.
This is the end of the text.
This chapter is frequently necessary in the art of medicine, and is restoration of fracture and displacement.
Listen carefully, my son, for this chapter concerns a matter that is not found in any of the old books or in any letter
and for this reason is strange in our land, for I have never found anything like it before
I know of nothing like it, except for the learning from the old books, or I have studied it so much that I have become accustomed to its methods through experience and observation of my life;
And thus I have described in this chapter what is contained within, and I have abridged it at the end, and I have made clear the forms of the instruments which are mentioned, as I have done in the preceding chapters.
It is therefore necessary that we say or prologue to this book should be the sum of words and the chapters or the learned men put their understanding into them, and remain steadfast on the truth, so that those who are proved to know and learn this noble art, and learn from others.
I say that when a break or dislocation or torsion or swelling comes to any, if it is known that the patient must be healed on one side and on the other, without anything hindering, such as weakness of the limb, or youth, or old age;
If the head of the shoulder is not too taut or too loose; and eat cold broth, that is to say cold juices, fat of eel and almond, and drink no wine, eat no oily foods, and do not eat too much meat which fills the veins of blood; until you have certainty of postoperative stability, not of expansion of the limb.
When the bones break start to restore, if you think that one must nourish the patient with foods that make great nourishment, or if there is viscosity, as with flour mixed in water, and peas, and testicles, and spleen, and spleenic pain, and fish, and great wine, and similar things. For a part of nourishment, rest and more the fracture will mend.
And know that bones that are fractured in marrow and decrepit do not mend well neither join according to their nature because of the drying out of the limbs, nor those that are too tender, like bones of young children.
but there is no cure, leave the fractured bone [in place], that is to say, firm grasp which has appeared and joins the limb whole, until it strengthens as before; and do not move it in any way, for this is what is recommended for large wounds.</start_of_turn>
And know that fractures are of various kinds in many ways.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow. For there are fractures that go to the marrow, and others by bending, as with the size of a pen to write.
For there are fractures that go to the marrow, and others by bending, as with the size of a pen to write. And if there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture with a small fissure.
And at the shoulder blade there is its engine, and its own instrument in its restoration, as it comes to mind to him in its place.
and it is known that the fracture of the bone is known by that which twists the limb, and opens well by driving, and some by pressure of the hand.
and when there is no swelling nor pain, the patient does not feel great pain, if there is no break;
for it is good to keep the limb immobile while it is soft and warm, and to apply a bandage of liniment that is beneficial; If it is impossible for me to move the limb, but you bring medicines that come after, then restrain it now cautiously.
If the fracture that is going downwards breaks the vessels that are in the joint, and if the two parts of the joint are unequal, then you must put them back in place evenly, so that the abscesses that remain will live peacefully;
and if there is an abscess remaining, if you leave it without attention, while the abscess is still painful; then put it back gently and steadily, and if there is any fracture that remains, that is more painful than if you left it whole; then restrain it cautiously as before.
And if there are broken bones in the limb, if they extend over three parts, whether of hand or foot, or at the wrist or elbow if it is a small limb, or over two strings or a string and a limb;
and set the limb in its natural position, so that when the broken parts of the limb are separated, if you rejoin them by all means, keep that in your work there should be no further damage or pain to the patient.
and adjust the joints of the bones according to the best forms.
And he feels well in the hand if it seems to him that it is not well: if the swelling is good and does not constrain him too much, do not press so much as they do who make it come by their work an abscess and contraction of the limb, as we have often seen.
When the limb is stiff, if the patient is very painful that he does not move it, neither watching nor sleeping, neither turning nor otherwise; and take care that the limb is so secure that he does not feel any pain. For when he feels no pain, if it is not at a point, and you command him to put himself in a state of composure that he feels no pain.
For when he feels no pain, if it is not at a point, and you command him to put himself in a state of composure that he feels no pain. and make sure that he remains upright, for pain does not arise until he is restored.</start_of_turn>
and the quality of the limb is as I have told you.</start_of_turn>
The limbs are of various sizes in their breadth and length and shape.</start_of_turn
For there are small members, such as arms and legs and the like: if you cover them with soft linen cloths, it will suffice.
And for those that are large, such as hips and thighs: if you cover them with a wide and hard cloth, for the large cloths embrace the whole great limb, and constrain it everywhere equally, so that there is no tension;
then you must support the lower limbs, i.e. two or three as the limb requires, and constrain your hand one inch from the break, then go below the break and constrain less, than the break will then move forward;
and soften the limb somewhat and somewhat, until you take a great part of the limb sound, then take another limb, and turn the bandage back over the broken limb;
Then reapply at the lower part of the fracture, and strain moderately, not too strong nor too weak, as we said at the beginning of this chapter.
Then put between the broken bones some strips of linen or cloth, so that they are all even, and then bind all around with thread, and then put your pins well made above, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or an abscess, put above something soothing the abscess, which will harden the swelling, and leave it for several days.
Then strain above your pins, and let them be half the width of a broad needle resting firmly, or of wire of which we make nails, or of barley groats, and let them be like this figure:
But it is necessary that when one sets the fracture, the tube which is placed over the break should be larger and wider than the others.
and should be as long as it is appropriate for the small or large limb.</start_of_turn>
then is strained on the bones just as you did at the beginning, and then bind under a thread immediately, as in the first instance on the break;
more is tight and less is better; and it is necessary that the thread should be medium, neither too thick nor too thin, and should be of linen wool.</start_of_turn>
For if the threads are thick, as I would have wished of the fools who make their knots with hemp cord, it is a great error, for the knot will not be even if it is too fine, and it will not hold but with a space between the nails.
If the patient is bruised by the nails after the stripping in the flesh, if you put on stockings of linen or coarse cloth, so that it does not bleed.
When there is a wound with a broken bone, and the marrow is broken, I will speak of the cure later on
And soaks that he cannot otherwise restrain must be stripped from these bones to break them at first hand. For when the limb is large, he cannot put these bones in except after five or seven days, or more as you deem necessary for the emergence of the wound;
And thus when the old wounds have healed, to restore the fracture, dislocation, and torsion: take flour that is held as by the walls of a mill, and mix it with eggs, and make this confection, not too fine nor too coarse, and use it.  This is the common method for restoring a fracture in various situations, and the same for women and young children, for there is neither too much pressure nor too much cold.
Another method of dressing that restores the fracture and dislocation and torsion: take three barley grains, linseed, alum, saffron, and Arabic gum, and mix them with vinegar; mix mirra and aloes, with vinegar; mix alechil with vinegar; and grind them up, and mix them with eggs; if the patient’s complexion is hot, use this dressing, for it is made of good materials and will restore the fractured bones quickly, and is worth more than many homes.
Other means of displacement worth considering: take mugwort and viscum, each in quantity of .x. of a barleycorn; mirra and aloes, each in quantity of .viiij. of a barleycorn; acacia in quantity of vi. of a barleycorn; and arnica in quantity of .x. of a barleycorn; mix well, and confirm with water or the juice of an egg, and administer.
Other means of displacement for joints and bones loosened from their place: soothe pain that comes out, and reduce swelling using oil; take new linen cloth, soak it in oil and put it on the affected area. These poultices do not restore health, but they are good for soothing post-cautery pain and reducing swelling.</start_of_turn>
Another means of displacement that restores fractured bones: take dried fig leaves and terrestrial poppy leaves, grind them together, and make a poultice.</start_of_turn>
Other methods for restoring the fracture of the bone are to remove any remaining abscess. Take root of chamomile, camomile flowers, violets flowers, wheat flour, and from cheese a part; and grind, and mix with wine, and if the limb is swollen, mix with vinegar of coriander moist or plain vinegar, and use.
Other methods for restoring the fracture are more forceful than the first. When a hard abscess comes with the restoration of the limb. Take root of vismalve, flaxseed, barley, melilot, and angelica, violets flowers and chamomile flowers, all an equal part; and grind, and mix with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb and its rest.
In his book, Hippocrates does not put anything on the broken limb to restore its force except some wax and oil, and nothing else, and he says that it should be between soft and hard
And it seems Galen deems that one must put something warm upon the broken limb to restore it, such as wax and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another way of dressing that is worth for pain and swelling: take mugwort and chopped onions, or poème oil, and gum arabic, and mix them evenly, and grind them, and make a dressing of it and bind it.</start_of_turn>
And then loosen a little afterwards, and take care that the patient feels no pain, that the bone is not displaced; if not, loosen it by hand every day.</start_of_turn
And if pain comes to the limb, or swelling, sense rest or inflammation, if you hurry, and loosen it, and place the limb in its proper position now; and take light clothing, and a sponge of moist sea-foam, and plunge into water, and lift up the limb, until the swelling ceases, and the pain is calmed. Then let the limb rest for an hour, then put on dry linen, soaked in water or rose oil, and bind on a bandage, until you are certain of the healing of the wound
And rest the inflamed limb, and if there is pain, then renew the bandage tightly, and a little displacement, and do not bind too tightly; and be discreet until it is healed.
And if you see swelling, redness, pain and swelling around the bone, and that it is renewed, as you did the first time, you must provide support and lian, if necessary.
And if it does not happen to the limb anything of what we have said, if it does not come loose for two or three or five or seven days; and in no case leave it for twenty days, according to what we have seen, until the fracture has healed, and approach the dressing of the limb above.
Therefore greater restraint than before is needed, and nourish the limb; as I said before; and if you see the limb dry more than usual, its juices do not flow; they cannot come out. The hair grows long and even; whenever you prick them at their root, keep your eyes still until they grow.
When the limb has been cut off by moisture, and is reset but will not stay in place, this is wrong, and if there is any doubt or fear, I see nothing else but to leave it alone and open it thoroughly.</start_of_turn>
various methods of fracture There are many ways to break bones, and various figures, and the causes are diverse;
For there are fractures which are made by percussion of a spear, and the bone is cracked throughout its length as far as the sypha, which is the socket of the bone, as if made by a chisel or fist; and for this reason this kind of fracture is called a «haichure».
For when the spear pierces the bone from beneath in a forward direction, and is called this kind of fracture «absolue»; and the wound of these fractures is great or small.
And if there is an embedded percussion, or fracture or displacement of the bone, or swelling on the bone, or other similar things.
And if there is a fracture of bone that approaches the skin, which is under the skin or on the skin, this wound is great or small.
And if a wound is closed by the bone as closely as a nail, and the break is small, it is called a "capillary" fracture.
And if a wound is made by a nail, or by a thorn, or by something similar, and if it causes the bone to split inwards, and if the bone is flexible as when heated over a cauldron; if between the fragments there is a piece of bone.
This is more serious in those who have soft bones, as in children;
And thus, in all these ways, small pieces are torn away if like these; and I shall speak of it in detail.
And thus, we know of all these breaks by the tearing above them, the questioning of tensions, and the corrupt matter which is above.
The capillary appearance is known by that which when we have discovered the bone, and we wipe on it above, if the black break is opened
In the treatment of the break, take care of the patient’s pain, and if you see no bad accident, as vomiting of bile, emission of understanding, extension, and swelling, and fever, and the eyes grow pale and flushed, and other similar things in various positions, if not cured without doubt.
And if you do not see an imminent accident, and you hope for health, if so, begin the treatment.
When the limb comes first to you, and it is in the armpit, if so, it is right to remove the bone from its fourteenth part from the muscle that you must touch.</start_of_turn>
And if it is in this state, if you are hasty to remove the bone from its seventh part from the bone that you must touch, then the tissue of the bone will be corrupted, and there will come the accident that we have mentioned.</start_of_turn>
And if the bone breaks down to the tissue that covers the brain, if so, you must make an opening in the fractured part: and take hold of the patient’s limb that is causing the pain, and uncover the bone in every way that you can, and over the wound more strongly than you can.</start_of_turn
And if the blood flows from a vein or an abscess, hold firm what helps you, and fill the cavity with cloths soaked in rose oil. And rest the wound until the abscess has subsided, and be sure to drain the blood; then when the bone is exposed, do it in two ways: the one if the tail of the fracture is narrow at the front, and this is the form:
And then there is another fracture which is greater than the first.
And so, if you have various sized nails, some thin and some thick, and they are pointed or iron-tipped, and in lighter work, that you do not bleed the head.
And if the bone is strong and tough, if you must pierce through, even though you administer nails with washers, do not pierce through anything other than the outer surface of the bone; and must have under the point a margin or circle, that does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone; and you must have several of these, so that if the nails are withdrawn from the depth of the bone, if you have washers for all tests, this is the form of two nails.
The quality for piercing through a brittle bone is that you put one washer on the bone, and turn your thumbs until you feel that the bone is pierced; then put the washer back in another place a little later, and do everything around, and close the incisors of the space between the holes, and do this more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you have reached the bone in your hand, or to any of the instruments that you have like pliers, pincers; and keep that you do not touch the brain or the jaw.
And when you have grasped the bone firmly, and treated, if it is possible, reset the protruding fragment that is dislodged from the bone to all other instruments resembling an incisor, but it must be more firm and subtle than the others.
If it remains embedded in no small fragments of bone, neither nails nor needles, if the bones are slightly fractured, then cure the wound with stitches and ointment as we have mentioned.</start_of_turn>
And the other method of treatment is that of the Galenicians, which is more moist; and the load is very great, and that is his word.</start_of_turn> It is necessary first that you uncover a portion of the bone, whether it be a break or a fracture, so that when you have uncovered that part, you shall put in place again the head of this incisor lens, for this is its form:
And do not cut through one side, for the part that is hollow in two corners, if the cutting is towards the bone; then place a little mallet above, so that you press lightly the bone all around, and take care of the cloth that is below.
if it is near the bone, if the bone is lightly moved, because we must move the bone properly, with sense and without fear.
And if the bone breaks through the skin does not pierce completely, and is only cut slightly from beneath, and there are small pieces, if you can restore the smoothness, and remove the splinters with a blunt scraper of various sizes, so as to bring about the most convenient healing, according to the work and the figure of the break.
If there is much scraping beforehand, and afterwards more subtly, and does not cease doing so until it is well done
In the other sizes of capillary tubes and cuts, it is convenient to cause the lesion according to its location; and this is something that is not easily learned by anyone who has not studied this art
And if the swelling is discovered, it is recommended that you take one drape of lint, according to the size of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and put it on the wound. Then take another drape of doubled lint in two or three layers, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and put it on the first drape; make it lighter than you think, so as not to press on the swelling, and administer further oil, and do not bind it more tightly than is necessary to hold the wound in place only.</start_of_turn>
and leave it so for a while or two, until the swelling subsides, then remove it, and administer medicines such as herbs, flour, incense powder, charcoal, and similar things; from these things make a powder and put it on the wound, and administer appropriate medicines without biting.</start_of_turn
And keep that the wound be perfectly closed, that you do not leave it open, neither do you leave it partly closed; for when it is closed over the wound hair grows thick and coarse; and it causes great harm to the patient. For when one puts upon the wound something biting, if it is not held down by something from below.
Take heed therefore, if no other misfortune befalls the patient, as we have said, if there be any doubt or suspicion.
And if nothing else comes forth but by the medicine which we have put upon it, that some good may result from it, then you must take a part of honey, two parts of rose oil and one part of gum, and put it upon the wound. Then the treatment consists of various cures that must be used as long as the patient is well.
Then the treatment consists of various cures that must be used as long as the patient is well.
And if one of the two parts is fractured, if you should bite your little finger or pierce the part of the body, and put this fracture back into its natural position at the index finger and the wrist, until it returns to its natural position. and do this gently, and beware that the patient does not feel pain during this process.
And if the break is in the upper part of the limb, and cannot come from below, you must believe that you must place it even with the top of a large staff.
And if the break is three parts, if you do it again, and hurry to restore the limb first if you wish;
otherwise after the seventh or tenth day, when the wound has calmed down, you must bind up the top of the limb where the break is with strips of linen if the break is in the limb itself.
Or you must break the limb in another place if the break is there; and let the dressing be so thick that it fills the hole in the limb.
And they say no restorer must moisten the tents in the burn, and die each one for himself. It does not seem to me that this is good, but it is necessary that they be moistened in the preparation of an egg yolk and powdered wheat; then leave the tent until the bone is firm and the cartilages hardened.
And never should one put goose feathers in place of tents, and if there is too much snow drape over it, and hold the brim, and blow the patient among them; or do as you please.</start_of_turn>
And if it happens that pus comes with snow while you are working, if you put some butter or cotton soaked in rose oil, or some vinegar.
And if after incision the wound does not bleed, if you put on a dressing of beaten hempseed, powdered incense, and honey, confirmed with the yolk of an egg, then put on a light bandage, and do not tie too tightly.
If the fracture is slight and is broken into small pieces, if you have available appropriate instruments, then extract the fragments, close the wound, and cure with dressings and ointments that are appropriate for this;
And if there is no sensation of pain in the wound, if you cure with stitches, and put on lead weights, as long as it is necessary.
Of the root of the mandible
When the mandible is fractured without any wound, and there is no break of the bone, except for the teeth which are loosened, if you know it lightly.
It is advisable, if the fracture is in the lower part, to bite your right index finger in the mouth of the patient; and if the fracture is in the left mandible, if you have your right index finger of the right hand, and hold the fracture lightly, and hold the other side by force, and make it even.
And if the fracture of the mandible is displaced in.ij., if you must, that you administer extension of.ij. parts, as long as they are equal.
If movement of the teeth comes about, or a fracture, if strained by a thread of gold or silver or silk, then place a broken mandible cerate on and place over it a pair of doubled drapes; and over the drapes place a large well-made sponge, or a piece of leather equal in length and width to the mandible, and bind it to the tooth that you wish, and command the patient to rest, and feed on soft food.
If you see that the figure is deformed, if it is dislocated at the root, and then reset it in its place; place plaster on, fine powder with a lot of eggshell or oatmeal, after you have oiled the cerate; and place over the plaster linen bandages, and if the plaster is loose, and the patient’s condition does not improve, leave it as it is until it is healed; often it is healed in two weeks.
And if postoperative swelling comes, if we have said it often before.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, repair so that no piece of the bone is left bone-like; if subtle of the bone has instruments covering it to this.
And if the wound is wide, if the flame has flared up as you desire.</start_of_turn>
And when you have solidified all these fragments, and there is no more movement, if the wound is wide, put on some covering instruments to prevent pain, as long as it is necessary.</start_of_turn>
because of force.</start_of_turn> The forceful rupture has occurred several times previously in this area, near the shoulder, and if it is broken in two places, there are pieces, and it is more light to restore; or if there is a break with a wound.
And if the break is when there is a wound, you must have two assistants, so that one holds the limb that feels the forceful rupture; and the other extends the neck towards the part; then put the break back in its place so that the form is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor swelling.</start_of_turn>
And if you have to extend further, put under the patient’s shoulder a round ball of wax, or linen, as thick as you need; and extend and hold the forceful rupture, and strain the ball with your hand, so that you can put the break back in its place as it should be.</start_of_turn>
If you are unable to support the arm's weight, because it hangs down, know that the patient lies supine on his belly, and put a cushion under the elbow, that is, the middle of the forearm, and hold the minister of the elbow forward, until the bone of the arm is raised.
Then address the fracture to your side, and if you find debris there, know that you must make an incision there; and remove the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot be reunited by any support, if the head rests on one of the incisors that you have; but that you place a cushion under the arm itself, in order to protect the face.
and seems like a scoop, and is not very deep, and be as wide as it seems necessary, according to the size of the bone and the position of the work; and has two holes, as you see, and one is large, and the other is small, as is the rule for the wound that you made when you treated the bone.
When you are certain of the depth of the wound, if the wound is small, or if you doubt the depth, if you use a dressing and bandage, according to its quantity.
If the wound runs deep, if there is much blood, apply oil of roses, aloe, and wine, and put on top.</start_of_turn>
The stiffness of the bone, when there are wounds and swelling, is that you put on the bone the plaster of the meal powder and egg white, and put on supports below, and put a sponge above if necessary.</start_of_turn Then take a very great bandage of a palm of a broad kind, then put on a doubled drape over the wound, and support it; then take a needle of the finest kind of two hairs of a broad and long kind, and encircle around that bandage, so that the head of the bandage rests pendant. Then put the needle on the fracture, and twist the bandage over the collarbone, and compress the inner side of the wound, and compress the outer side; and keep the shoulder joint still, and as soon as you see that the ligature holds the fracture steadily, and you clearly see that the needle does not move from the broken bone, if you withdraw it slowly, and if you keep it in place;
and make the patient lie on his back, and put under his arm about one small pillow to support the wound; if you align the fracture by aligning the scapula, or you bind the arm to the collarbone, and do not loosen it until it is well healed, for about twenty days.
Then resume the manipulation, if you see that it is necessary, and hold and support it firmly until it is restored; and it is usually restored in about twenty-six days, and less in most homes.
Then resume the manipulation, if you see that it is necessary, and hold and support it firmly until it is restored; and it is usually restored in about twenty-six days, and less in most homes.
When the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture or has become loose in its place, it should not be forced out by any means other than touch; if the limb is repositioned according to the shape of the dislocation, and it is immobilized in its natural position in all its movements; then put on coarse powder of wheat with abundant eggshells, and put on light covers, and put on a broad and firm support, a little wider than the shoulder, and as the support is loosened, if necessary, use the support of hemp ropes, so that the support lies evenly; and then stretch the limb with a firm bend, so that the support does not move from its place, and look at the limb regularly; and every time that it relaxes, if you stretch it, and put the support back in its place if it has been forced from its place, and put the patient down on his side; and the shoulder is restored in about twenty or twenty-five days.  And when this number of days has elapsed, if the dislocation has cleared, and the limb has been plastered, for it is not the bone that is easily fractured.
And if a piece of the bone thrust forward, and not a little like before, if it stays there, and the bone, do as we said at the fracture of the forceps to appease the afterburn.
And if a piece of the bone thrust forward, and not a little like before, if it stays there, and the bone, do as we said at the fracture of the forceps to appease the afterburn.
And if a piece of the bone thrust forward, and not a little like before, if it stays there, and the bone, do as we said at the fracture of the forceps to appease the afterburn.
And if a piece of the bone thrust forward, and not a little like before, if it stays there, and the bone, do as we said at the fracture of the forceps to appease the afterburn. And the restoration is that the patient lies again on his back, and puts in between the scapulae, then presses the scapulae, and reassembles the two ribs at the hands, and discreetly put all in equal manner that the figure of the bone is as it should; then put on bandages and bandage below the staple of salt, or other soft matter, and cover with a bandage, and bind above the fractured bone, so that it does not move; and turn the patient around the back, and restrain him gently, and reward somewhat every hour that the limb is loose, and if it relaxes, restrain it; and if you see that it is loosening, due to corrosion or by inflammation that comes to the limb, or pain or swelling, do not hesitate, and loosen it, and scrape away the dressing, and address what has come from the manner of treatment; then remend the dressing, and restrain it until it is healed.
Of the fracture of the ribs
The ribs that break from the breast only come from the back, at the shoulder and do not bend except because they are slimy; and the pain is well known at the inquiry of two.
And the restoration is that if you put the fracture back in place, if it is right. And then put the dressing in place and bind it with a bandage, if you have need of it.
And if the fracture of the ribs is downward, if it causes great pain, and swelling, as if of pleura, for the bone is pressing on the gut; and there is vomiting, and all together there is great loss of blood, and that is a great grief, and many have died from it.
And if any of those who say it must administer food that swells the belly, to push out the pain at its departure.
We do not do this, for after these chills have passed, life does not come again if it has not already begun.</start_of_turn> If it has already begun, then well.</start_of_turn
And they say that no one has ever put a bandage on the body to stop the fever, for it is like reason; however, there is doubt that the bandage will not draw out the superfluous humours from the body by the disposition of weakness.
And they say that on must not cover the wound with coarse linen soaked in oil, but put on tents between the ribs to make equal the hour around, then either cure with the treatment for pleurisin, meat and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear from the bone that points to the loin, and there is doubt for the patient, if you must cut on the bone of the broken rib, and you must put in place an instrument to hold the skin; then you must also break the bone, treat gently, and then suture the two layers of the wound, if it is large, and treat with sponges, until it is healed. And if an abscess comes, if you put on wet cloths soaked in rose oil, and put on the wound; and treat while the bone that you must break is at a distance from the abscess, and do not leave it until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
of the fracture of the collar bone.</start_of_turn>
Never comes a sudden break of a bone in the neck, or indeed at the spine in the back. And when this happens to anyone, and you see that he is whole or not, if you take notice that his hands are limp and fleeing and dead, and that you cannot move or extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, if he does not groan. Such is death in many cases, and if you move them and he feels well when you strain and prick them, such is that the bone joint is saved, and the patient will be healed, if you put in cure.</start_of_turn>
And if the same thing happens at the spine in the back, and you see that he is whole or not, if you take notice that his limbs are softened, and that his accidents are in his hands and on his back there is a violent vomiting and evacuation without will; and when we have treated him on his belly, there is a violent vomiting without will. And when he is treated on his back and he looks to his side, if he cannot vomit. Such is death: if he does not work in his cure.</start_of_turn>
If this mishap does not occur, then the matter is less serious.
If this mishap does not occur, then the matter is less serious. If there is swelling, put on rose oil or yolk of egg on the spine; when it is calmed down, put on a comfortable and drying dressing, and bind it with a bandage, and tell the patient to rest; do not sleep on that part where there is pain, until it is healed.</start_of_turn> If bones break, cover loosely over the wound; and unite the bones together, then support the joints of the wound, if it is large, with a splint, and bind it tightly; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "fracture of the heel", if it persists, turn your left thumb to the other hand at your wrist, and put them even, then put on the dressing and bandage, if necessary; then strain it, and if there are broken bones, if you keep it still, and unite them, and cure the wound until it is healed.</start_of_turn
Of the fracture of the bone of the thigh
When the bone of the thigh is fractured, and if there is no immediate sign of improvement at the head; and if it lasts long, and declines in the thighs, and brings pain to the patient at the place where it is fractured, and swelling ensues.</start_of_turn>
And if the restoration is to be made, extend your hand above the fracture, until you reach the fracture; and keep the fracture in place; and if the fracture is only at the head, put it in its natural position, until it is restored to its natural shape.</start_of_turn
And if the fracture is long or declines downwards, make the patient lie on his belly, until the restoration of this fracture is apparent.</start_of_turn And when you have set the hair even, if you put on a bandage, then put on a staple of wool or hair, and hold the bandage still, so that it does not move; and keep the limb relaxed, as long as the hair is even.
And instruct the patient to sleep on his side, or on his back.</start_of_turn>
And if the abscess bursts, do not touch it, until the abscess has subsided; then put on what we have mentioned before; and then return to rest, and hold it still if it is appropriate, without causing any further harm; this is the proper method.</start_of_turn>
De la brisure de l’ajutoire.
From the dislocation of the shoulder
And there are two methods for restoring it: one is to take a fistful of moist earth and shape it like this:
And the other method is that one should order the attendants to hold the limb firmly at its collar and to grasp the limb above the elbow with the fist of the hand that is not supporting it, and to hold down the forearm with the other hand, and to extend the forearm to its greatest extent.
And if the extraction is too strong, if it strains [the shoulder], hold the bone at the base of the bone; and on the bone, extend the thumbs of the attendants to their part. And if the bone is close to the head of the shoulder, if you must put in [a ligature] the middle of the bone at the shoulder, and the other towards the elbow, grasp the bone; and just as if the bone is towards the elbow, if you must put in [a ligature] the lesser, with some labor, until the bone is even on both sides, and on the shoulder; then put the bone straight, if it is possible, and strain, for the wound does not come out.
And if the wound does not come out, do not strain for more than thirteen days; put on a soft bandage and oil of rose, until the wound is calmed; then strain, and put the support on the bone, then assemble the limb on the aid, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; and put on the bandage, strain on the aid, and on the limb, so that the limb is in its place, without anything hindering it, or without displacing the bone.
And if you doubt that the bone is not displaced, if you use pins, put on the bone a pin wider and stronger than the others, and leave between the pins a space equal to twice the thickness of the bone; then strain on the pins, as I have said at the beginning of this chapter, more strongly and less loosely.
If you see the sitting of the stars and the tightening, as we have said, in the hour when you restore the limb, if you doubt the incision, let it stay closed until the seventh day, as we have said; then look carefully for two days, that the wound does not swell or become infected, or that the nerves do not become numb in the limb because of its tension. If it is necessary, as we have said.
If no such thing happens, if more than two days have passed, and the patient lies down on his back, with his hands on his stomach; put a dressing on the shoulder with wool equal in size, and look for an hour or two to see if the limb is not moving or if the ligaments are not softened; if it is necessary, by the power of medicine, and do as I have said before, partly as a remedy. And when it begins to recover, if it is large. It is customary that the shoulder and limb must be taken off for forty days in total; and then it must be loosened and a bath and ointment applied to the affected part. And if the dislocation is difficult and involves blood clots, it should be left to loosen for one or two months.
... for a fracture of the arm.
The arm consists of three bones, which are called the "radius" and the "ulna". One is small and is close to the pouch, and the other is large and is close to the little finger; by chance the large bone only breaks sometimes, or the small one, and sometimes both together.
When the small bone is broken, the restoration is easy and the healing; but when the large bone is broken, if the healing is bad, it is more painful than when they are broken together. If only the small bone is broken, if the limb is gently extended, and made even.
And if it is the large bone that is broken, if the limb must be drawn more strongly; and hold the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and keep the small one lower than the others, and let the patient cross his arm over himself, and the pouch in front of him higher than the patient suffers no pain; then extend the limb slowly from the shoulder to the wrist, or from the elbow, and another assistant from the other side. And then put it back in its place, according to its best form.
If in the fracture it is broken into pieces, if you put something into its place, and if there is none that pricks it now, and you do not manage to restore it to its place, if you leave it and the bone, as we have said before.
If in the fracture it is broken into pieces, as I have mentioned in the singular concerning this chapter; take the cure.</start_of_turn>
If at the commencement of restoration blood comes out through the incisions, if you glue them with a bandage made of rose oil and white wax, that it be neither too tight nor too loose; and bind them securely with strips so that the incisions are appeased. And then bone the wax, and put in place the plaster of molin with abundance of eggshell, because put the pins in, and let the pin of the fracture be more firm, and a space wider than the others; and that there be a space between the pins that must have at least as many holes as there are bones or arms in multiple positions: either that the fracture is in one of the bones or in two places; and is more strained above the fracture than elsewhere, and is most painful on the first day, less so on subsequent days, as I have said at the commencement of this chapter; and let the bandages that are above the fracture be soft and moist, and neither too hard nor brittle; and let the thread that is used for tying be neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said. And reinforce the limb and the tendon afterwards for several days. And if any evil accident befalls the limb, as for example a wound which befalls the limb, then shalt thou raise the limb with warm water, until such time as the itching ceaseth; and let the limb rest undisturbed. And then commence the treatment anew, and if the ligament be torn and the bone be fractured, or things of like nature, if need be.
And if the swelling does not depart from the limb, because it is too great, then shalt thou soften it, namely by fomentation, and let it remain for some days, until the swelling depart, and then restrain it.</start_of_turn>
And if none of these things which we have said doth avail the patient, if not until after .xx. days, or more, then thou shalt bind up his hands to his neck, and let his neck be even, and shalt guard against movement and eating, and he shall sleep on his back; and give him nourishment every .xxx. days or every .xxxv., or every .xx. days, according to the composition and temperament of the remedies.</start_of_turn>
Of the breaking of the hand
The bones at the back of the hand and two together cause many fractures, and only rain comes more often.
And when the hand is broken or rained on, if it is to be known that the patient should sit cross-legged, and sit upright in front of him equally; then put his hand on the extended cloth, and extend the physician the broken bones, and put them equal with the eyes; and put on the plaster and the bandage, if there is no opening; then put on a splint as much as is necessary; and be covered with a cloth of linen.</start_of_turn>
And if the fracture is at the shoulder blade under the belly of the limb, if you make a ball of cloth, and command the patient to hold his broken limb against his side; then strain from a long cloth, and be the splint as great as the limb, and strain it, as it is commanded.
And if the break is downwards, if you command me to place a splint above and another below, so that the hand is overspread and straight, then I will bind it tightly around the hand, and hold it between the two.
And if the break does not come from either side, if it is in the palm, if you command me to make it even, as it should be; and I will restrain it with the splint, and if you see that I must place a right-angle splint to raise the break, and it does not move; and if the break is in another place, as in the index or one of the others, if you make it even, and I will bind it with the two fingers which follow; or you will bind them all together, holding them close together, as much as he wants, or you will place a splint above, as with a pouch; and take care of the restoration and the arrangement of the wound, and cure whatever comes of it, as I have said.
And if the break does not come from either side, if it is in the palm, if you command me to make it even, as it should be; and I will restrain it with the splint, and if you see that I must place a right-angle splint to raise the break, and it does not move; and if the break is in another place, as in the index or one of the others, if you make it even, and I will bind it with the two fingers which follow; or you will bind them all together, holding them close together, as much as he wants, or you will place a splint above, as with a pouch; and take care of the restoration and the arrangement of the wound, and cure whatever comes of it, as I have said.
The bones of the hip are often fractured, and one can see it when it turns frontward and backward; and the restoration is when it is bound together again. The patient lies on his face, then extends his limbs symmetrically; and it is when the fracture is at the root of the bone
And if the fracture is close to the root of the thigh, if either of the ligaments above the knee is torn, and the other ligament below the fracture; and in the same way if it is close to the knee, and then either the ligament above the knee or the extension below; then put the limb in its natural position with both hands, until it is parallel to its natural position, and then put on the dressing and bind it, if necessary.
And if there is a wound close to the eye, if you leave it calm for a while and then return to your work and your cure, the binding is made in part for safety. It is necessary to wrap around the edge of the wound, that is, a double bandage about two or three fingers in length, and hold the excess, then bend the limb until the nails reach the root of the nail; then pass one thread long between the hip and the limb, below the knee, and bring it up to the top; then bend the limb and the hip together with the bandage, and put on the edge of the wound the stars, and put a star on the bone of the limb; then put eight threads between the limb and the hip of coarse gauze to make even the tension, and begin to tie in pairs or threes on the edge of the wound; and the more you go up the wound, and less the strain; then take out two or three threads that you have passed between the limb and the hip, and tie two stars that are below, and put back the thread to the top, until you see that the wound has healed; and the strain, if it does not move from its place, then leave it alone, and it will not cause any wound or swelling or anything like that.
And if there is pain, if it comes loose, and address what has come, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that prick, it is necessary to cauterize, as we have said; and if we cannot, it is necessary to cut the bone, and drain; and cure as we have said, when it is healed.
And never is the bone broken in this case when it is set in place, as in the shoulder and arm; nevertheless, in the restoration made in this way, I do not cause pain to the patient.
And if the bone is set in place in one or two days, or less or more, according to the variety of temperaments.</start_of_turn>
of the rue of Genoa</start_of_turn>
There are often breaks in the street of Genoa, but they happen many times. And if it breaks, it is not more than a tear, or a hole, and there is pain, and sense of pain, and this is well known.</start_of_turn>
And thus, if you put everything that is round back to its place, as long as it is put together firmly, then put the dressing on and place a round cushion there if you have need of it, and hold it firmly, then restore all the other things that we have mentioned before, such as an abscess incision and other similar things; if you put each accident in its place that it deserves, as long as it is sane.
And thus, if you put everything that is round back to its place, as long as it is put together firmly, then put the dressing on and place a round cushion there if you have need of it, and hold it firmly, then restore all the other things that we have mentioned before, such as an abscess incision and other similar things; if you put each accident in its place that it deserves, as long as it is sane.
And thus, if you put everything that is round back to its place, as long as it is put together firmly, then put the dressing on and place a round cushion there if you have need of it, and hold it firmly, then restore all the other things that we have mentioned before, such as an abscess incision and other similar things; if you put each accident in its place that it deserves, as long as it is sane. Saiches that are in the limb have two bones; one is called the "mustelz" and the other is called the "foscile"; and there is a fracture in the limb as it comes to the arm, and for this the restoration is the same as that of the arm, and the work is whole again.
If two bones are fractured together, twist the limb from all sides.
If the bone is fractured in two, twist the limb forward.</start_of_turn>
If a great bone is fractured, if one feels great pain and sees it clearly; and twist the limb downwards. Immediately apply extension, and make it equal, and bind the bones equally; but always remember that if the fracture is serious, and there are many pieces, that the extension should be less violent and lighter; and adjust accordingly.</start_of_turn
Once you have completed your work, if you take two strips of coarse cloth that reach from under the armpit to under the knee of the limb, and bind the limb from one end to the other; then cover with two layers of bandage from under and over, and bind firmly in the middle, and with this binding the limb will not be able to move forward or backward; and that is good; and no one should administer anything that will lengthen the limb, and if there is swelling, and it is a fracture, and there are many pieces, that the extension should be less violent and lighter; and adjust accordingly.
Of the fracture of bones it is known.
As for the ankle, there is no fracture in it; but in the bones of the foot there is never a fracture and two are enough, and there is no other cause of death except for great swelling of the limb.
And if there is a fracture in the bones of the foot, and you see these bones pressing against one another, if you put the limb so that it appears to be floating in the air, as if a bird were flying by, and then put the limb back in its place, the bones will rise up; then put the bandage in place and bind the limb firmly, and put a little bandage under the foot at the joint, and strain the limb gently, and when the swelling has gone down cover the limb with cloth and other things as you think is necessary.
And when two or three days have passed, if the limb is still swollen, because you will find the bones whole, whether fractured or not.
If there are two breaks, if you restore them as we have said must be done with the hand; then put at the break a support according to the length of the break, and make it somewhat wider; and put on the thumb that which I have mentioned, and strain immediately; and if there are three or more breaks, break them, and put on over each break a support according to its quantity, enveloped in one layer of linen, and strain the thumb from the bone. Make sure that the thumb remains above the break of the bone as much as possible, if it remains well-held.
Remember also the other things that I have said about other breaks; and secure each accident as it should be secured.</start_of_turn>
of the fracture of the clavicle bone</start_of_turn>
When the natural woman's bone is broken, if she sits enlarged, then incline towards the part of her backbone; be held by behind; then fill the belly of the nature with wool, and put as much as a sto at will; then evacuate the woman, and hold her loin from front and back; and immediately jump the wool, until it comes to the entrance of the nature, and return the bone with the sto; and when she sees pissing, if the bone is grasped by the wool, and when she has pissed, she will recover, and thus make seventy-two days or more: if the fracture is restored, and if you see that, take a bladder of elderberry, and tie a string to the belly, and empty all the bladder into the nature; then blow through the string until the bladder is emptied: the nature will then restore the fracture; then fill with wool, and leave it for a few days, until it is healed.
And when the wrist bone of a man or woman is broken, if you restore it as we have said concerning the thigh bone; and these fractures that happen to the forearm do not hide from the one who studies and uses them, and understand my book. For the fracture signifies in many cases the right way of restoration: understand that then
In the arm, when it is broken, take a goose neck and put it on the arm; then wrap around it with cloths, and leave it for two days or until it is healed, and it will be completely healed.
Of sudden with wound
In case of sudden fracture with wound, even if it is great, as for the bones of the thigh or the shoulder or similar, that it be set immediately, as the things we have said prove.
And if the wound is clean, if the restoration of vitriol suffice, if you have nothing else, then begin to restore the fracture in the same hour, or the next, if there is no coming of the after-effects.
And if there comes swelling, if you must leave the restoration until next day, as long as the swelling is appeased, and do not touch neither the third nor the fourth part, for you will bring about other evils.
And if the bone is fractured is appears above like a wound discovered, then you must know that you must touch it lightly with your hands, slightly extended.
And if the extension does not appear to you to set your hands equal, if the limb has this instrument which is of iron, which is two or three inches long, and its breadth is according to the quantity of the wound; for this reason it is necessary at the middle that it grasps three or four lines, according to what is necessary in the bruise; and be round and somewhat large, so that it does not swell to the compression on the limb at your work, and be above and forward, and large from the middle forward, thus:
It is called "palainche" because it must be known that when the limb is bent, it must be placed upon the visible part of the bone; and once it has been placed, it must be equal, so that one meets the other. And if the fracture is subtle, and the instrument does not well grasp the bone, if you must bend the chief of the bone, as long as the instrument has possession of it.
If you cannot restore the bone as we have said, if you see that the handle of an instrument that can be covered over is to be used, or to pierce or suture, to your poorness; then take away that which is remaining in the bone, rough and scaly.
When the bone is restored, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, swelling that it is not in its natural position. If you do too much and it remains in its place, then moisten it with black vinegar; and if it is in this state; do not put anything on the wound except cerate or oil, for it will cause decay and corruption; then administer stars when the bone has been restored, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover the dressing all around, according to the quantity of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not strained with the bursting; for many times this has been the cause of death among fools, and has caused the patient to die or become lame or corrupt countless times; and let the itching be milder and less severe than other breaks.
And if the wound is small or large, and you doubt that the accident will suffice, as we have said, and you feel pain in the limb, if it does not suffice to put on stars; but cover it around, instead of stars, with firm cloths, and bind them. And when you see afterwards that there is blood seeping through the wound, if the thing that you put on the wound has become soft, put an astringent ointment on the wound, like an ointment of four medicines and the like.
And it is necessary that you stretch the limb three times a day, in the morning and in the evening, while it is soldered and healthy.
And it is necessary that the limb be gently flexed and straightened part by part like a bow that corrects itself lightly.</start_of_turn>
And if the limb persists in displacement, and cannot be soldered but returns almost to its place, with small pieces of bone, for it is necessary that you reduce the wound with all your might, and that you extract all these broken pieces which cause this pain.</start_of_turn
And if a fistula arises in the limb, or any other form of corruption, it is necessary that you treat it, according to what is stated in this chapter above. And when a bone is broken, and is exposed on the limb, as the bone of the shoulder or the arm, and other similar bones of the great limbs, if you do not treat it, for many times death results, but leave it until it has healed; by chance it will go away by itself within twenty or thirty days, and then cure the wound if you wish; or if you do not wish, leave it.</start_of_turn
The hairs which come out of the beard.
The hairs which come out of the beard often follow the breaking of the wind, even when it is close to the joint; and it is a helpful thing to see the figure of the limb; for by chance one cannot make the limb do its natural work.</start_of_turn>
Take care therefore that we are aware: if he gives astringent medicines, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocollus, acaice, and others, that you take neither of these things, or all together, and mix them with stiff wine or with eggs or with oil; and put them on the wound in bandages, and bind it well, and do not move it from hand to hand until it is set; and then reset it, and begin again, until the nodation is bony; or you bind it on a piece of well-made leather; for the property of leather is that it hardens all the swellings under the limb; and if the nodation has already hardened as much as a stone, and it is necessary to harden it, if the swelling above has burst, and make the excess apparent; or you must leave it alone, until it is bony, and treat it until it is healed.</start_of_turn
When the fracture is restored and remains weak afterwards, if there is any discomfort: because sometimes it is caused by the limb having been too tightly bound and not properly relaxed; or because there are too many bands, and they prevent the limb from moving smoothly; or because of many bruises; or because of too great a movement, not even in its place; or because there is blood in the tissue, if it is weak.
And the cure is to feed the patient and make the limb firm, until the pain is multiplied in him; and give him baths, and make him merry and comfortable; then put a poultice on the limb, so that the poultice attracts the great restoration, and the blood often boils fiercely, until the limb returns to its natural position; and return to its natural shape.
The limb is bent after the disease.
When the limb is bent after restoration, and the bone is broken open, and the limb is deformed, although it retains its natural work: if one does not believe the fools who say that the limb must be broken anew, and many have acted thus in our land; this work is blamed, and many evils result from it, and by chance the patient; although if the swellings and torture are fresh, if one covers them with hot water, or softens them with herbs such as rue, meadowsweet, and melilot, and similar things; and makes an emollient plaster, like aquaint well made, and takes the muscle of rue, and confirms it with gelatine grease or oil of poppy seed, and makes plaster over; or one takes fat figs, and pounds them with horse dung, and similar medicines that appease the swelling.
And never is the bone displaced by continuous rubbing and for a long time with wet hands. And keep the limb in motion for an hour.
And if the dislocation is swollen and hardened, like a stone, and requires iron, if it is covered with skin up to the bone, make a slight incision; and apply cushion and dressing to the wound.
And thus begins the book of dislocations.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury
When dislocation comes about, if it can now be corrected in its original position
For if it is late, if by chance he remembers it and comes to pinch it again, do not move it because it is swollen; for many times it has caused swelling and other pains.
Indeed, when this happens, if he makes the patient comfortable, then let him go; until the swelling subsides. Then raise the limb high and liberally, and support it gently, and treat each limb as it comes to its place.</start_of_turn>
And I have commanded the chapters on dislocations of the shoulder joint from the head to the wrist.</start_of_turn>
Des mandibules.
The teeth are loosened and the jaw is dislocated in two ways: either the jawbone is fractured from its socket and softened, or it is loosened completely and hangs downwards, causing the tongue to hang out of the mouth, unable to be held in place, unable to close the mouth, and to be enveloped by speech.
When the dislocation is small, it often returns by itself in various positions.
and if it is complete and accompanied, you must immediately immobilize it, and do not touch it;
And in such a manner that the minister grasps the head of the patient, and holds the gaze fixed on the pocket of one of his hands at the root of the dislocation of the mandible in the mouth, if the dislocation is three-quarters gone; and the other hand must be freed, so that they are even; and command the patient to soften his mandibles and move them from all sides.
And keep the eye fixed even, until it returns to its place.</start_of_turn>
And if it returns grasped, even if both mandibles are together, if they arise with hot oil, as long as they remain lightly; do not attempt to force it back, as we have said.</start_of_turn>
And when they are brought back even, and the patient's mouth is closed with the tongue properly clotted, if you put on moist cloths in a circle made of rose oil and beeswax, then bind them lightly with threads.
And the patient should sleep on their back, with the arms resting between two cushions, so that they do not move towards the chest or to the sides, without making any effort to raise them up, but take some gentle nourishment, as long as the pain subsides, and keep the jaw closed
and then eat only lightly, and do not open your mouth wide while eating or drinking, until the jaw is well closed and healed.
And if the two mandibles do not manage to be reset at a single hour, and are not made firm at their roots, if in comes fever and swelling accustomed, and by chance vomiting of pure bile.
And when you see this, know that it is a loss; and many times death follows in eight days.</start_of_turn>
from the forceps.
The forceps cannot pull out a wound that is deeply seated, and is always damaged when it is driven out, and it is always felt.</start_of_turn
And if the patient lies prone on his back and extends his arms; then press the limb towards your palm, and it will return; then put on the bandage and bind it tightly, and strain it.
And if the limb which is beside the cuticle cannot be loosened; if it does loosen once, if you leave it in its place, as we have said; then put on the bandage and bind it tightly, and strain it, and command the patient to rest until he is well again.
And thus the limb is brought back to its place, when it is loosened from its bone.
De la dislocation de l’espaule.
From the dislocation of the shoulder.
and does not damage further behind for the shoulder, and does not damage further from the nerves; and many times dislocates downwards towards the armpit, just as when there is much hair, for at these leaps there is great pain; at those who have little hair, the leaps are painful, and return painful.
And sometimes there occurs in some households a percussion or cracking, and it engulfs the swelling of an abscess with a thick discharge, and care must be taken that it is not damaged by this.
Therefore it is necessary that you suspend it until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.</start_of_turn>
And it is known that a dislocation occurs when it is twisted towards the shoulder, and it makes a difference between the painful and the sound shoulder, and you will find between their difference the cause of the pain.</start_of_turn and at the head of the shoulder you will find a pit, and the shoulder is dislocated from the touch of the head of the shoulder, as if it were a bone; and it cannot move in any way, neither to move the hand to the elbow, nor to move anything else.</start_of_turn
And thus, if it is displaced upwards and is not hidden, for you will find it clearly on touching.
And this kind of dislocation is not forced to restore, when it is new, or when the limb is painful.</start_of_turn>
And the method is that the physician grasps the painful limb upwards, then puts the thumbs downwards on the buttocks, and grasps the joint firmly upwards to the bone; and the physician grasps the limb and extends it upwards, since it is put downwards.</start_of_turn
And if it does not come as we have said before, if it is to be believed that the patient is to be bathed in warm water; and it is to be administered mild and soothing nourishment, such as decoction of elderberry and fenugreek and honey in water, and to be administered.</start_of_turn
Then either soothe the patient on his back, and place on his seat a cushion of linen even, not too soft nor too hard, then place his hand on the cushion, and keep the shoulder joint firmly in place, and treat the hand of the patient.
And another attendant holds the patient’s arm firmly in place, if it does not move downwards; the shoulder will then return immediately. And if you see that it remains dislocated in this manner:
then you must make the presence of someone who is greater than the patient; and be upright over the cost of the patient, and hold the shoulder joint below the patient’s hand, and keep the hand above, so that the patient’s arm hangs downwards. And another minister treats the patient's hand downwards towards the belly. And if the patient is too weak, if he can hold nothing heavy, the dislocation will return immediately.
And thus it is also done in another way: and if the bone is long like a nail in the earth, which the head of the shoulder must be as round as a ball, and not too thick or too thin; then put some oil on the patient, but let there be coarse cloth over, and let the patient's hand be long enough to reach the other hand; then extend the hand downwards towards the other side, and the dislocation will return to its place at once.
If these things do not suffice to restore it, if you perform this cure: take one fistful of three fingers and two palms of large size, which has the thumb bent forward to enter into the armpit, as in this fashion:
Then place the thumb of the fist over the base of the arm, so that it does not move the patient; put it into the armpit; extend your arms above the arm of the patient; and hold the shoulder joint above the arm, and the arm at the wrist; put one elbow on one inch of the palm of the hand, and stretch out the hands backwards, or leave the forearm hanging down: the dislocation will now be regained.
And when it is regained, in whatever way, if you put a ball of wool of equal size under the armpit, then put the plaster on the abscess with powdered oatmeal, with incense and egg-white, on the whole shoulder and around, and strain the armpit outwards again, and bind the limb over the plaster, and embrace the hand at its collar, and keep the hands still.</start_of_turn>
And it is commanded that he should move his arm until it is comfortable, for it will heal more quickly; and then move it more after five or six days, and it will be healed.  If it is stiff and is not softened, it is healed.
And if the joint is forced from its place by moisture or for some other reason, if it is commanded that you administer cautery twice as deep as it is placed before or as a chapter of cautery.
And if you do all this, and it does not heal after twenty-five days, and the limb cannot be lifted, then know that the nerves of the shoulder are crushed or stretched or softened; and that the joint will never be fixed in its place again
The shoulder dislocation that is at the side of the arm, and the arms, or behind, if it is done by impulse, and extension of the hands, and has received another support; and it heals as long as it is sound.
And when the healing has passed, if there is stiffness in the limb and late mobility, if the patient uses the limb many times, as long as the stiffness is relieved, and returns to its first nature.
because of the dislocation of the shoulder
The joint of the shoulder has been damaged at several points, and has returned to its normal position; but it has been damaged throughout, both frontally and laterally, and the dislocation has not been corrected, as it is well seen and felt; and it is damaged in a certain way. And when you join the patient with the limb, if he can see it openly. For the joint is shut, and cannot bend the arm, touch his shoulder at all.
And you must keep it still in this way even after you have pulled it out, for if you pull it out again, if it comes out once more, it will be more painful to bring it back. And by chance it will not be able to be brought back at all, even if it is behind; for it is better to leave it as it is than to cause further dislocation, which is more painful and can lead to death.</start_of_turn>
And if it can be restored, when it is like this that you can bring it back, you must extend your hand with both hands; and let your arms be spread out, and your hands down toward your belly according to the patient’s situation, front and back, and hold the joint together with your thumbs and index fingers until it returns to its place.</start_of_turn>
If the dislocation is in front, if it returns when the hand doubles over its hand, and the thumb is firm at the root that is deshydrated.
If it does not return to its place, if you administer strong extension; and that two ministers extend the arm and hold it by two ministers, so that it does not move during extension; then turn the arm from the shoulder downwards, and having covered it with a double-layered towel that is long and wide.
And when you see the limb back in its place, if you apply some oil to the joint to soften it, then stretch the joint, as long as it returns;
When it is in place, if you put on dry plaster with an egg-shaped weight, and the strain forms, and you bend the arm at the shoulder of the patient, and leave it for a while, then you can release it.
When the joint is firmly in place, if you release the limb and leave it, and if you see that the joint does not hold well, repeat the plaster and the limb, and leave it until it is firmly set; then you can release it.</start_of_turn>
If after the joint is reset, there is still pain, and if it moves, bathe and massage it well, and press until it is relieved; or you can put on the joint a poultice of mutton fat, and leave it for a day and a night, then extract the bone, and make it enter or bathe.</start_of_turn When he sweats, let him gently massage the joint; then reinsert the limb above and below; and do this three or four times until he is cured. If you see that the swelling has increased with moisture and heat, hold the limb still; if it returns to its normal position.
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
The joint of the limb is loosened, and its return is laborious, more than any other joint throughout the body; you must therefore bring it back to its place immediately, even if it is loosened, and even if there is bleeding or infection.
And if you put your hand on a table and extend your fingers, look that you put them even, so that you place your palm on the surface of the joint and hold it until it returns.
However, you must look if it is well in place; then put the patient’s hand back on the table at extension and reduction.</start_of_turn> And if the dislocation is at the back of the arm, if you put the patient’s hand back on the table, and you look that you put your hand on that appearance of the joint. If it returns now, it is well.</start_of_turn>
If not, if the strain of calming after-pains settles, and you leave it in its proper place, it will naturally recommence.
If it cannot endure it, and you do not put it back in its place after some days, the joint will become stiff forever.</start_of_turn>
and does no harm to the patient except when the nerves are cut, or the vein is severed; for other ailments there is no other remedy than to cauterize, which is dangerous in itself.</start_of_turn>
And when the limb is in its place, if you place the displacement that we have mentioned, then strain and leave it for three days, then remove and leave it in peace.</start_of_turn
If he cannot move it easily, and there is no pain, if the fluid of hot water is applied, and it is rubbed until it is well healed.
If the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
et le laisse ainsi jour, et puis le met égal celui jour; et de ne pas le lie, si comme nous avons dit, et lui desslie de jour, et lui fais mouvement, et le relie de nouveau; et fais ceci souvent, tant qu’il soit étroit.
And leave it thus for a day, and then put it equal again that day; and do not bind it, as we have said, and loosen it from that day, and make it move, and bind it again; and do this often, until it is narrow.  And do the same if it is loosened in the belly of the limb, and do as you have done before, until it is healed; and do the same if it is loosened from another part.
and do the same if it is loosened from the shoulder.
When the shoulder blade or the neck is dislocated, or there are several dislocations, if there is no remedy, for the patient’s life is in danger.
And the sign is that the blood spurts in an abnormal direction, it cannot be held, and often renders the limb limp, or the knee or arm, or both arms useless.</start_of_turn>
And often the shoulder dislocates into three parts; the one that dislocates at the back is called "gilbosite."
the cure is that if the gilbosite comes from childhood: if there is no cure or healing of the whole.
And that which comes from sitting or blows or from similar things, say the old methods of healing with great words, or there is no profit at all;
But I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and I have composed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the swelling that comes before the wound, there is no healing at all;
and just as that which comes directly on the coast, and one cannot cure it but by that which comes behind, as I say.
And it is that the patient keep his face extended one inch above the level, and has tension from his eyes, that he does not move.
Then put a thumb at the head of the shoulder in the earth forms, and another has a piece, and hold one hand apart from the patient’s buttocks, and another has haunches, and has knees, and has ankles;
and two assistants know the ropes, one at the head and the other at the piece, among the three thumbs;
and if it moves from its own movement, it can never come back to its place;
And if it does not return by this treatment, take a handful of twelve strong bones, and bind the area around the joint, and let the patient lie on his side, and support the head of the handful over the joint; then put the middle of the handful on the spine. put the thumbs of the handful over the other head of the handful, and press firmly, until it returns to its place; and if you see that it does not return, do it with the thumb that is turning at the wrist.</start_of_turn>
And hold the patient’s arm firmly with twelve fingers, and over the parts put three others, and between each finger put a bandage and a piece of cloth, a palm’s breadth long.
And each basin has one hole, or the nut is loose, and let the basin be firmly fixed in the earth, if it does not move; and between each two basins there is one basin returning, so that when the thread returns, there are two small basins of a palm's length, in order to bring back the nut.
Then take the thread which is among the nails at the nut towards the chief, and the other thread towards the pieces at the other nut, and let the minister turn his nut throughout the thread, and the master puts the thorn even as we have said
And when they are even, put on a desiccant plaster with abundance of eggs, and then press, and then support with a tablet of two fingers, which prevents the swelling of the marrow and the sensitive part of the vertebra, then bind with a thread, as we have said, and use the patient’s natural nourishment, until he is healed.
And if nothing else comes to pass at the end of the illness, if it is necessary to administer soothing and calming medicines, with the exception that we have mentioned before; and never give a piece of lead.
And never does the swelling appear at the back of the shoulder, and take care that this is not a dislocation; and this is the bone that opens, for in this case we must not have any presumption: for by chance comes death.
hip dislocation
The joints of the hip and shoulder only dislocate; it does not happen with other joints; and the hip joint is damaged in three parts: front and back, and top and bottom; the more it is damaged from the front, the more it is damaged from the back.
And if you know of a dislocation, that is when, if you join the painful limb with the flesh, if it is longer, and if the patient’s knee is wider than the normal, and he cannot double his knee at the fire. And this is the cause of many deaths of patients who are burned with caustic substances, because the head of the humerus comes out of its socket.
And the sign of this is that if this accident is contrary to those mentioned above.
And the sign of this is that if it is well placed, the limb is well placed in accordance with the completion; however, do not double the knee excessively in pain, and if you see that it is suffering, do not delay, and retain the urine, and swell the limb, and when he walks, let him pass over the heel.
And the sign of that one who has it behind, if he cannot expand his knee, neither double it, and is that leg shorter than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the thigh is displaced from its socket.
If this semblance of dislocation persists, if it is an old dislocation, and it remains as it is without any cure; and one must not presume otherwise.
And in this case where the dislocation is fresh, and there are three ways of dislocation, if you rush to return the joint, and stretch it inwards and outwards, and move it to the right and left; by chance, if it returns, and there is no need for any other cure.
And if it does not return in this manner, if you must, appoint a strong minister, and put the limb firmly in the palm of your hand, or at the groin; And if it does not return in this manner, if you must, appoint a strong minister, and put the limb firmly in the palm of your hand, or at the groin; grasp the limb firmly with your thumb and index finger, and the other hand supports the limb above the knee; the other hand grasps the head of the limb.</start_of_turn>
And extend upwards and downwards all at once, until the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains suspended.</start_of_turn>
This method of extension is very common in three out of four cases; and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, that is good.
If not, you must apply a remedy to its semblance. When the dislocation is complete, you must place the limb over the costal cartilage, then place the limb over the root of the scapula, and the limb which is below the angle, and extend the limb upwards towards the angle and downwards towards the forcele.
Then grasp another assistant by the arms, and embrace the great limb of the affected shoulder, and extend it towards the front: if it returns to its place now; and this method of dislocation is more gentle than the others.
And if you do not hold it firm in this manner as we have said, if you must bind the patient's limbs together with a strong thread over the toes and knees, and over the joints, so that the limb extends more than the others.
Then let it hang from the head of a stick, or on the ground with the arms spread wide; then command a minister to grasp the head of the shoulder, and let another minister hang alongside the patient, who graspes the shoulder, for the joint has now returned naturally.
And when the dislocation is driven out, if the patient lies down as we have said in the one who has gibbosity, and strains the limb properly, and on the heel as well;
Then put the thumb on the head and the other as pieces, then insert the thumb between the thighs of the patient in the form of a nail. Then put moist towels around the patient, so that it does not bleed, then extend the sleeves ministering to him, and I will show you how to put it in its place.</start_of_turn>
If it comes back, that is good. But if not, put on the table, and press on it as we have said in the swelling, and keep the patient lying on the side of the coast.</start_of_turn
And when the dislocation is forward, if you must, extend the limb gently, as I have said; and put the eyes on the painful area over the shoulder, and press with the other hand, and stretch forward towards the groin.</start_of_turn
And if the dislocation is urgent, if it is not possible to extend the patient sideways, do not lift him up from the ground, but rather that he remain as if he had been dislocated at the outset, just as we have said above concerning the two thumbs. or if he is lying face down, and the limb is extended as we have said before, and must press on the joint at the table;
then he will stretch out his legs, and they will be equal; therefore hold the thighs in place, and put on the dressing, and strain with a bandage, so that the dislocation does not move again.
And rests for two or three days, then releases and places the support over it; and if you see that they are even, if strained, as before, leave it for two days; then releases and make him blink attentively, until the limb is comforted.
And thus rests for two or three days, then releases and places the support over it; and if you see that they are even, if strained, as before, leave it for two days; then releases and make him blink attentively, until the limb is comforted.
The shoulder joint is dislocated in two ways: that is to say, forward and backward, and behind; and do not strain before.
And the sign is that you instruct the patient to bend his limb at the knee, and if he does not reach his knee, his bowels are emptied.
and restore him completely if you make the patient sit upright, and extend his limb if he can, and put your hand on his face, and put his heel on your toes.
then take his knee in your palms, and pull between your thumbs, then bend his hip joints so that they form a right angle; and another attendant extends his heel as long as his knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he has well bent his knee slightly
and put on the bandage on, and air the limb to the knee, and bind them together firmly for two or three days, then take it off; and do not let the patient move until the limb is comfortable.
And if the limb is not displaced, if an extension is administered strongly, as we have said in the treatment of the hernia, until it is healed.
Until it is healed.
The limb is never completely still, and never completely relaxed, and is always somewhat tense and strained.
And the sign is that the limb is limp and hangs forward at the part where it is loosened.
When the limb is slightly dislocated, it must be gently repositioned and held with the hands until it spontaneously recovers.
And when it is slightly loosened from root to tip, if you must, make the patient sit upright, and hold him.i.e. support his limbs under the ankle;
Then draw the limb towards your right hand, and then to the left hand once. Then extend it upwards, and keep it well stretched out;
and do this twice, as we have said, while gently supporting and stretching the limb. If it returns, that is good; if not, repeat the procedure, for it will eventually return.
If it cannot return naturally, if you make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and put a passage firmly in the ground between his thighs, and tie the blanket around him, that he does not move the patient.
Then hold the limb at the hip, and another assistant extends the limb with his hands or with a string, which is placed on the collar of the limb; Then extend the legs of the assistants equally, and keep the passage either between the patient’s thighs to hold the patient when extending him;
Then put the thumbs equal to the dislocation at his hands, and another assistant grasps the limb at the shoulder, and the dislocation will return immediately.
And when it [the dislocation] has reached a point, put on the plaster and bandage above, and the strain forms, and bind the limb to the leg, and keep the nerves that are above the ankle behind, so that the bands are not too tight;
Then leave it [the bandage] for one or two days, and if the bands slacken, strain; then take it off at the third or fourth hour, and tell the patient by the third day. and if it goes before this end, it is not certain that it will not damage further.
If the wound bleeds profusely when the vein is opened or the abscess is incised, as we have mentioned before, you must keep the wound still until it has healed.
If the wound bleeds profusely when the vein is opened or the abscess is incised, as we have mentioned before, you must keep the wound still until it has healed.
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
And if the dislocation is not in the back of the shoulder, if you must make the patient sit up straight on a bed or a table, and place your limb on what is open from these joints, then press on your limb firmly until it returns to its place
When they are even, and nothing is open, if you put a dose of rue plant on a table at a quarter past nine, then the swelling forms, and you leave it for two days, then you remove it; and you rest it until it is healed.
When there is wound and dislocation together,
When wound comes with dislocation, and it is seen restored, many times it happens that the patient dies.
if you are not presumptuous in the cure, if you do not know how to use it for a long time, and if you are not merciful and compassionate and timely, do not be arrogant;
And use at the beginning of things tranquil and calm, if you do not see hope of health; leave the patient in the hand of God. And when you see hope, if you now restore the limb to its place, even though the abscess remains;
And when the limb is in place, if you administer tranquil things and cauterize the wound, as it should be, with desiccated ointment;
And if with dislocation there is fracture, and minor bones are loosened, if the bones, and do what we have said in simple diseases;
And keep away from danger, as I have said, for this brings shame upon you according to your Creator, and for the preservation of your arms and your body. Amen.
