O ye, very dear children, I have finished this book which is the end of the science of medicine assembled from its employment, and I have completed it by its exposures and declarations. And I saw in vision that I must complete this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely surgery.
And because the work of hands is fraught in our region and is strange to all, if the science is lost and forgotten, and nothing remains of it except for the little descriptions in the books of the ancients which the hands have performed. And from this arises the error and the vanity, and the closures of the understanding and the displacement of the science.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.
Or it seems to me that I must bring it to life together the ordination of this practitioner according to the way of exposure and declaration and abbreviation; and I will join together the forms of the instruments of cautery and other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of it, as it is necessary. And because no wise man of hands is found in our time, the art of medicine is prolonged. And he must know who comes into this subject thoroughly the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so long as he can discern the judgments of the limbs, and the forms and the joints and the separations of them, and has knowledge of bones and nerves and veins and arteries and the number of seeds, and the movement of semen and its rest.
And thus Hippocrates taught us that with the hand we must not be lazy, but must work diligently; and the same in the art of healing.
We must say at the outset of this book that whoever is not learned in the things that are before him, if he is arrogant and does not humble himself; as I have often seen happen, many people ruin themselves through these very things that are related to this science and abandon both science and sense.
For I have seen a madman who copped his testicles with a pincer, or pulled out the hair of a woman; and he bled so much that the woman died in his hands.
And thus another marvel which treats a stone of a bladder, and the stone was great; if it carried away with it a piece of the bladder, and remained in the hon for two days.
And I have already heard of it being called to treat, and I saw the disposition of the patient and the greatness of the stone, and indeed if it were cut out it would surely die.</start_of_turn>
And thus another marvel which treats a limb broken in our land, and with the bruise caused by the wound; and the physicians of this land do not know how to treat the bruise upon the wound as these stars are held together by strong ligature, and do not allow the wound to bleed at all, and leave it thus until it is finished; and they command that it not be moved, and that the limb be entirely freed and the bone and marrow be lost forever.</start_of_turn>
I come to him and hasten to loosen the limb; and when I find it dislocated, it is without pain and without feeling any discomfort.
But in every way the corruption has already been confirmed or the limb has become deformed, and it cannot be healed; and the corruption continues to grow as long as the limb remains whole and intact.</start_of_turn>
And thus too with other matters which undermine the body, such as tumors, boils, and inflammation caused by the malice of its master.</start_of_turn
For a wound caused by a melancholic tumor, it is only useful to touch it with fire if it is not in some part already corrupted to such an extent that everything corrupted must be removed.</start_of_turn
And thus, take heed, for the work of the hands has become divided into twelve parts: that is to say, there is peril in many things. I will show in each chapter where there is doubt and peril.
For you must always be wary, lest the fools speak evil of you
If you take your arms in custody, and undertake your diseases gently and firmly, and use the better way so that by the grace of God you come to health and be saved; and leave the contagious diseases in their natural state; and stay armed in this way so that you can go from this world to the next in peace.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.»
The physician rejoins the discourse, reminding the reader of the two preceding chapters.
The first chapter deals with fire cautery and surgical cautery with water-based medicine, and this chapter orders from the head down; forms of instruments, and instruments for cautery, and everything necessary for the work
The second chapter deals with fracture and piercing, and of abscesses and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and this chapter orders and the forms of instruments.
The third chapter deals with restoring dislocations and strains, and similar matters; and it is ordered from the head downwards, and from the forms of instruments.
So, as we have recalled from the work, it is necessary to say what is the quality of the aid and the danger of neglecting complexion.
I say that the quality of the aid, and the danger, is the longest word and the most subtle science and the secret response; and concerning this, many speak, and they agree with this; and I find that their words are insufficient, because I reduce the length.
I say that the fire cautery helps universally for all complexion or when there is matter, for since there are two complexions: that is to say a complexion that is warm in sense of matter, and a complexion that is dry in sense of matter.
In complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.
For in complexion hot and dry mixed with matter, some say it brings no relief and declare that cautery is of great aid; others say the opposite: that cautery is of no value in disease except when it comes from heat and dryness. For when you compare the body of a man and his moisture with the complexion of the fire, you find the body dry.
And I agree to this word. For I have never found it to be otherwise by experience.</start_of_turn>
And every way, there is no fire that does not yield to me more than that which has been proved by experience, and which knows by long experience the chapter of cauteries, and the variety of humoral conditions, and the causes and dispositions of their diseases, and the issues and the space of their tensions; of other humors we have no fear, even in cold and moist diseases.</start_of_turn And all the others yield to the cautery and agree with it.</start_of_turn
And know this, children, that fire cautery is more effective for certain ailments than burning medicines.
For the fire is simple, and brings no further pain than to the limb that is being treated, and harms no other part besides that.
Burning medicines come from one limb to another, causing ailments in other parts and causing the patient to suffer more.
The fire, because of its height and for the goodness of its substance, does not cause much pain, if there is no excess.
The fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Know ye, son, that it is necessary to agree in what tense the cauteries should be made, and their precautions.
I say that the cautery is permissible in all tenses, for the harmful effects that are coming from it are overcome by the aid of the cautery; and besides, if the cauteries are for necessary pains that are urgent and cannot wait for a greater harm to the limb.
And think not, my son, that because fools do, it follows that the malady which is cured by cautery has no remedy; for he says it is so. But he lies, for cautery is nothing but medicine which moves the complexion and dries humors which are the cause of pain, and is more useful than medicine for hastening its value and for the virtue of its work and its lordship.
And know that no disease ever departs according to the complexion of the patient and the course of the disease and its virtue; and are gathered in it the superfluities by the acquisition of meats and similar things, if these are not administered with cautery when there is little superfluity and moisture, for indeed cautery is better for pain than meats and similar things, and part of the pain does not return again; but this is often the case.</start_of_turn>
And many people do not understand that because cautery is called behind medicine, and it is true; but they do not believe that cautery is better than medicine, but their understanding is false, for indeed cautery is behind medicine because whenever we administer other treatments for any disease and they do not help, then we administer the cautery, and it is better.</start_of_turn> Therefore, although cautery is behind medicine, it is not according to the intentions of fools.
The ancients say that gold cautery is duller than iron, and they say that fire is only useful for the quality of the gold and for its fineness; and they say that the lead of the cautery does not cause harm, but this is not true, for I have proved it, and I have found that it is seen in some men; and gold cautery is worth as much as iron, as they say.</start_of_turn>
And indeed, when you burn the instrument of gold, you do not know how much it is tarnished by the color of gold, and when it is so cold; and if you burn it too much; if there is too much fire; and thus there is enough hindrance.
And for this reason we use our fire cautery, as we have learned it in our work.
Or you have commanded this chapter from head to toe, for this reason that the way should be easier to find.</start_of_turn>
olive oil cautery
These olive oil cauteries are useful for moisture and cold, for there are many diseases caused by a condition called "soda," and by the abundance of humors that descend from the head as sweat, and in the ears, and for many other complaints such as toothache, earache, and neck and throat pain, and even for many diseases that arise from cold, such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
The form of this cautery is such that the patient is purged by means of a soluble medicine which modifies the head of the joint, two or three times, according to what the physician deems useful and agreeable to the patient's custom; and then repeat the head of the joint of the patient.
Then he makes him sit between your hands, and put his hands down on his feet; after that put the root of your thumb on the root of his thumb between his two nails; and there or will come your two middle fingers, if it bleeds from the base then withdraw the cautery which is called "olive", for this is the form:
And put out the sign of ink, and make descending and extracting your hand back and forth; then withdraw your hand slightly, and renew the cautery until you see the bone somewhat; and if you do not see it, continue the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you; after that take one moment of balsam, and put in awe and soak a cotton pad inside, and take out the bone, and leave it for two days; after that put on a soft bandage. And leave it on until the scab has become bony; after that cure the wound of the burn which is called "tetrafarmaçon", until it is healed.
And they say the ancients, that the more time passes over a wound, the more it purges; and for this reason they aid the wound with movement.
And they say that none of these men say that we must leave the cautery on for so long that part of the bone is burnt, and then we must renew what is burnt on the bone, and it must be cured.</start_of_turn>
And others say that we must leave the cautery on for so long as a woman puts in her girdle for that the humors issue out loosely; and we must leave the wound open for a long time; and then we must cure and dress it.</start_of_turn>
And these two ways of cauterizing do not seem to me to be good for all things, for in some men or if there is fear of pain; and I think that I ought to leave it; for the head of the shoulder is easily loosened by the continuous solutions of nature, as we have seen in other members; and even when the pain is slight by nature, the first semblance of cautery is more salve and merciful for me, and for this reason I do this thing in this manner.</start_of_turn
From the ancient pain of the head.
When there is chronic pain in the head that lasts a long time, the patient must use herbs, pills which are called «cochie», and vomiting of the head, oils and poultices; and if we make the cautery as we have said before, it is of no avail.</start_of_turn>
Take care that if the patient’s condition is strong and not too weak; then the cautery must be performed as we have said above.</start_of_turn
After the cautery is done on the bone of the head as we have said, and you have done the cautery of the vein which is called the «vasselz»; and that is where you put the sponges; hold your hand so that you do not see blood until the bone: the patient feels more great pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of that later; and it is recommended that the cautery of the horns be more subtle than that of the middle of the head, and that is the form:
Dou cautere dou chief, Dou cautere dou chief,
When in a part of the shoulder comes sudden pain, and the disease is extended up to the armpit, and the limb is expelled by medicines that are modified, and other cures have been made as I said in the division of diseases; and all this has not profited: therefore you must make cauteries in two ways, that is to say of medicine and fire.
After the cure of inflammation while he is still sane; and if you see that he does not recover from this with any of the medicines I have written or if you wish to treat him with other medicines that are not mentioned.
The iron cautery is as it is written above. Make the cautery like this:
And it is called "closed" because its head is made in the shape of a loop or it has a slight curve, and in the middle there is a small appearance; and put out the painful limb, and hold your hand and touch the burn with a slight movement until half of the thickness of the hair is burned; and keep your hand still so that the artery does not burn, that is to say that it is blistered, and drain abundance of blood.
After having put on cotton wool around the limb, take it out after two or three days. Then put on moist cotton wool in the burrow and cure the limb of swelling until it is healed. And if you wish to cauterize this abscess with the cautery which is called "cultellare," at the very end, and keep the artery in that abscess which is not ancient.
After having put on cotton wool around the limb, take it out after two or three days. Then put on moist cotton wool in the burrow and cure the limb of swelling until it is healed. And if you wish to cauterize this abscess with the cautery which is called "cultellare," at the very end, and keep the artery in that abscess which is not ancient.
When you cauterize an abscess as we have previously said in the chapter on diseases, and it does not benefit, and you see that it does not suffice with just the cautery, then you must abstain from the cautery which is called "cultellare" while it is still green; and if you must remove the limb leaving a mark of half an inch long, and you move your hand once, and strain so that you do not cover the artery and do not feel pain; and be wary of the jaw that bites when you move it, and that it does not cause more damage than the pain and spasm, and be wary of the evacuation of blood from the artery when it is cut, or cutting causes great fear and discomfort to those who do not know how to handle it, and who are not experienced and learned; and leave the work in peace; but I will tell you how to staunch blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it is in this book.
If you notice that the former cautery does not suffice for the ailment, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the other side as well as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed; and if you see that, administer the cautery that we have said or the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has a pair of scissors; and this cautery is better than the previous and more helpful.
If you notice that the former cautery does not suffice for the ailment, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the other side as well as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed; and if you see that, administer the cautery that we have said or the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has a pair of scissors; and this cautery is better than the previous and more helpful.
When the ear is affected by pain from cold, and there has been no relief from medicines and other cures that we have mentioned in the division, and the pain does not subside, then apply this cautery which is called the “needle,” for this is its form:
After pricking all around the painful ear, or around the joint, if the pain persists in both places, then loosen a little from the root of the ear until you have marked the length; and take ten points around the ear; then cure the length as soon as it is healed.
After pricking all around the painful ear, or around the joint, if the pain persists in both places, then loosen a little from the root of the ear until you have marked the length; and take ten points around the ear; then cure the length as soon as it is healed.
Torture that must be cured by cautery is not fierce except for those that move from moisture, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not make any cautery that resembles that which comes from drying and swelling of nerves.
When you treat this semblance of torture that is made of fumes of hydras and purges of head and gargling, know that it is worth nothing; therefore, you must cauterize the patient with two cautery irons. One in the root of the ear, the other at the temple, and the third at the junction of the two eyebrows. Place the cautery iron in the part that opens well and make it cauterize at the head of the ear below the tip of the earlobe, and another at the temple as long as one eye. And leave the cautery iron in place until half of the hair is burnt; this is the form of the cautery.
And it is the semblance of a cutlass that we have placed before you, but it is a more subtle and effective remedy than the knife; after treating like this, as I have said before, until it is healed.
When apoplexy is ancient and you cure it as we have said, and it does not profit, and the patient does not have fever, then you must make three cauteries: one on each corner of the head, one in the middle of the head, and one in the part called "vasselz" as we have said before, and the last cautery on the back of the stomach; and it is cured as we have said before
De litargie.
When lying down. The patient must be given large doses of wine and cooling pills to soothe the brain; afterwards lie the head of the patient down and put on the crown of his head a patch of rue that is written or treat with poultices; and that is the manner of the fire cautery: as I have said.</start_of_turn>
If he is sane, well and good; but if not, two burnings of the head are to be made by removing juice until the col is reached, and there should be space between each burning of two large ones; and the cure is to be like the others. If you see that the patient is suffering, and the patient is gasping, make one burning in the middle; and if there are several, make two more on each side, and cure until he is sane. And the burning which is called the olive, as I have said before.</start_of_turn
From the cold of the head From the cold of the head, it must be known that the head must be freed from hair and that which has been said previously; after which, when the patient’s head has been raised, then make the cautery between the nape of the neck and behind the ear, and in front of the collarbone; and if you must do more than this, and the limb is moist and the patient is fainting, and the sickness is violent, do three cauteries on the spine of the back; and let it remain as long as the hair is black, and keep your hand still; after which, cure as long as it is safe, and be the cautery which is called “olive” which has been said previously.
of epilepsy
The fiery cautery must not be used except in cases of phlegmatique inflammation; and first of all modify the head of the year and other treatments that we have mentioned in the preceding chapter when the patient is large and suffering from excessive medical treatment.
And if it is a feeble patient who cannot bear suffering, make him garglement and chew, modifying the head of the year often with bones of flesh; afterwards raise the head up to the middle and make one cautery as we have said before, and one cautery on the vein and on the spleen; and if the patient is strong and suffering, make cauteries as we have said to those who have paralysis and softening of bones, on the spine of the back and neck, or the olive cautery as I have said.</start_of_turn>
If the patient is feeble, make one subtle cautery as follows:
When melancholy is the cause, superflous or corrupted humors and large phlegm arise, then indeed we cauterize with certain cauteries as we have said to the paralytic.
When melancholy is the cause, if the superflous humor descends to melancholy and the body of the patient is moist, then let him drink something to cause the brains to be relaxed, as is done before in the division.</start_of_turn>
After that, take the patient’s chief; then make a circle of lint well made, like a circle, and put it on the chief; and hold the patient’s limbs crossed, and keep them well secured from all sides; then bring the flame and burn a little barley chaff; and keep the fire temperate so that the patient can tolerate it; then remove the circle from the chief and let it cool; do this for the patient once every week with another good government, until he is healed.</start_of_turn>
If you see the burn cauterized by making several pricks throughout the burn. This method of cautery soothes the brain instantly; then put on moist cotton wool in butter and lard.
If you see the burn cauterized by making several pricks throughout the burn. This method of cautery soothes the brain instantly; then put on moist cotton wool in butter and lard. When the sign of the evacuation of blood first appears, as I have said in the division, then immediately order the patient to drink something that will solidify the head and keep it away from all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe more times when fasting.
After that you command him to rest his head, and you cauterize him around the head, and make three cauteries on each temple if the swelling of the blood has descended from the head as two together, or if it has descended from one side; and cut through all the veins and arteries that are below the eyebrow, and let the cautery be as long as the width of the temple; and take care not to remove too much blood, for if there is too much blood loss, if it is necessary, stop the bleeding with a piece of leather like you do.
And I shall teach you concerning the extraction of arteries and the incision of the cautery how you shall extend it; and in no way shall you make the cautery or the lancet pierce the joints of the marrow bones behind.
And I shall teach you concerning the extraction of arteries and the incision of the cautery how you shall extend it; and in no way shall you make the cautery or the lancet pierce the joints of the marrow bones behind
When the tears of the eyes are ancient and accustomed and are on the veins, or if you cut the arteries that appear to be in the front of the head; and it is seen that these are cold, fleumatic superfluities, then you must make the cautery as I have said at the beginning of this chapter: namely, cauterize the head and two cauteries on the temples, and two cauteries or lancet the joints of the marrow bones; and if there is need for more, if you must cauterize further from the eyebrow to the tip of the nose with every small cautery.
For the pain of tears through the eyes,
When you have taken the medicine as we have said in the division, and it has not helped, then give the patient two fingers of wine; after that raise the head and make cautery or mix of olive oil; and make three cauteries of the cautery which is called "clavilis" on the two nipples, one at each breast; and be careful not to burn the artery. This is the form of the cautery which is called "clavilis":
When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then the cautery of this cautery which is called "olive" is done. Thus is the form:
And if you see that you must perform cautery upon the hairs of the armpits, let them grow as long as the hairs of the armpits themselves; and do not leave the hand but firm until the third part of the hair has been burned, as I have said.
And if you see that you must perform cautery upon the hairs of the armpits, let them grow as long as the hairs of the armpits themselves; and do not leave the hand but firm until the third part of the hair has been burned, as I have said.</start_of_turn> Never before have I seen that the hairs of oil have been converted to beards, and prick the oil, and it makes cautery in two ways: that is to say by fire, or by burning medicine.</start_of_turn
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.
When they are born and even, then the physician should put the patient in a safe position; after that, mark on the skin of the eyes a figure which is as much like a flame as possible, or as the beginning of a sign from the hair; then he should put a moist cloth in butter and a little salve on the oil, and then cover the cautery with this form:
After cauterizing on the mark that you have made, and doing this several times, so that the burn is neither too deep nor too shallow; and the sign of the work is that you see the membrane withdraw, and the hair is raised to the point of the oil; then you should keep your hand still, and let them rest for two days; then put a moist cloth in butter until the swelling has gone down; after that, apply an ointment until it is healed.
And if after that the hairs grow, and the papere is softened, then restart the cautery on the same place as before; and if the hairs are plucked out, burn them as long as the papere returns to its natural state, and be even, and do not prick the hairs with the oil.
The burning cautery of medicine is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow large and even, then make parchment of the shape of a bay leaf; then take soap of France and live chalk, each a third, and grind them together well; and make it thick, so that it does not reharden, then put it on the shape that you have made like a bay leaf, and put the papere on the eyes; and if the disease persists in oil only, you must open in oil only, and if in both; and put cotton wool soaked in oil around the wound; and the head of the shoulder must be in its natural position and your thumb showing on the medicine, and press once and let it move every time the patient feels a biting of the medicine, for he feels biting just like fire. When you have done this for a long time, if the medicine has reached your thumb. When the bite is gone, if you lift the limb high, and you see the wound lift just as if it had been lifted by the contraction of fire or by incision; and if it is firm, it is well. If not, if you repeat the treatment on the limb or the treatment has not worked, until your works are even, and your wounds are at a point; then put on a moist bandage over the wound as long as the pain persists, and cure the limb of the swelling which is called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healed.
And if you have taken great care of your work and there is no longer any need for medicine, and if the wound becomes soft after that, and the hair is pricked with oil, if you repeat the treatment on that limb which has become softened by the wound, just as you did before; then cure until it is healed; and this is the form of the perfect cure.
Know that the souls of men are diverse in greatness and smallness, and according to that are your constraints; and do not be afraid to take another way to that which is studied by this art.
Of the treatment of fistula by cautery
When you treat fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatment brings no benefit, then you must cauterize according to this manner
Instruct the patient to hold his head still; and hold his ears between your hands in such a manner that he does not move them, does not lower his head; then put a wet cloth or vinegar juice on the oil; then burn the cautery which is partly: and keep it over the head as if it were a goose feather; gather up what has been cauterized if you see it, if there is a point from the one ear to the other; and if you see that there is a burn similar to a burn; but whatever happens, that which is over the head is worth more than your work.
After pressing the fistula until it is over, and draining the pus, and drying; and if it is closed, if the wound, and drain the wound; then put the cautery on hot and hold your hand over the cautery at the part of the thumb next to the oil, so that your hands do not tremble; and put the cautery in the grease of the oil, and hold it firmly.
If you approach the fire cautery at the beginning until the bone, that would be well. If this does not suffice, restart the cautery once more; otherwise, if you have done it carelessly, leave it for two days; then place a moist bandage on the burn and treat the desiccation until it heals, and if thirty days pass and it is still not healed, apply corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and then follow what is written in your chapter.
And there is a method of cautery for fistula which none of the ancients have mentioned. Understand fistula, and open the vessel; then put into the split .i. a little piece of gauze which is like this: and I make to the quantity of a third of an ounce; and hold your hand or gauze firmly, and do not move the patient, only that the melted wax does not come into contact with it; and it is advisable to put on the patient's oil a moist bandage of wool or cotton: the wax will thus adhere to the vessel of the fistula, and the patient will recover with great marvel at the health.
If the fistula is cured by the cautery as we have said, that is good. If not, if you must, administer a perforation to the nerve, and bring the fistula back to its normal place as it should be in its proper place.
If the fistula is cured by the cautery as we have said, that is good. If not, if you must, administer a perforation to the nerve, and bring the fistula back to its normal place as it should be in its proper place. If the fistula is cured by the cautery as we have said, that is good. If not, if you must, administer a perforation to the nerve, and bring the fistula back to its normal place as it should be in its proper place
When you have treated these cracks resulting from the divisions we mentioned, and the cure has not profited, then you should perform a small cautery culture according to this fashion:
When you have treated these cracks resulting from the divisions we mentioned, and the cure has not profited, then you should immediately perform a small cautery culture in that area until the pain ceases; after the cure, keep the limb still until it has healed.</start_of_turn>
of the abscess of the armpit.
When the abscess comes to the root of the arm or the elbow, or the shoulder or the root of the teeth, after making the opening and the wound becomes swollen and forms a fistula; and you should cure it as we have mentioned in the divisions, and it will not profit: so it is necessary that you have a small cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after you have cauterized the opening or perforation of the fistula, and keep your hand still until it has healed at the front and behind; and do this once or twice, after the cure of what we have mentioned in the cures, until it is healed; and if it is cured thus, that is good; but if not, you must uncover the limb and remove the corrupted bone, as you will find in this chapter.
The movement of the teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you have cured it with medicine, this is of no avail; therefore put the patient’s hand in your own; after that withdraw the cautery which will form afterwards in part as if you were putting on a pincer; and put the cautery into the tooth socket immediately, and hold your hand until the patient feels the heat coming from the root of the tooth; after that withdraw your hand and resume the cautery as you please; after that fill the patient’s mouth with salt water, and keep it closed for an hour and a quarter.
And in part, when the teeth which were moving are confirmed, and the soft gum is restrained, and the moisture is corrupted, it dries up.
De la douleur des dents.
When toothache comes from cold, or there is cold or heat, and medical cures do not help, then it is necessary to perform cautery in two ways: cautery of the nerve and cautery of the fire.</start_of_turn>
Cautery of the burn if such be that you grasp a burn of grease, and the end in a spoon of iron or pewter; after taking cotton and wrapping over the tip of a rag, and the boil in grease boils, and put upon the aching tooth immediately and hold until it is cold; and do this often until the remedy comes to the root of the tooth, and if you see if there is still grease and cotton in the grease, and put upon the aching tooth, and put on the iron again until the fire comes to the cheek of the tooth.
The cautery of fire if such be that you grasp a cauldron of iron or pewter, and either large if the fire does not come to the mouth of the patient; after heating the cautery, as it will be shaped afterwards, and put it upon the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cold; do this often, for the pain will be as great from the inside as from the outside. And it is expedient that the patient fill his mouth with good grease in the process of this cautery, and then take it out; and this is the form of the cautery:
When the scrophules are of phlegm and cold moisture, and are not obedient to digestion by medicines, then you must burn off the cautery head, for this is the form, and to do so you must make several incisions on the side of the wound to let out the fumes from the other part; and put the cautery hot on the abscess once, or twice, as much as it is necessary until the abscess bursts; and if the abscess is small, if you put the cautery on according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it in for two days; and put on wet cotton wool around it until the swelling has gone down. Then cure the wound of abscesses and sutures until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
When moisture prevails over the channels of the pores, and even when this comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be first relieved by solvent medicines; afterwards perform the cautery at the root of the throat, and keep it so that you do not go further than the throat, and do not burn more than is necessary. Afterwards perform another cautery at the joint of the collarbone at the base of the spine; and let the cautery which is called the "claw" remain as it is; and cure the limb as it has been said above until it is healed.
When moisture prevails over the channels of the pores, and even when this comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be first relieved by solvent medicines; afterwards perform the cautery at the root of the throat, and keep it so that you do not go further than the throat, and do not burn more than is necessary. Afterwards perform another cautery at the joint of the collarbone at the base of the spine; and let the cautery which is called the "claw" remain as it is; and cure the limb as it has been said above until it is healed. When moisture prevails over the pores and the patient has neither fever nor sweating, and the ailment is ancient, if you perform two cauteries on the forcele [jaw] in the front and one between the two nipples; and let the cautery which is called the "claw" remain as it is as it has been said above.
And if you see it, perform the cautery directly on all the cauteries which are called "points" because their shape is like that in the disease of the ears; and let the points be until .xxx., or more bent. Afterwards cure the limb according to what is said above, and let the cauteries be at .iij. rains according to this form.
And because of that, these cauteries are lighter, for these that you make at .iij. together.
because of the dislocation of the shoulder. When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterwards, support the patient on their back and chest; then take hold of the thumb which is within the armpit with your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated, if necessary, grasp the cautery which has about an inch of length: thus...
...and burn the thumb until it reaches the chest, and the burn would come out with three cauteries in total; and for this reason the cautery is made with the cautery which has about two nails, for the figure of cautery is like two nails; and the nerves are according to the fineness of a thread and this is the form of the cautery which has about two nails:
And never is the suture placed upon this nerve because there are seven cauteries there.
Then put on the cautery, broil the wounds with oil; then rest the patient, and do not move the limb until it is well comforted.</start_of_turn>
And if it is dislocated somewhat, whatever the cause, then make a cautery over the callous of the cautery clamp or the mouth of the cautery. For the joint is closed, and the moisture is strong and the patient is healed.</start_of_turn
of the pleura.
The ancient said that we must make for pleuresin cauteries of root of aristologe, and in part thus: take a root of aristologe long, the greatest that thou shalt find, and be dry, and be as great and as long as thy two hands; and the grease in oil, and the mark on the fire, and cauterize. I. Cauterize between the nipple and the collar, and II. Two small cauteries in descending on that which is below the beard; and III. Cauterize between the fifth rib and the twelfth, declining behind a rib. I. Cauterize at the pit of the stomach, and I. Another above the stomach, and I. Between two ribs, and II. Have two ribs below the pit defend the cautery that is between two ribs; and do not press me your hand, but make it open as when smelling.
And they say no ancient that no man uses a fire cautery resembling a scraper, and puts it between the ribs, until it comes to this incision; and they jump away because of the pain, as we have said in the incision of the liver. But in this work is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
of mice
When you treat the disease of the mouse from what we have said concerning the divisions of the cures, and it brings no benefit, then there remain two methods of cautery that are both good.
When you treat the disease of the mouse from what we have said concerning the divisions of the cures, and it brings no benefit, then there remain two methods of cautery that are both good.
and another method of cautery is if you fear that the cautery has too many nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and keep the limb in the place where the mouse is, or the patient’s belly comes towards the left side, and let the elevation be such that you support the limb according to the limb, according to the length of the bone, and the cautery should be according to the width of the bone.
After that, if the burn is large, do not flame the area any more until the burn is perceived from the other side. Then take away the cautery and there will be three. And if you see that the burn has progressed to the entirety of the burn area, take away the cautery at two-thirds of the burn. After that, cure when the wound has grown for a long time, and this is worth as much as the other cures mentioned before.
After that, if the burn is large, do not flame the area any more until the burn is perceived from the other side. Then take away the cautery and there will be three. And if you see that the burn has progressed to the entirety of the burn area, take away the cautery at two-thirds of the burn. After that, cure when the wound has grown for a long time, and this is worth as much as the other cures mentioned before.
The cautery is not useful for hydrosis, except in the manner called "asclytes." When you treat it according to the methods we have said in sections, and your cure does not benefit, then you must give it three cauteries around the belly, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, and two at the back on the spine, and one at the place of the pain; and let the cautery be close to the root of the hair.
After leaving the cautery open for a long time to drain the pus, do not leave the dressing on the patient after the cautery; and healing will be expedited, and both joints will be bound together with the help of God.
The shape of the belly cautery is like a nail which we have before shown; and the olive-shaped one is like that which is shown here
of swelling of the parts. When the parts are swollen with that which is hygro-pneumatic, and are filled with yellow bile, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the thumb between the thumb and the index finger; and keep your hand with the cautery towards you. And do not enter too deeply, for otherwise you will burn the yellow bile, and the cautery should be made in this fashion:
After that, make two incisions on the thigh; at the tip of the buttock. And let the incisions be long, one of them above the knee and the other below, between the thigh; and leave the incisions open along their length to cure, that they may be healed in peace; after that, perform the other treatments that we have said.
After that, make two incisions on the thigh; at the tip of the buttock. And let the incisions be long, one of them above the knee and the other below, between the thigh; and leave the incisions open along their length to cure, that they may be healed in peace; after that, perform the other treatments that we have said.
When the solution of the belly comes from cold and moisture, as the retaining and digestive virtue which is the stomach and the intestines is evacuated, and cannot be cured by means of treatment; and you see the patient well suffering and very weak, if you make a great burn on the stomach as it has been said above or a burn of the stomach, at the burn that circulates; and three burns around the abdominal cavity at all times.
If you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, perform a cautery on the armpit, and indeed cautery on each side, and three small cauteries on the abdomen below the large one; for the cure is beneficial when there is good aid.
If you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, perform a cautery on the armpit, and indeed cautery on each side, and three small cauteries on the abdomen below the large one; for the cure is beneficial when there is good aid.
When hemorrhoids are deep-seated, single or multiple, and are old and are composed of cold and moist corrupted humors, they are cured as we have said in divisions; and it does no good to make cauteries: indeed cautery on the spine of the back is all that is of any use, which is to remove the knots above the buttock and below the triangle, and indeed cautery of the buttock itself. Two must be done;
If you think the stomach is chilled and the meat is not cooked, and you see the face puffed up, then you must apply a large cautery to the stomach, as it is said above, and another to the liver, and another to the spleen throughout the staple; and leave the cautery on for a long time. After that, cure the wound until it is healed.
If you think the stomach is chilled and the meat is not cooked, and you see the face puffed up, then you must apply a large cautery to the stomach, as it is said above, and another to the liver, and another to the spleen throughout the staple; and leave the cautery on for a long time. After that, cure the wound until it is healed.
When you deal with the thelul, if you see the cautery which appears to scratch, then grasp it firmly with your hand and put it right over the affected area; and leave it there until the bleeding stops by itself. Do this once or twice; and if there is much thelul, if you cauterize each one as we have said; after that, cure the wound with useful remedies until it is healed; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the outside, you will have more help.
Of a wound that is not properly treated
When the patient cannot endure the size or opening, as we have mentioned before, if there be any ailment that cannot be cured except by cautery.
When there is no opening or fistula, and it is filled with pus and corrupted moisture, if the physician tries in vain to cure it, and maintains that the wound should be cauterized, it is necessary to remove the cautery as soon as it seems to burn, and to insert it into the fistula as much as it will hold, and repeat the cautery until the burnings are cured, when the wound is rigid and corrupted; once, or twice, or three times, according to the amount of matter that must be removed; and beware of nerves that are nearby and of large veins. If the fistula is close to the bladder or intestines, be cautious of these parts, and do not do more harm than necessary; after cauterizing, cure the wound until it is healed, and if the parts are stiff and the matter is ossified along the edges, then cauterize once more; if the matter is not ossified, leave the wound open until it is healed, and corrupt the bone that is beneath, as we mentioned before.
Of the kidney disease When pain from swelling comes with abundant vomiting, and does not abate with the help of a woman, then it is to be known that you must cauterize on the kidneys both on one side and the other side above the navel; and if we cauterize them in the middle, if there are two cauteries in a line, it will be more helpful.</start_of_turn>
Of the bladder When the bladder is swollen and weak from pain and moisture, and the patient retains urine, then you must cauterize on the lower part of the bladder above the navel, at the place where the hair ends and the skin begins, and make two or three cauteries as long as a bean; and make one cauterization at the back or two if necessary; and make a cauterization of the navel as described before.</start_of_turn
De la marris. When the marrow is cold and moist, and does not allow me to conceive, and the flowers are corrupted and their endings are late; and when they come, if there is great pain: then it is to be known that it must be cauterized around the bone, as we have said or cauterize the bladder, and two cauteries behind the loin; or the cauteries are applied to the navel, as we have said.</start_of_turn>
De la hainche.
When viscous moisture descends to the thigh bone, and by this cause it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and is found to be swollen with pain, if it is known that the patient must cauterize the patient above the thigh bone at the circumference, and mark in front of the limb around the thigh if it twists, so that the thigh is within the circumference; and if the cauteries are made like those which we have cauterized the stomach.</start_of_turn
And if these cautery treatments are not present, make two cauteries of the olive tree, and let the cautery be as strong as all the others; and cure until it is healed.
And if these cautery treatments are not present, make two cauteries of the olive tree, and let the cautery be as strong as all the others; and cure until it is healed. When pain comes into the groin, due to cold and moisture, the patient is cured of this by what we have said in the previous section; and the cure is not worth the disease which is old: therefore it is necessary to purge the patient of the foul humors or other solid pills that are similar.
After the fire cautery; and the manner of the fire cautery is two: that is to say, with assembled medicines in the embers, and fire cautery. The fire cautery is done according to four methods, of which one is as follows: that you cauterize on the hip bone twice; the third time in a triangular shape, making a good depth and great, and having between each cautery an interval equal to the thickness of a thumb, or olive oil; never make the cautery in the middle of the hip bone, for there are three according to this form.
And if you see that the fire cautery is done on the circumference of the circle which we mentioned concerning the dislocation of the hip; but make part of the manner that the circle contains the entire hip, and all the thickness of the thigh is parallel to the circle.
And this is the manner in which one does it in sciatica, when the pain is in the hip and does not reach up to the thigh or leg. And if it comes up to the thigh and leg, make two cauteries here or the patient says that the pain is there; and make one cautery below the ankle three times, on the left side once; and either the cautery is blunt or the thickness of the thigh is wide; and if the patient feels that the pain extends up to two fingers or almost as much, make the cautery at the place where the pain is felt twice or three times at the cautery which is called "points".
And if he has come to this, if the pain persists from the knee to the thigh, let him perform cautery with the blunt or circular cautery, and keep him well guarded in all his cauteries, that you leave neither the cautery nor the burning of nerves and great arteries, and that you cause him no further pain or contraction.
And I myself have seen several people who have performed cautery on the ankle bone, and left it until the limb was completely limp, and they pierced it also, and it was perforated and corrupted throughout. After a solution of the belly from which death resulted
And if the pain is in several parts together, perform cautery on both at the same time, according to this method. // And they say in the cautery of the hip, for this is the method, make one like a nail of a doctor, or less, and be at the head as thick as a nutmeg, or less, and be with hooks and be between hooks, or from one hook to the other at a distance equal to the amount of a nut; and let the hooks be over two parts, and be like nails, and there should be one inch of burn well made. And this is the form:
And let the hair grow until it is all red and soft, and then place it on the box of the aching shoulder; and let it burn for a while; and then cauterize once. Leave it for two days. Then make an ointment of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; after the cure of the swelling until it is healed.
Albucasim says that our methods often use this cautery because of its quick effect, and we see those who use it; and all these boils are cauterized, which can cause suffering, and there it is where care is needed.</start_of_turn>
of backache.</start_of_turn>
When pain comes to the back, or from sitting or percussion or from too great an evacuation of blood, or from similar symptoms of cold spreading matter, of none of these symptoms is the fire cautery of any value, save for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
When the patient is devoid of stinking pills or other similar things, we must make three lines signed with a mark on the back, loin or where the pain is located; and make three or four cauteries according to the virtue and the quantity that the patient can endure; and the cautery must be made according to the cautery which is called "poins"; and if you see this, make two or three cauteries at the middle cautery according to this form:
Many times this disease comes as a small wound, and the sign of its beginning is that it has burst open in the loin when it comes on; and there is doubt and fear; and you find at the back of the spine on the back and on us its appearance which comes after the others.
When you see that and you see it healed, if you cauterize at the cautery of this circle according to this fashion.
When you see that and you see it healed, if you cauterize at the cautery of this circle according to this fashion. If you see that some part of the spine has become swollen, and if you see that, if you cauterize around the spine at the cautery point, about one or two lines, and keep the points close together. After that, cure the wound until it is healed as we have said, and beware that you do not bring too much cautery at once which is in vain.</start_of_turn>
of joint pain
When joint pain arises from moisture that has spread throughout the limb, and when the pain originates from within the bone, it is called "podagre" properly. And when the cause is cold and the disease does not yield to medicines, it is often cured by cautery in this way: make a mark of the cautery around the joint of the limb, and apply the cautery as follows:
And if it is necessary to prick the surface of the bone, make a burn mark at the whole of the cautery and call it "point". And if the pain spreads up to the knee and other joints, and this often happens, make a burn on each knee twice or thrice on each side, with the entire olive burn; and if you must do more, do so, but do not hold your hand too long that the burn becomes black.
And if the pain goes down to the knee and the back, administer the cautery as we have said in this chapter. And if the pain is in the hands, if you prick around the nail twice. And if there remains no pain, if you prick on some joint and on the root of the hand; and if the pain comes down to the buttocks or the shoulder blades, if you burn some part of it, and give the patient good guidance and prescribe medicines. For if you give the patient good guidance and evacuate phlegm, you will be healed by the help of God.
De la routure dou syfac.
When the routure comes, and the bowel descends like stones and it is new, if you see that when you attempt to cure it, it does not mend itself; and that it causes things to leave the belly, so that the pain descends from the belly; then make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his shoulder tight until the bowel is repaired, and keep his arms at your sides, and mark with your finger the routure above the shoulderbone, and at any sign that it resembles half of a circle below the ribs; then withdraw the cautery in this form:
until it is soft and it emits sighs; then bring back the bowels to their place; and the assistant will hold his hand over so that they do not return backwards; and take care of the wounds of the patient, and put some lint and some gauze on the wounds, and another on his hand; then put the cautery on the sign at your whole hand, and keep it straight and hold it until you have reached the bone; and if you do not reach it the first time, if you try again until you reach the bone; and take care prudently that the bowels do not protrude when you are making the cautery; that you do not burn them; and by this the patient will not die, or any other evil.
And towels that you do not bring up to the cautery, your work is worth nothing. And it is necessary that the cautery of the small people be subtle according to their measure, and that of the great people also great according to their measure; after two days cure the body of the burn until the eschar is bony; after that cure other ailments as long as he is sane, and keep the patient forty days on his back until the wound is well closed; and make sure that his movements are lazy, so that the urine does not flow when he stirs to go to bed.
After forty days, when he wants to rise, let him be supported by a well-made stool, and let him rest for forty days; and let him have good rest, so that he works little and avoids too great a supply of drink and eating, and too great a lifting of the head; and when he has learned this, if he is sane throughout. And I shall tell you afterwards about the treatment of the tail in this chapter. of the evacuation of the belly
When routes come out in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow any more, then you must make a cautery of the route according to its quantity, and either a third or a fourth of the root; after that, treat it as we have said. None of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized with the cautery at two angles according to this form.
But first mark the rootlet and make a line along the width of the route, and another below, and hold your hand firmly with all your might at the end of the cautery. But the first cauteries are lighter and milder.
of ancient pain in no limb. When pain arises in any limb, whether from injury or from sitting, and the pain persists for a long time, and the medical cure proves useless, then it is recommended to cauterize the area using the cautery known as the "points." The cautery should be performed according to the length of the limb, its breadth, its weakness, its toughness, and its twisting and painfulness. If the first cautery is successful, well and good; if not, repeat the process. Indeed, it is customary to perform the cautery on the area that is closest to the painful area, so that one can make the cauteries until the patient is cured.
When pain arises in any limb, whether from injury or from sitting, and the pain persists for a long time, and the medical cure proves useless, then it is recommended to cauterize the area using the cautery known as the "points." The cautery should be performed according to the length of the limb, its breadth, its weakness, its toughness, and its twisting and painfulness. If the first cautery is successful, well and good; if not, repeat the process. Indeed, it is customary to perform the cautery on the area that is closest to the painful area, so that one can make the cauteries until the patient is cured.
The disease that arises from putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy is not often cured by cautery, but even when it is, the patient often remains sick. If you see the disease in its early stages, take heed and cure it as we have described in the division; do not linger or delay, for if the corruption has spread throughout the body, even repeated cauteries will not be of any avail. Therefore, when cauterizing the head, do so as follows: first cauterize the top of the head, then the front of the head below the eyebrows; then on each side of the nose, and finally on the back of the head below the hairline. Keep your hand over the area being cauterized until the bones are exposed, and until the surrounding tissue has bled out so that the vapors of the humors can escape; then cauterize the mouse according to the situation.
And if there is a mixture of moisture everywhere; and it appears openly, if you must use these cauteries that we have mentioned or chief, namely a cautery on the top of the thumb, two cauteries on the spine of the collarbone, three cauteries on the spine of the shoulder, one large on the elbow and one other elsewhere, two on the two thumbs, two on the scapulae, two on the flanks, two on the Achilles tendons, and one on any joint of the hands or feet, and on the pits of the hands; keep away from the nerves that are behind the calcaneus, so that you do not burn them; and never make the cautery on the bones of the heel or the bones of the stomach or the liver.
And the more you make the cautery, the more help you give, and the more benefit you gain; and the patients do not feel pain from the cautery as if they would feel it if it were new, because the flesh is already corrupted. It is necessary that the cautery be large and small according to the members and joints, as you do in handling herbs. After curing the wound several times with flour and honey and other cures until it is healed.
from swelling
When swelling comes to any limb and is cured by medicines, oils, and plasters, and is not completely healed, then it is done to cauterize on the limb according to the greatness and smallness of the limb; and either the cautery is made at the root of the thumb or at the tip of the ring finger. Then it is cured with ointment until it is healed. And at no time is cautery done on the hand, foot, or back, at the issue of the nerve that makes the limb immobile, or if it is bony swelling. And all this is done without any hindrance if one is skilled in the limb and the issue of the moving nerves around the bone.
When swelling comes to any limb and is cured by medicines, oils, and plasters, and is not completely healed, then it is done to cauterize on the limb according to the greatness and smallness of the limb; and either the cautery is made at the root of the thumb or at the tip of the ring finger. Then it is cured with ointment until it is healed. And at no time is cautery done on the hand, foot, or back, at the issue of the nerve that makes the limb immobile, or if it is bony swelling. And all this is done without any hindrance if one is skilled in the limb and the issue of the moving nerves around the bone.
When the disease called "albaras" is present, and medicine is of no avail, then it is done to cauterize with a needle once, according to the quantity of the area, until the swelling is bony and has changed colour; then it is cured with flour of times and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and without colocynth and alum, a part of each; and all this is mixed together, and bound up with a bandage, and left to heal until it is healed
The cure of chancre by cautery
When the chancre begins, and you see it stop, if you cauterize at the circle [cautery] which appears, all around the circumference of the chancre. And all the wise men say that one should cauterize also in the middle of the chancre; but I do not think that is good, for I fear that it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have seen it happen many times; and the right thing is that it be cauterized around, at the circle which is called the "circle", as we have said concerning the cautery.
of the swelling that cannot be cured
When anyone has an ailment called "adubelati," and it lingers without diminishing or due to the excessive production of the disease in the patient when he is decrepit (that is, too old) and there is much blood, or for other reasons; and you see it haste to die: then cauterize around the mouth of a small cautery by pricking; after that leave it in place. For it will haste to die.
And if you see it turn with the entire cautery, if it is hot, cauterize the cautery again so that this is the shape:
And put your hand in the middle of this ailment that is called "adubelati" as long as the cautery has perceived the pain, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels relief in part as the disease progresses. After that cure until it is perfectly healed.
The fire cautery. Instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
The fire cautery. Instructs the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Many times it happens that when a piece of meat is defaced a disease arises which is called "clos" according to our understanding, and is a great thing feared that causes the limb to swell. And the cautery of this disease is in two ways. That is to say, fire cautery and hot water cautery. Fire cautery is that which is done by cauterizing as with a needle a piece of meat just as if it were a pin of wool, and which is done with iron heated to the measure that it can penetrate the abscess of all parts, and that there be subtle margins; after which one puts all around the abscess and holds the hand tightly around the abscess until it comes to the front of the abscess; and one leaves it in place for two days until it begins to discharge pus; then one makes an poultice of bruised wild mallow seeds with wool, and leaves the poultice in place throughout the night, and one closes the abscess tightly and will remove it from its roots. Then one cures the wound by applying pressure until it is healed.
If the abscess is converted by the discharge of the flesh, and this happens many times in the hand and the foot, if one must perform hot water cautery; this is in part as follows: take a needle of silver or iron, or a piece of wool, and put it on the abscess and the surrounding area, that is to say, burn the verrucae; then put the needle on so that it reaches all around, then put a little of hot water, and hold the hand firmly, pressing the hand by turning so that the margin of the needle comes to the root of the abscess, and can find the hot water going deep down to the root; and let the patient drink a little of the hot water for an hour; then leave it in place, and it will drain out all at once from all its roots. Do this again until all of the abscess is gone, and then cure the wounds which cause the swelling.
You have not provided any text for me to translate, so I am unable to provide a translation.
When the body trembles from cold, or from a quartan fever or from another, if you make four cauteries on the spine of the back, one cautery between the shoulder blades, and one cautery at the waist and one on the stomach at the olive cautery; if you leave them on, the trembling will cease and the patient will be cured of the cold.
When the body trembles from cold, or from a quartan fever or from another, if you make four cauteries on the spine of the back, one cautery between the shoulder blades, and one cautery at the waist and one on the stomach at the olive cautery; if you leave them on, the trembling will cease and the patient will be cured of the cold.
Whenever the body is bathed in sweat, or pustules swell up, which come from corrupted matters; if you do this at the first sign, when they appear, make a cautery on each head of the pustule: a subtle cautery of fir of myrtle, from which the point should be grasped by the fire, or of aristegall root, or by the cautery of lentils. And never should you cauterize them at the beginning when they appear, but only in this manner, and they will not be cut through, but will be broken up by the excess from which they come, and will be healed; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
When the artery is cut. When the artery is cut, there is often great bleeding from the artery at the wound which comes from the surgeon, or from the incision of the abscess, or from the cautery of the limb, and similar things; and it is a mournful thing to watch.</start_of_turn>
And whenever this happens, if you are in a hurry to put your thumb on the wound of the vein, and you strain too much without calming your thumb, and no blood comes out anymore; then take olive oil cauteries of various sizes and make them red; then press down, that is, large or small as it is suitable for the wound and the limb in which the artery is passing, and put the cautery on that vein or hold your thumb there, and hold the cautery as long as it is necessary without letting it go.</start_of_turn>
And if there is bleeding again when you remove your thumb from the vein, and the cautery is finished, take hold of another cautery that is on the fire immediately.
And do not cease to do this one after the other until the limb is restored; and beware that you do not damage the nerve that is nearby, and that no other harm comes upon the patient; and take notice that when without displacement of an artery, it is not possible to fill it up properly even when the artery is large, except by one of the three methods that we have mentioned: or by cautery, or by extraction when it is not otherwise treated, or by strong ligation of thread, or by medicines placed upon it that have power to restore blood flow. And let it be firmly held in place afterward.
Whoever brings about the restoration of the limb violently with cloths or with the laying on of burning things, or other similar things, if it does not prove helpful, does harm.</start_of_turn>
And if there is no other remedy and there is no medicine present, if necessary put your two fingers on the wound of the vein as we have said, and keep them in place until the bleeding stops; and do not move the limb, but moisten it with cold water often so that it may be cold to the touch as long as the limb is frozen and swollen and resting; and make incisions in front of this where cautery and medicines must be applied.</start_of_turn>
Now we have said or previously in the first chapter that every disease in which it is necessary to perform cautery of fire, or of applied medicine, and the methods, causes and instruments, and forms of cauteries; and in this chapter we shall speak of those matters in this way that we find them more conveniently in this chapter through this way.
And thus, as I begin this chapter, it is necessary, my son, to learn that in this chapter there is more peril and fear than in the previous chapters of the cauteries, and for this reason it is necessary to take greater precautions.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you that you do not undertake madness. For many people come to cures in various ways. If they come from those who have suffered so greatly from their illness that they move lightly from fear of their disease, and from the greatness of their malice; of these things we must have fear. And of these there are some who make you understand, saying: "Wait, I am ready"; and the illness is desperate. It does not suffice for me that you yield to those who come to you who have this manner, but put more great caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not carelessly speak more than reasonably of what you are certain of, and of what you have taken and lost; and use prognosis and indication in the treatment of your patients so that salvation is either obtained or converted; and this will help you to acquire good renown, glory, and memory that lasts long.
Very dear son, our lords, you must understand and rejoice, and if you yearn to be inspired by the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selon ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’à piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.
Or I have commanded thee this chapter by dividing it into chapters, according to that which is before or the chapter of cautery, that I have commanded thee from the chief to the feet, forasmuch thou shalt find more easily that of which thou hast need.
Saiches that this ailment comes out many times as soon as the child is born, and when the bail is strained too strong the head of the child; and never comes from any other cause save that which does not go away
And I have never seen such a disease vanish except in childhood, and in all that I have heard, the patient always died; for this reason I believe that it is better to leave the work in parts rather than to cure it.
And I once saw a child in whom the bone was completely split with pain, and the head grew so much that it could not bear; and I believed that the moisture was so great that it would kill the patient, and when it is collected between the bone and the flesh, between the marrow and the bone; and the work is such that if the moisture is between the marrow and the bone, and the incision is small, you must make a wide cut; and as long as the moisture remains, the form is like that of a spasm
If the moisture is deeper, and the incision is larger, if you make two incisions in the shape of a cross, following this form:
If moisture swells the bone, and the sign that you see the head of the bone protrude from the chest, and it sharpens when you press it with your hand from within, and it does not return: if you suspect that the head of the bone is fractured, you must make two incisions as follows:
If moisture swells the bone, and the sign that you see the head of the bone protruding from the chest, and it sharpens when you press it with your hand from within, and it does not return: if you suspect that the head of the bone is fractured, you must make two incisions as follows:
Another method of incision is to look or open the greater wing of the scapula, and the assembly of the edge; for it is never before; never behind; never to the right; and never to the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.
When the bone is fractured or the vein is opened, and the cavity is filled with liquid, do as you please; but beware that you do not cover the artery; let the blood flow freely, for if the patient dies from excessive bleeding and evacuation of moisture.
When there is no known disease which is called a "catarrh" which has pus or blood, and the disease is ancient, and the medicine does not profit, then the only cure is to cauterize with that which will not cover the arteries.
It is not possible for me to translate the given text, as the provided text is written in Old French and requires specialized knowledge of the language and its syntax.
If you see it, hold the sponge below the artery and close the wound above, cutting as much as .ij. inches across the middle.</start_of_turn>
When the vein is closed, if blood spurts continuously, stop it immediately.</start_of_turn>
And if the artery does not open on feeling, if you know that two fingers’ breadth will suffice, mark the spot and proceed until bone; what may be forced out with blood should be done so if it be more than two fingers’ breadth, and less if possible. According to what the patient can bear and the filling of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone point where the stitches were placed, if the tape that was put around them has not held, then strain the wound and tie it up, and treat it with oil until it is healed.
And if the artery does not open on feeling, if you know that two fingers’ breadth will suffice, mark the spot and proceed until bone; what may be forced out with blood should be done so if it be more than two fingers’ breadth, and less if possible. According to what the patient can bear and the filling of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone point where the stitches were placed, if the tape that was put around them has not held, then strain the wound and tie it up, and treat it with oil until it is healed.
When ancient dropsy comes with acute catarrh, because of the tears and the choleric humours in the temples and the ancient sode are lost and similar things, and it is treated by means of medical cures and all that does not benefit, except for the cauterization of the arteries of the temples.
And thus the method of extracting them is that if the patient makes the hair of his temples grow long, and understands the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is not put back as quickly as in some men who are too cold; and if it is put back, the patient must raise his head from some covering, then rub the limb with no rough cloth, and pour cold water over it until the artery opens clearly; then take the spatumile, which is its shape:
And thus the method of extracting them is that if the patient makes the hair of his temples grow long, and understands the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is not put back as quickly as in some men who are too cold; and if it is put back, the patient must raise his head from some covering, then rub the limb with no rough cloth, and pour cold water over it until the artery opens clearly; then take the spatumile, which is its shape, and gently stretch the leather until you see the artery, then pull it up tightly with tweezers, and cut off the hair at the root. For if it is not cut off, it will not jump out without pain in all its parts.
And pull out blood from the groin to the elbow, just as much as is necessary; and if the artery is large, it is convenient to bind it with two strong threads of silk, so that no blood will appear in front of the wound, and let the blood drain naturally; then cut away the surplus that is between the two threads in that place, and if you see that, if you wish, you can cauterize with a cautery needle until the hair is cut off; and that is the best remedy, if the patient has no fever and is of a warm complexion.
For the fire cautery is useful for finishing off moisture: because of this it is of more use against moisture. For it is useful to extract the arteries that are filled with much cotton and put on well-made bandages; and when you remove them, if you are cured of dry medicines that cause the growth of hair and bandages, as long as you are sane; and if you do not have a staunch for the artery as you should when you cover with cautery, or you use the hand of vitriol and strain it from your hand, which is without stain; and if you do not have that, if you must remove the limb, you must do so until it is frozen, and rise the limb with cold water until it stops, and strain it as it should be strained; and what is more tender and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this cautery cutting through a third part, but the cutting should be well spaced to ward off more length of heat. For when the instruments are too tense, it holds less heat. The fire cautery must have between the joints a space of one inch. Then, when you have marked the area with needles, let the loop of the forceps burn over until it reaches the bone, and grasp the vein with the forceps; and keep the bones separated from each other because they are not soldered by this cautery in any way. This is the form of the fire cautery.
The fire cautery must have between the joints a space of one inch. Then, when you have marked the area with needles, let the loop of the forceps burn over until it reaches the bone, and grasp the vein with the forceps; and keep the bones separated from each other because they are not soldered by this cautery in any way. This is the form of the fire cautery.
When the tears of the eyes descend from veins that are above the root of the head, and it does not profit any medical cure in doing so, and you see the patient’s face swell up, and feel pain in his front and gait like a madman; and although they are tense and moist if paper towels are placed over them, and are shaken off by the heat of the tears, if there is no other remedy for this cure.
And they call it the ancient 'cure contuse'; and you must make the patient who has this ailment grow the hair front and back, then make two incisions or fronts equally according to the length of the front; and let one of the incisions be as much as one-third of the way down the front swallowing the juice until it is level, and the other one-third has half the costles of paper above it; keep the incision of the arteries that are half the costles of paper above it; and hold your hand from the continuation of the two mandibles, and let there be a wound of the quantity of two-thirds to cross the joint.
from the incision which is over the temple down to the second incision; and scrape out all the marrow that is between the two incisions to the top of the bone, then make the other half of the wound down to the other second, and then take out this piece of cautery.
If in the first fissure the instrument which is called the “cultellaire,” and which is very well trenchant on one side, and on the other side is smooth, is not deeply trenchant, and this is its form: If in the first fissure the instrument which is called the “cultellaire,” and which is very well trenchant on one side, and on the other side is smooth, is not deeply trenchant, and this is its form:
because of the swelling of the abscess
When no acute cautery is used, you see the pupils tense and small, and the vision blurred; and the hair on the head prickles, and there is great pain, and the patient coughs; then drool from these accidents as from those matters and this cautery does not come from many veins, but from many wounds.
When you command the patient to raise his front, then make a large incision from the left temple to the right temple, and so on. That is to say. Begin from the incision of the left temple to the right temple, and go down to the bone; and remove your hand from the nerves of the temples that move towards the cheek; and when the bone is exposed, if there is blood, drain all the blood with a sponge, and then dry between the two layers of the incision and put in cotton wool, and try to hold it in place; then apply damp cloths soaked in wine and oil, and keep it covered with a bandage; when it is healed, it is necessary to rub the bone until it begins to grow back, and then treat it with drying things that will cause it to harden.</start_of_turn>
Partly in this way: take three parts of wheat flower and three parts of colophony, and make a poultice; and administer it to these wounds to harden all around.</start_of_turn
From the swelling of the ears
Everything that causes swelling of the ears is one of three things: grains, or pus, or stone or other foreign bodies; or seed, as in cases of peas, beans, or barley; or a flowing liquid as in the case of fever and chills and other things.
When there is a stone or other foreign body in the ear that does not fit into the ear, do not put the ear into the sun. If you see the stone, if no violet oil or mastic oil comes from it, then prepare for extraction; and let him vomit, and stop the bleeding from the nose when he vomits, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and extend the ear downwards. Many times the pain will go away by this cure; and if it does not go away, prepare for extraction with needles, as this is the form:
If the stone comes out by itself, that is good; if not, prepare for extraction with small needles of double curvature; and if it does not come out by this, take a pinch of the flesh and tear a part of the ear very little, and stop the bleeding that comes from the wound with wax if necessary; then the pain will go away, for many times it comes out by itself as we have said; and if it does not come out in this way, take hold of the flesh around the wound and press on the stone or whatever it is, and the pain will go away. If these things do not suffice, if you are in a hurry to make an incision at the ear base as well as at the apex of the chalazion vein, and if there is spasm, do not hesitate to make the incision first at the front of the head; then draw the patient’s head between your hands and turn the ear downwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear, at the fatty tissue or bone depending on which is easier; and let the vein bleed out as much as necessary, and evacuate the pus from the wound until it is healed. If it is grains that are swollen and inflamed, administer extraction; and if it cannot be extracted, administer sponge-rubber according to this form:
But make no incision until you think the grain is moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have made many attempts; then extract it with tweezers and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction is aligned.</start_of_turn>
When the ear aches, the patient should immediately apply a warm compress to the ear and fill it with cotton wool. If the pain persists, take many small stones according to the length of the ear canal and push them in with tweezers; put the patient’s ear to the fire; and put one or two stones into the ear, and pull out the pieces from the other side, and burn another stone on the stone that is in the ear; and do this until the pain is gone. If you see that the pain has gone, take the tweezers and grasp one of the stones in the ear, and burn the other stone as long as the joint is painful; then put in the rest of the stones until the pain is gone, as we have said in the stone.
In the extraction of the tooth, if it is of small size, as with a flea and other things, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of large size, we must feel it, and it is the easiest thing to extract the tooth that is in the ear.
In the extraction of worms from the ear, when you have cured it as we have said in the division or treated with distillations, the cure does not help, if you look at the ear in the sun: if there are no worms, if you see only subtle wounds, and if you do not see any, take the tweezers which are like this:
And let the opening be broad and deep. And as for the greater chief of the ear, according to the quantity of the suffering of the patient, order that it be raised up to the top of the ear; do this often until you see that it issues. And if it does not obey to issue, if I press upon the cotton wool as I have said concerning the stone; and if it does not emerge forthwith as we have said, if you must, administer distillations which the ancients have proved useful in the cutting of herbs, and you will find them or treat them with distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all these instruments, thus is the form as you see.
And let the silver or gold be made into small pieces, and over these let there be poured a distillation; and let there be pressed from within the instrument a piece of lint well made for this purpose. If you see that there is taken one hair and wrapped around the point of the ear immediately with cotton wool; then pour in your oil or juice, and what you see of your medicines in the ear; and let the ear be closed. Then put back the lint into the cotton wool all around, and press your hand firmly until the oil is distilled or almost from the ear; and let the patient feel within, and let the distillation be neither too hot nor too cold, for the medicine will not be so good.
Of the swelling of the ears.
No child is born without a mark on their ear; and the same thing happens at home by bursting of a wound or a hair growing in the ear. Such bursting never comes without leaving a mark on the ear, if one does not look; and never happens without leaving a mark.
When it comes out without leaving a mark, if one does not look, it is a sign of serious illness in many conditions; and in this case one sees that you put the ear of the patient in the sun; look inside: if you see the opening, if the opening has all that surrounding it, that is its form.
And whether it is yellow or greenish in front and behind all around, if it does not bleed the ear; if the opening is of a hair or a piece of the ear, if you have subtle scratches, and the wound is slight, as long as that hair is all bony.
And if swelling arises in the ear, take one blunt lancet and scratch it lightly at the fire, then place or press against the ear. If you feel the swelling which the patient feels in the ear, pierce lightly, and do not damage the nerves of the ear; then put in the ear a sponge according to the size of the perforation, and the moisture in the Egyptian position.
Do not do anything until the wound is healed, or take a sponge and soak it in rose-colored liquid, and sprinkle it with powdered vitriol; and if you see the ear fleeing, it is likely that you have torn the sponge and must insert another sponge soaked in oil of roses and beeswax until the swelling is bony; then cure it until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
And if there is discharge of blood comes, immerse a sponge and cover it with cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other cures that will harden the loosening of blood which are either to perform distillations.</start_of_turn
De la char des papieres.
This is the end of the provided text, and I am unable to translate the remaining portion as it is not included in the given context.
And if without remedy, if the burn with the lenticular caustic is left on, and the burner after the incision is worth moving; and many times they must be repeated, for nothing remains of their root. And when they are burned by fire, if they are burned through those roots, they do not return anymore.
De la gresle.
Many times come papers of pus from things that seem greasy in their form and hardness; for this is the disease called "granulin", and is an assembly of large moisture in the papere of the belly and of the feet; the work is such: take warning if the granulin moves from one side to the other, and this is a light thing to know; then make a large incision, then strip away the soft part lightly, then take tweezers and grasp. If you do not grasp it in the right direction, you will not see the papere; and if the wound is large, if the assembly has a costure, and cure until it is healed; and if it is small, do not use force, for it will be restored as soon as the swelling subsides and the pus is drained.
And if the granulin descends into the ear towards the upper part, if you reverse the papere, and bring the granulin to a few tweezers, grasp and press from one side to the other; and if the papere is loosened by the incision, this will cause no harm; and when the granulin is grasped, if you leave the dirty oil, cure the body of that which is drained until the patient is healed.
of the fat of the pus.
The fat of the ox is enclosed in paper tissues and this has happened more to the common folk than to the nobles; for the mucus runs from their eyes and they are unable to behold the sunlight for fear that the tears will run from their eyes; and for this reason they lie with their faces down and sleep, and their paper tissues are soaked with moisture that swells and appears covered in the fat of the ox which breaks out in the oil. And when you press the limb to your chest and feel the fat between your thighs.
The manner of the work is that the patient puts his head in order; then take one sheet of linen and make a circle around the quantity of fat in the chest part, and put it on; and press on your thighs from one side and the other, so that the fat is assembled together in the circle; then make in the middle of the moisture at the spiddle trenching a wound not more large than the wound we make to the vein; and make the leather firm as long as you see the fat; and in many positions comes fat from the wound, according to the shape of a white piece of fat.
Extract the thick piece of marrow between your thighs at the waist, and twist your hand to the right and to the left as much as possible; and keep that you do not touch the wound, that you do not come near to the oil until it is finished, that you do not stain it.
And if it exits not at the commencement of the incision, if you enlarge the incision slightly as far as it will open; then take out the foreign body as we have said, and moisten the bandage with oil and water, and put on the limb, and strain from bending.
And if there are such persons who scratch themselves and put on things to corrupt that moisture which is dried up. Then cure it until it is healed. And if it comes to the limb in post-mortem, if you cure abscesses that are bursting, as much as it is healed.</start_of_turn>
hair of papers
When paper is born with hair attached other than its natural state, and is enclosed, if it irritates the eyes, it causes various diseases like tears and softening of paper and glue, as well as the destruction of the eyes; the cure for this is in three ways: either by applying cautery with fire, or by medicine with water, according to what is before or alongside the cautery, or by incision and suture or by thread, according to what I shall say.
You must place the patient’s head in your left hand, then pull the paper from the oil at your left hand side; if it is converted, that is good; if not, if there is an awl at all.i. thread from above; either cut the margin of the paper or the hair will be pulled out; then take one thread from below and pass it through all the paper, and pull it out at the scraper; then make in the lower part of the paper, from the bottom of the hair, the hair that is attached, with all the surrounding fat, from the great tear until the little one; then draw out one thread and put under the paper a little fold of cotton and bandage, and sign on the paper a figure like a mistletoe berry, and it is sufficient that the figure be according to the quantity that you see elevate the paper which is assigned to you.
And if there is a part that has met with great quantity of paper according to what the paper is softened; then make on all the surrounding fat on the .ij. lines that you have signed, and from the great tear until the little one; and either the one of the incisions close to the natural hair in the thickness of a root, then hold the ointment in one of the .ij. angles of the wound, and then close all; then assemble the .ij. layers with a suture of a needle with all.i. thread of fine wool, and wipe the blood, and make air the surplus of threads over the .ij. corners of all things glued, as you see; and if you see that, and if not, leave the suture and the threads until .iij. days or .iiij. days; then cure the wound with a suture of dry and constricting things, for the paper returns to its place at the support of the wound and the assembly of the wound, but the suture is stiff (as they say the old ones), and that is laborious;
And if in another way: if you mark the mark of a figure which is just like the fuelle of a myrtle, as we have said, at that point you must remove two ounces in accordance with the form which is here.
Then cover what is above with small forces equally according to the form which is here:
And if you are unable to hold the pliers, and the thing is not even, if you take a needle or there is some thread, and you bind the mark with the needle; and you take another thread and bind the great limb, and the second thread you bind the small one, and you assemble between your two the threads equally; then hold your hand equally, and hold all the leather above where you have marked, as we have said, and then assemble the two layers of the wound with sutures, and cure until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, if you apply cerate and other soothing ointments.
And never has it happened that the hair of the beard has been converted: if you use what we have said about incision; but the costure in one and the other is more artificial.
The cure for carbuncles is as follows: convert the beard hair and the hair of the head according to what has been said, and then make two incisions each as long as the beard and wide enough for two fingers; and take two threads of the same length as the beard. Then assemble one to the other securely over what rests on the beard oil, and strain the two carbuncles from the two ends; and leave it in place for a few days. The skin that has been strained will become soft and wrinkled and will disappear, as long as it is treated by itself.
If it is late, if the wound has grown strong, then cure it while it is still healthy; and when the wound has healed and the beard has grown back, the hair will not prick. This is the form of the two incisions you will make according to this figure and according to this quantity of length and width:
The work is like taking a subtle needle, and there is i.e. a silken thread; then gather the hairs and do not let one touch another subtly, and let the length of the threads be as long as a palm; then order in the chase another subtle thread of silk briefly, and do not knot the chief of the thread; then put the patient's chief in its place; and let there be sunlight so that the work is clarified, for this is a subtle and delicate work, then withdraw the needle throughout the chase to the root of the hair, and make it bleed profusely until you have bled out all that is natural; then remove the hair until there is only one or two or three or more remaining; then remove your hand as much as the vein escapes throughout the chase with the natural flow of blood.
If the chase is treated and the hair does not bleed with it, if you draw the chase to a close with all the thread that you have ordered, until the chase vein bursts from the root and you see it through the sight of the oil; then if you draw the chase and the thread, close the oil and leave it closed for two days or three, until the hair has bled out and the burden has ceased; and if the hair is small, if you accompany it with a long thread of natural wool, and leave it until it is elongated and then take it away.
of the corruption of the oil
When this ailment which is called "aleacrati" or the rotting comes to light, if there are two ways: one natural, and the other unnatural. And it comes about by wound, or by cutting or by cautery, and by like things.
And the way of working in this is that you make this suture and dry the flesh, and put inside some lint, and leave it until it is healed; and do not do anything but use in the treatment of this things that dry and restrain. For if you do that, if the disease comes back worse than before; but there is need of softening things, as with fenugreek; and vinegar or salt and linseed seeds boiled, and melted beeswax, and cover with a cloth, and treat this.
And the treasure of your treatment is that you must take care that it does not heal differently from the way it was before; and this work that we have said is not fierce except for addressing this disease, that it does not come back differently from the way it was before.
Of the cauldron that comes in the oil
Of the cauldron that comes in the oil, this disease which is caused by moisture is called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental. The accident comes from wound and fracture and cautery and things of that kind; and the way of the work in this is that if you take an awl, because it has two threads, and the hook is in the cauldron, and it makes the left upper lip split so that the thread of the vein is split into two pieces in about three quarters of the cauldron; then the cauldron is placed below at the whole of the awl, and the handle has one large spatula.
And if the wound returns as it should, that is good; if not, take a scraper and put it into the fracture, and twist the wound, and make two incisions or cut through the middle of the wound; and if there are three incisions from each angle of the incision that you have made, or if you make an angle so that when they are assembled, the figure is as that of a letter which has not "j. griesche"; then bind that cauldron, according to the quantity of its cost and moisture, of that which will soothe the wound, and then join the two severed parts, and bind them with a thread of linen; then apply the remedies that we have said of the mollifying medicines and bandages, until it is healed.
If the sickness comes from a fracture or a suture or from cautery, then it must be made that you make a clean incision all around the hairs of paper; and as for what is above, separate between the two books of a thumb, as I have said; and must be done according to the form of the sickness, for it is diverse in form, and the learned men appear to know everything from head to foot how to restore the figure to its natural shape; and the patient himself, according to what is suitable for the work and for the instruments in various arrangements.
If the sickness comes from a fracture or a suture or from cautery, then it must be made that you make a clean incision all around the hairs of paper; and as for what is above, separate between the two books of a thumb, as I have said; and must be done according to the form of the sickness, for it is diverse in form, and the learned men appear to know everything from head to foot how to restore the figure to its natural shape; and the patient himself, according to what is suitable for the work and for the instruments in various arrangements.
If this fracture has occurred at the shoulder joint in such a manner that the limb hangs suspended with the palm downwards, and is unable to move or perform its natural functions, if it must be that you extract the bone from the palm of the hand, and elevate it upwards; and that the edges be bound together, as long as the surrounding skin is not too tight and does not tear the oil; and that your incision, which you have made to reassemble, be slight, so that the limb returns to its natural shape; and that all that has been reassembled be bound together, and that no more oil be added to the wound, but only a little sweet water and vinegar; and after that put between the limb and the oil a cloth of linen, and cover with oily wool in abundance; and finally put on a bandage of wool and other soothing things until it is healed.
De l’ungle de l’oil
Saiches that the nail is in two manners: it is nervous and seems like tough fat, and another which is not very nervous, but seems like white moisture frozen, that when it is touched with iron and is cooked through, there are pinpricks; and both seem to swell towards the great tear, and rise up so much that they cover the whole eye and the light and movement of the oil.
And the manner of incision is that the patient places his hand in his bosom, then grasps the eyes; and keep your hand on his wrist, and then break the nail with pinpricks of small double curvature, and stretch it upwards; then take a needle, and put in one hair of horse, or of sheep, or of beef, and one strong thread; and double the point of the needle once and fix it in the nail, and pierce through the whole needle, and tie the nail with a thread and stretch it upwards, and support all around the nail the cost of the nail that surrounds the nail-bed and the hair to the hair just as far as the chief, and then close the remaining part in the root of the tear with all the small forces, and leave the natural tear or the tear itself; and in no way stretch the nail only with the needle and the thread, as we have said; then support all around the nail the surrounding area that is this form:
And keep that the sponge does not touch the fleshy cloth and break it, and that the needle does not pierce it; and after the incision, pour oil a little ball of butter, and give him a decoction of alum, and leave it until the other side; then cure what is left of it until it is healed.
And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot push back the needle, and the thread does not pass through, many times it is cured of this semblance of nail; and as I have said in the division, if you see it covered, if you pour oil on the patient, and take the sponge more slight in this form:
And withdraw the nail gradually, and if you see that it does not decrease point and that the edge is pressing, if you distill from your mouth into the oil decoction of alum and red alum and butter, and pour oil until the other side; then repeat the other work as before, until it is completely healed.
If nothing opposes you in oil, as with an abscess, then milk, and cure the abscess first while it is healthy, then resume the work as before, while it is healthy.
If there appears fat floating in the oil at night, with great swelling, if you suspend it in vinegar, and cut off a part and not the whole, that blood does not rise; then distill in the red oil of colera, which is made from litharge.</start_of_turn>
of the flesh that comes from the navel.
The eye of some men never bursts; cover the navel and bind on the papers and torment them with fire, and it seems like a rose of thorns; and when the patient puts his head in his stomach, then do the eyes burst, and all that heat has a reasonable cause for this, and the support has force; then take the first heat and go through it all to the end, and keep only the fumes left at the work. And let the incision be as small as possible, as we have said in the incision of the vein, and have little force of the hand to move the bone.
When the incision is complete and the bone is all taken out, if you use cold oil of safflower or you distill it and similar corrosive medicines, and put on the oil cotton with eggshell, so that it should be well protected; and if it does not stay, and the patient vomits, and you doubt the protection, if you leave the oil and cure the abscess with calming things that protect the protection; then return to your work until it is healed, and when you do the charges are added to the oil in this way.
But it is necessary to nourish the cure with a weak oil of natural origin; and in an accident, in the work of fire; and do not burn your hand in any of these works until you see that the limb is suffering from that work.
From the veins of the eyes
The veins of the eyes are red and covered with oil, and tolerate the gaze of the patient and irritate the oil always. The physician should therefore take care at first that the patient rests his head still, then suspend the veins all around as he deems appropriate, and do so cautiously: for in this matter there is great force; there is no other disease more fierce than madness; therefore one must handle it cautiously.
And two veins by degrees in one limb according to this form:
Then suspend these veins gradually by degrees in one limb according to this form:
And if you are unable to collect all of this in that hour, make a poultice on the oil of soothing things to ease the pain of the eyes, and leave it until the pain is relieved and is secure from after-pain; then begin again according to this manner which is before, until it is healed; and that is the way of the forces.
And if you are unable to collect all of this in that hour, make a poultice on the oil of soothing things to ease the pain of the eyes, and leave it until the pain is relieved and is secure from after-pain; then begin again according to this manner which is before, until it is healed; and that is the way of the forces.
The mire so named "arissati" fistula: when you cure it by cautery and medicine with burning water, as I have said before, and it is not completely healed, if there is any moisture remaining in it, then you must make an incision on the after-pain, there or wherever it must measure, and drain out all the moisture, until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is fractured, and you see the corruption and darkness, if the limb has all the signs, it is called an "aspre chief"; and is made like a nail, that is, a fractured bone, and is pointed out like a lime when it is in this form.
And put on the limb the fractured bone, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand until you feel that the corruption is fixed; do this only once, then restore the limb of drying medicines.</start_of_turn>
If the limb is swollen and chares do not appear, and the bone is fractured, and remains so for eighty days, and does not heal and is not to be sutured, and any other remedy does not come, save to restore the fistula to its natural place: uncover the bone a second time with iron, and with sharp medicines, and when it is uncovered take hold of the limb as described above, and the bone should be bent at two angles, and the limb should be reduced to its natural shape as you see here.
Then place your thumb on the bone below the armpit, and wipe your hand with oil. Indeed, draw the forearm back until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it through the sensation that comes from below when you keep your hand on his elbow. Then restore the dry medicine, as I have taught you, and when the wound heals and the pain subsides, if there is still matter in the elbow; if it is a lighter matter for the patient.
Then place your thumb on the bone below the armpit, and wipe your hand with oil. Indeed, draw the forearm back until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it through the sensation that comes from below when you keep your hand on his elbow. Then restore the dry medicine, as I have taught you, and when the wound heals and the pain subsides, if there is still matter in the elbow; if it is a lighter matter for the patient.
When the wound opens all the way and does not cause discomfort in the chest, neither does it cause any reduction, if you are to bind the patient; then the same, then apply a compress or bandage in a counterclockwise direction to draw out the wound, then apply oil. Indeed, make an ointment of beeswax, aloe, incense, and ochre, and then strain the oil and apply it with cloths and bandages; and keep the cloths in place if you take cloths of sufficient size, and two layers in every three, and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity of wound there is to mix; then strain by means of a piece of strong cloth that forms, and restart the compress in a clockwise direction to draw out; then hold the compress and leave the oil strained for a while and night, and if it is softened, if you strain it out; then keep the bandage in place after the wound and the nut, and if you see the oil returning, that is good; if not, repeat the application of the bandage and cloths and the ointment and the compress until it is healed.
Dou derrompement de toile uvee.
When the dislocation comes in the shoulder, then open [the joint], and comes forth like a piece of resin; it is expected to see [it]. If you see it covered, the work is like biting an awl into the root of the limb up to this [point], then comes out another awl or there is a double thread of the limb; and make it slip, and leave the first awl as it lies; then join the double thread and bind a part of the limb around, and strain it well, then pull out the awl and put on oiled lint liberally over it; and leave it until the thread has bled with the limb, then cure the oil of comforting things until the wound is healed; and never is the wound restricted by the limb cheese-nut from a circle of wax, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
And if the wound shows great swelling, if you pierce at the fatty tissue that comes out with the oil, and correct the moistness of the albumin and pull out the wound, and put into it as much as possible; then pull out the awl when it is healed.
De la bowe de l’oil.
The bow of oil.
Des aigues de l’oil.
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit. Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis serre l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre. Se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.
After a little rest, if the water comes back in the second time, put the force with the instrument, and when it is firmly fixed and does not move, grasp the almagda lightly by circling your hand a little and a little; and then put back in the water a little of the previously extracted liquid, and remove the oil from within. Then put on the oil-soaked compress or gauze with abundant egg yolks, and tie with the oil-soaked bandage. We and those who are with us put on a woolen brochet with abundant egg yolks.
And if the almagda cannot enter the oil because there are parts of bone that have too thick the hairs, then you must take the instrument which is called the «alberit», which is like this in shape:
And pierce then only the conjunctive, do not linger too much in the process, but make it subtle; and when you are finished, the patient will perceive immediately the coming of sleep, as we have said; and when the work is finished, the patient will experience a deep sleep on his back for one and a half hours; and let him rest peacefully, and take nourishment, and do not move his head to the right or left, and bind him as he lies until three quarters; then release him in this same house, uncover his face, and let him see nothing; and then put him back in the same position until seven quarters; and do not let him do anything else until you have finished the treatment or the incision, but make sure to feed him, for his pain will increase greatly.
And when the swelling has gone down, take away the oil before the seven quarters; and bring in that which quiets the abscess; and when it is quiet, loosen the face and put on a little ointment to cover any raw spots; and keep it bound in this same house. And then go out of the house and come in again, and he will recover in his case; and do not let anyone touch his things in this case.
And one came to us from Iraq, who told us that in his land when a person is in pain, they make a great meal and perceive the pain as a joy; but we have never seen or read about anything like that in our land or in the books of the ancients; and it is a new thing to us
And these are the signs of the shapes of an almond, for those who do not know them; and they are like peas in rows:
And their heads are of this same subtlety, and their backs in two angles like a bow.
like the head of a spear from the neck.
Sometimes births or deaths of various hairs occur, for there are some which seem like scorpions with teeth; and if there are such or if there is hair entangled with blood-red color, or if there is hair of grey color like bone. In this case of those hairs which are grey and not entangled, it is to be known that you must make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; and cover his nose, and spit out the seed at those hairs, and pull them out; then take what you have in your hand to support the subtle gut of a part, until you are sure that that hair is entirely bony.
If nothing remains to hold it, if the opening has been made with too little force, if nothing settles; and if it swells without stopping, or if it hangs loose, or if it is an abscess, then grasp it firmly as if it were possible; and if it is a malignant abscess, hasten and cauterize it while it is not stained and all the pus has gone, then throw or pull out the contents easily and with speed or vinegar.
If it does not swell, and moisture comes up to the palate, the teeth that were sound; if moisture does not pierce as it should, teeth that are loose in the bone below, behold the instruments do not come out by force: therefore it must be that you drink a large thread of silk, and keep hold with the hands, and put between each knot no more than; and put the patient’s limb under the thread at the armpit, and stretch until it comes through the mouth; and many times do the children do this, and it is a light matter for one who has seen it done; then hold the chief that comes from the armpit with one hand, and the other chief that comes from the mouth with the other hand, and take the one after the other as we are or as the thread is. Do this until you are sure that the knot has not corrupted the tooth, then pull out the thread, wipe the blood, and moisten the thread with Egyptian balsam, and put it back in place as before; do this two or three days, until the pus has corroded all that is remaining of the tooth; and then put out or remove a cautery again for several days until it is healed, and if there is any need of sedatives, use them; and this is the form of the instrument for extracting the tooth, as we distill oils and medicines or not.</start_of_turn>
And be it of silver or of gold, resembling an overlarge lamp, if like a cord; and if you see it, make a closed cord, and the instrument will be flat to purge the tooth; and have one hand on the chief to hold it when oil or no liquid is being burned.</start_of_turn>
From the armpit on the neck.
Many times there arises at the root of the neck a disease which is called "telul", and it grows and becomes very great all of a sudden, so that it is visible to see; and for this reason it is commanded that you should begin to compress it at the beginning, and break the bone thoroughly, then apply the cautery or burning medicine; and if you delay in compressing it when it is great, if you take hold of it firmly, from a dark color to a pale hue, if you do not touch it with iron, for it is a thorny abscess, for when you touch it even once, there comes great harm to the patient; and if the abscess is of soft touch, not of dark color, you can see that you can easily compress it, if you leave the patient and compress it without fear, and cure the limb of dry and restraining things.
when the neck is cut and bound.
When solutions of continuation arise in these cartillages, it proves useful for some people. It is therefore not to be omitted, if one sees that the wound is fresh throughout its extent; and then add three fingers to a bolster and hold it until it is healed. If the fingers are already detached at one end and the other, if one must support all the parts of the limb until they bleed, and then assemble the fingers to a bolster, and strain, and sprinkle gunpowder on gunpowder of dragon, and burn; and put upon the gunpowder a piece of replacement of great or other solid replacement that adheres, and leave it until it bleeds out by itself, and then cure it until it is healed.
The manner of making the bolster is that you assemble the solution: either with needles, as we have said in the belly bolster; or with thread, as I have told you.
of the detachments of the fingers.
At the hands of a master, the book has teeth like sharp grains of wheat, minor and greater; thus it is right that you must break the teeth, open each socket, and take them as pincers and grasp in the front part; then apply the paste after the incision of the vitreous membrane, until it is dry; and then remove it easily, and cure the part with dry things until it is healed.
From the root of the gums.
Many times blood appears on the teeth of the gums, which are often called "albules"; if you hold them steady and grasp their root, and let the blood flow out or the blood clot; then put out the vitreous membrane, or other drying and restraining powders; and if the gum comes back after the incision, and this happens many times, if you grasp it a second time and cauterize: if it does not come back even after the cautery; these are the signs of the instruments that cover it.
Des sordens.
Once are assembled at the chief of the teeth, in the mouth between the gums, teeth which are lazy and dull; and never are the teeth black and yellow and hollow, until the corruption comes to the gum, and they are biting; if you make the patient sit between your hands, and his head is straight, and open the teeth or the gums open, until nothing remains; and then make black and green, and yellow and other spots, until they are whole; and if that has happened at the first reason, it is good; if that has not happened, if you repeat the second and third time, until you have done everything; and the teeth that have to be extracted have various forms of instruments to remove them, as that which the work shows, because the raisers of the teeth which one must withdraw have other forms than those which one must put between the teeth; and these forms and others are seen with you.
It is necessary when you cure the tooth of its pain that you later withdraw as much as you wish, because it must not make me do it; for it is a substance that is very bitter, therefore we have no excuse for neglecting to remove it. When the patient is constrained to endure, if you are certain that the pain will depart, many times the pain will depart from the patient; and care that it is neither too great nor too small, and make the patient groan; and although it does not depart, as long as the patient endures, because we have already done it for these scoundrels; and when you are well certain that the pain will depart, then you must lead the patient to vomit violently to protect the teeth from all parts; then the muscles are to be flexed at the shoulder and elbow joints, as much as they are well displaced, and then fix the elbow firmly; and keep the patient’s head in your hand between your knees, and hold it firmly so that it does not move.
After that, stretch the tooth directly toward the cheek, and if it does not move, take no instruments and hold the tooth loosely from the front part; and move it as you did before. And if the tooth is perceived and mixed, if you cover it with cloths, the gum or the tooth itself will be damaged; and if the subtle strain has tenailles, do not break by straining; and you must moisten thoroughly over the gum to soften the tooth.
And take care well that you do not break it, and that you leave some part of it, and return to the patient with the greater pain of the first. And take care that you do not do what the ignorant layman do, who break their bones every time without any care, and do not bring anything but this which we have told you; but they bring all sorts of misfortunes from the root of this great disease because of the bones that remain broken, or from the bone that is broken, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is broken, wash the blood of wine or vinegar and salt; and if there is any discharge, that often happens, if you apply the juice of vitriol to it; and if that does not suffice, cauterize it.
The forms of the instruments, indeed mute them at first, whether with long points and broad handles, that they do not double in number when you draw the tooth; and these are the forms:
And be of large size if they do not bend while drawing, and be of iron well made, and be tipped with teeth to hold.</start_of_turn>
of the root of the teeth.</start_of_turn> When the root is drawn out at the root, if you must put out the moist cotton in the burrow. That is to say, towards the inside or towards the outside, until the wound is softened; and then hold the forceps that are called “algefri,” for in this way the head of the shoulder seems like a beak of a sparrow; and be made as with a file and that is the form:
And if the roots do not suffice to withstand all these tensions, if you must uncover the bark entirely around the root, and place the instrument which is called "althali," which is to say a palainche, from which it is known.
And be strong and firm so that it does not break me, and if the root leaps up by this, that is good; if not, if you aid me with all your instruments, from which these forms will come afterwards.
And if you use this instrument which has teeth, from which it is known.
And other instruments which are before the teeth, and this instrument which appears like a great clamp, of which this is the form:
And other instruments which are before the teeth, and this instrument which appears like a great clamp, of which this is the form: let it be known that this instrument is so strong that it cannot break, and its jaws like those of instruments for teeth; and with other instruments which are not mentioned here; the master surgeon will himself find the instrument which is appropriate for each case, according to what his work and the disease demonstrate, for there are many diseases for which the old methods do not teach any instrument because of their diversity; and if it breaks at the root of the bone or any other bone, or if it moves, if it seeks these instruments that it must be used, as I have said, and to aid it with gestures, for this is its form. And let it be known that it must be strong and well-held to hold the bone, that it does not escape, but that it can hold and restrain; and then restore the limb of medicine that is appropriate for this, and if there is inflammation in the bone, and it is small, if the grasp has all these instruments:
When the tooth appears does not follow the natural curve, and the form is bad, even in women of fair complexion, if one should know that it is necessary to extract it since it cannot be saved or comforted: then one must remove it; and if it is close to the tooth, take hold of this instrument which is like a small beak, and if it is of iron without a groove at the top.
And the socket often swells and swells up in the hands for the duration of the tooth, and because of this one does not move the others, and if it appears one can limber it if one files a piece of the file to the shape of this:
And it is like when one files nails; and while filing the tooth slightly, if it does not move too much, when the work is finished at the end there is no rasp, and when it is dense enough it bites the tongue, so if one limps the sharpness until it is even, so that it does not bite the tongue or corrupt the speech.
When the teeth loosen.
When the teeth loosen, whether by percussion or biting, and the patient is unable to press against what annoys them, you must treat them with restrictive medicines, which is of no avail; for if you order them to be restrained with a golden thread, because the silver thread becomes green and is harmful, but the gum does not move at all; and let the thread be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of space between the teeth; and if you see that the teeth are aligned, if you take a loop of thread and pass it twice between the two front teeth, then put the teeth between the front teeth, if there are one or more, as long as you see them steadily up to the adjacent tooth; and then resume the coverage up to the part where you began, and strain your hand steadily and cautiously, until it does not move; and if your thread is tied to the root of the tooth if it cannot escape. Then close the teeth with the thread and reassemble them, and put them back between the adjacent teeth, and put them so that they do not touch the tongue; and then leave them so tight as they can remain stable, and if they slip or the thread breaks, if the strain of another thread; if it lingers and will serve just as well, and that is the form of the teeth and the arrangement of the front teeth and the back teeth, as you see.
And when the tooth aches, if you put it back in its place, fresh from fresh, as we have said; and let nothing interfere that is not wise and soothing, and never make the shape of a tooth of whalebone, and put it back in the place where the defect is, and strain it as we have said, and keep it tight and serve for a long time.
De coper lou liien de la lengue.
The tongue hangs limp by the side of the jaw; or sometimes from the birth of the limb; or by the violence of a deep wound. The patient must open the mouth widely and stretch out his tongue. Then grasp the large nerve that comes from the root of the tongue, while the tongue is displaced from its place, and if there is any delay or if it does not yield, and it is a sign of a wound, if you stop the bleeding and grasp the limb widely; and keep the wound from becoming too deep, for the artery that comes from the root. And when you have done this, if the limb becomes pale and soft, or cold, remove the clot; and if it does not go away, cauterize with the blunt cautery, which is good for this; and then treat it with another remedy until it is healed.
and if you see pus color or black or hard, if the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is a sore; and if it is declining to swell, and there is moisture, if it evacuates the clot, and you wipe with a fine sponge, and deliver from a part and from another; and if it does not go away from your work, if you put on a broiled vitriol until it is dry, and then return to your work until you have finished all the work; then lift the limb easily and gently, and treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Des apostemes de la gorge.
There are often boils in the throat which are called "godath," and they are often accompanied by swelling of the tonsils. And when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, take care: if they are boils of small size and little pus, do not touch them with iron. And if they are red and the root is large, do not touch them with iron, even though you must remove the pus; but leave them until they are dead, and then you will remove them, or they will break by themselves; and if they are white in color and the root is slight, if you have brought the instrument to cover, but look first that the boil rests peacefully and is calmed. Then have the patient sit in the sun, and his shoulders relaxed, and cover his mouth and grasp his hands between his, and press the tongue down towards the instrument, as it is formed; and let it be of silver or gold, just like a knife.
... and you see the boil, take the sponge and press it into the abscess, and hold it firmly for more than you wish; and do not pull out any hair with your fingers, then put the cover on the instrument, as it is formed, which looks like a force; and if the chief is crooked, and one place is higher than the other, and they are very painful, and is made of iron or tin.
If you do not have this instrument present, if you can manage with tenailles, know that this is the shape:
If you do not have this instrument present, if you can manage with tenailles, know that this is the shape: cut an almond from one side and the other; and when you have grasped one almond, grasp the other in the same manner, and after the incision, gargle the patient with hot water, hot and easy, and if blood appears, gargle the patient with hot water, or extract pomegranate seeds or rue marigold, or similar things, until the bleeding stops; then cure as long as it is healed; and never again does an abscess appear in the throat except for the two almonds, if you grasp them just like the two almonds always.</start_of_turn>
And I treated a woman with an abscess that was not in the throat, namely an abscess of little size; and I had her hold her throat very close, so that the woman could not breathe through the passage that was blocked, and could not eat or drink, and died because she fainted. And the abscess was so high that it had forced out two teeth from their sockets. I therefore had her take two doses of opium, then I forced out a great portion of saliva; then I repeated the process in the other socket where the abscess was. I closed the mouth and squeezed the tongue; then I put the opium back into these abscesses, and closed one part, and only a little blood escaped; and I extracted the passage from the throat and as she began to drink water and then wine, and did not stop spitting out blood from that abscess for a long time; and the abscess returned to its place and filled the space that I had evacuated, until it was almost as big as before; then I bound it and cauterized it inside the throat: and that was the end of the matter; and I departed from those parts, and only God knows what happened to her after I left.
De l’uve.
From the navel.
And if there is a hair or something put on the medicine, as the hairs of a spoonful, put the instrument on all the medicine above the navel; and the patient should be sitting on his cost, so that he salivates and the mucus comes out of his mouth from the medicine inside, if it does not go down to the throat, and the coughing; then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it on the navel, the amount of half an hour, until you see it limp and the biting of the medicine is appeased; and if you see that, take cotton and wrap it over any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and withdraw the instrument with all the cotton in the cautery, until the cotton is burned on the navel; and do this often, until the cautery is perfect, then leave it dry and clean the cautery after three or five days. And if you must restart the medicine, if you restart it, and after the cautery wipe around the navel with cotton wool, and cover what is around the medicine; and be raised with cold water, and be cured of hiccups until it is healed.
This cure is safer than incision, for it is treated by fumigation according to this method. Take camomile, rue, origanum, ivy, cloves, and vinegar and assemble them all or any of them in a pot. Put some oil in it and boil. The pot must be well sealed with strong earth, and in the middle of the pot is a tool that should be hooked according to this method: This cure is safer than incision, for it is treated by fumigation according to this method. Take camomile, rue, origanum, ivy, cloves, and vinegar and assemble them all or any of them in a pot. Put some oil in it and boil. The pot must be well sealed with strong earth, and in the middle of the pot is a tool that should be hooked according to this method.
Many times it has happened at the throat of an os or fish bone, or nothing; so it is therefore necessary that you should perceive what you see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you see the thing; and what does not appear to you and is returned to the throat, do make the patient vomit the sickness as soon as the meat is cooked in the stomach; by chance if the thing is expelled by vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a lettuce root, or a piece of dry bread; and join the sponge to the thread and then transfix it. And when it comes back, if it is swollen, then draw it out again; and if it does not come out by itself, take a hook according to this shape:
And let the instrument curve at the head if it can more easily enter the gorge, and keep the head raised up; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, that all may go well, do not push the bone inwards; and it is better that the patient move the instrument, because it is either stiff or the matter is putrefying; if the epiglottis is swollen, or if it is forced out with all the instrument equally, as much as it is forced.
And let the instrument curve at the head if it can more easily enter the throat, and keep the head raised up; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, that all may go well, do not push the bone inwards; and it is better that the patient move the instrument, because it is either stiff or the matter is putrefying; if the epiglottis is swollen, or if it is forced out with all the instrument equally, as much as it is forced.
Never is medicine enough, as I have said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when that does not help, then look at the patient’s throat in the sunlight, and press the tongue to the instrument that I have told you of. And if you see the swelling, if it has gone all the way to the little tonsils, or if there are tense bits that are worth as much. And if that is not worth it, if you take a mouthful of vinegar, and put it in the patient’s throat, and then take away or swallow the vinegar; and if the patient still has pain, take a full dose of cold water, and rinse the mouth, and swallow, and move the tongue often; and if the swelling is severe, spit.
If she does not yield as we have said, if you suffocate the patient with asafoetida, with the instrument that I have mentioned in the fumigation of the eye; do this many times, for it will make sense. And the manner of fumigation is that you take one pot or there are charcoal pieces, and put the dressing over a coverlet felt in the middle, and in that hole is the head of the instrument; then you pour out your fumigation, and the patient puts the chief of the cane in his mouth, closes his mouth, so that the smoke does not go out, but comes out until the nausea; and the nausea will now cease, and if she does not yield, repeat the fumigation many times; and offer the patient thirst, and make him drink dirty and foul things, and do not drink water; and thus will she be forced to yield by this government.
And the form of the instrument is thus that, as we have mentioned, when it is seen, it resembles tongs with teeth to enter the throat; and it has the shape of a beak of heron, and it has a rough lime, so that whatever it grasps, it cannot let go; and thus is the shape:
the surgeon of abscesses
The wounds of boils are diverse in perforation and size; for some are similar to their root, and those that hold moisture. Others are caused by the bones or are fixed to the flesh. For the abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundation, and those of the bones of the joints are different from those that occur in the tissues.
If the abscess does not need to be pierced, as long as it lies according to its companion; but if there are some that must be pierced when they are hard, and do not die according to their companion, like an abscess that comes from a joint; for when an abscess comes from a joint, and it is left as it is until it is rotten, by chance if the tendon and nerve of the joint are ruptured, which is the cause of contraction in that limb. Or if the abscess comes from the main part of the limb, and you delay the perforation until it is measured, it will reach the main part of the limb; or if it comes from the foundation, if the perforation is not done as soon as it is measured, it will remain unhealed.
It is necessary that you take out the pus of the abscess that is dead according to its companion; when the pain is calmed, the swelling has gone down, the redness and the heat have disappeared, the throbbing and the pain in the head of the abscess, and other signs; and that you make the perforation or drain the abscess more dependent on the abscess, and the place where it is; and that the perforation is long enough for the abscess that is at the hands or feet, or in the joints and nerves and arteries, and for all the bones that are equal or there is no swelling.
When swelling persists, by reason of that limb. And when an abscess is in the flesh, if it be deemed necessary to make an incision, let the puncture remain until confirmed in digestion, as we have said. For if you pierce before that, if it has gone far enough to reach the marrow, it will be filled with foul matter; and with foul breath and vomiting. And if there is no abscess but that which is perceived by the large swelling of the limb, then it must be deemed that the limb has suffered injury. And it is right to bring in small abscesses, small punctures; and in large abscesses, large punctures, and many incisions according to the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses as must be evacuated immediately, or if it is necessary to cover them over, as in the case of wounds; and when it is swollen as much as a drape, and is softened, it is right to make as we make bubbles. And if there are such as are cleft at two angles, or such as require covering like the burr of a myrtle, as in the case of carbuncles; and if there are such as require making a round incision, and other incisions resembling a suture.
When there is no chief (doctor), if there is only a superficial carbuncle, it must be pierced directly; and it must be known when the carbuncle is large, and it has contracted greatly, and you must pierce, if you do not remove all the pus at once, but only a part; then squeeze the carbuncle up to the other side, and do nothing further; do this many times until the pus is all gone. In the same way, if the patient is of weak virtue, or a woman in childbirth, or a young child, or an old man decrepit, for these people do not expect any benefit from the discharge of the pus, except that it may perhaps kill the patient. Therefore, leave this chapter with great caution, and when you have perceived the carbuncle, if you have stopped the bleeding, look to see if the wound from the carbuncle is small; and if it is a complete wound, bring in threads or old cotton; and if it is a large carbuncle, and there is much pus, it must be known that you should swallow in the chest two attempts so that they cancel each other out; and if you have cauterized a part of the skin and covered it in, if you must cover it with much cotton or coarse lint, soak it until three-quarters dry; then the bone and cure the wound until it is healed.
And if there are discharges of blood in your work, if you bring in cold and easy water, and a damp cloth, and take out the foreign body many times. And if the discharge of blood persists, if there is governance and cure, and the powders that I have mentioned in my hands in this book, and if there is frost, and the limb or the carbuncle is pale and nervous, it must be known that you must put in attempts and wet patches soaked in wine and oil; and if it is winter, and the limb is fleshy, it must be known that you must put on wet patches soaked in water and oil, or in wine and oil that has been rubbed, until three-quarters dry; and then remove the carbuncle and dry and cure it, as is proper, until it is healed.
And this must be known throughout in the treatment of abscesses: or as I have said previously concerning the precautions before treating abscesses, so be it in this chapter.
And this must be known throughout in the treatment of abscesses: or as I have said previously concerning the precautions before treating abscesses, so be it in this chapter.
And this must be known throughout in the treatment of abscesses: or as I have said previously concerning the precautions before treating abscesses, so be it in this chapter. Or as I have said previously concerning the precautions before treating abscesses, so be it in this chapter. For if there are small abscesses that are like beads or geline, and there is moisture in them like in peas; and if there are hard and stony ones at the navel, and there is no doubt but that the artery opposes them. And the work of the size is such that if you expect all the instruments that are called "endoscopes," which is what comes after, what is in them? For if there is moisture in it, it must be evacuated through the long tube. And when the moisture is evacuated, do not leave the peel that contains that moisture, because it returns in place when nothing is left; then soak in Egyptian cotton, if it is present; if not, in water and oil, and apply the bandage, and leave it until the other side; and this will repair what is delayed. And since you have put in the cotton, as before, the second side, and the third, until you are sure that it does not remain in place; then cure the wound according to what is appropriate. And if there is no fat in the abscess, if the bump conforms to this form, long; evacuate your vomit, and expel everything, and put all your cure on the edge or where the abscess is; and if the artery opposes you, do as I have said above. And do the same with a perforated abscess, and at the navel and to cure it as I have said.
And the size of the wound on the thumb and the moisture, if it is less severe, because they are of little blood. And if there are any of these wounds or chieftains who have no moisture, and of these wounds which I cauterize or chieftains of an old woman; and find the wound just like a hard stone, rough and white, and cannot break it; and if no blood appears, we must make the wound just as well as if it were a stone. In other wounds coming or chieftains, forasmuch as these which come from the head of the fetus and have roots of the ears, the opening must be made every day to the most dependent part of the limb; and the cure must be made as it should be.
And the size of the wound on the thumb and the moisture, if it is less severe, because they are of little blood. And if there are any of these wounds or chieftains who have no moisture, and of these wounds which I cauterize or chieftains of an old woman; and find the wound just like a hard stone, rough and white, and cannot break it; and if no blood appears, we must make the wound just as well as if it were a stone. In other wounds coming or chieftains, forasmuch as these which come from the head of the fetus and have roots of the ears, the opening must be made every day to the most dependent part of the limb; and the cure must be made as it should be.
Many times happen these carbuncles at the collarbone, and the armpits, and in the groin, and never in any other place or limb, and are moist and united together. And every scrofula is properly contained within its coat, as we have said; and the symptoms of these scrofulas are many. There are some that contain moisture, and if there are malignants that do not obey health, in those in which you see a good disposition to the toucher, and is similar in color to the flesh, and is dry from the front and does not have the color of the neck or the artery or the vein, and is not deep; if you must cope with it, and scorch the front part, extend the two thumbs of the hand as we have said in chief wounds; and the hand must be kept close to the body, and do not go too far in front, that you do not cover anything that you should not.
And if you cauterize the vein or artery, and this does not allow you to work, if you put in the wound a piece of vitriol broth, or some powders that remain without blood, and tighten the wound; and leave it until the bleeding has ceased, and soften the wound, and commence to move. And when the pain has subsided, if you return to your work, until you have completed it; then if there are any small abscesses remaining, if you can grasp and twist them. And if there is in the root of the abscess a large vein, if you cannot do anything but grasp that abscess at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and leave it hanging freely; then apply the wound dressing of fine cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, and cure.
And if you grasp the whole abscess, if you can gather together the four limbs of the wound, and close them now, then there is no remaining swelling due to the size of the abscess. If you can understand to grasp the root of it, and tear forward, and close as we have said. Those abscesses which retain swelling, pierce them either so that it bursts or that it dies; and pierce as with the one mentioned before, depending on the case, and mix with ointment and similar things, so that it removes what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well drained, if you apply an ointment dressing covering the scar, as long as it is healthy.
When the wound is well drained, if you apply an ointment dressing covering the scar, as long as it is healthy.
The old folks used to tell of the tailor of the gorge; but I have never seen it done in our land, and that is what they wrote in their speech.
As for those who are quarrelsome, it is necessary that the epiglottis, which is called the " epiglottis," be freed; and this cannot be done without causing pain to those veins and blood vessels which are around the throat, or in the gullet or in the tonsils.</start_of_turn> When the disease is in the chest of the chest cavity, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to prevent loss of blood from the strangulation.</start_of_turn
When our wings tear the epiglottis, we must split them from each other two or three circles or a small tear through between the two circles or by the amount of the tear through the hyoid bone, without damaging the cartilage.
and thus if it is convenient at the section of the epiglottis there is no mark, and the blood vessels are long enough.
And if the master is fearful, it is advised to extend the skin of the throat throughout its extent, then split the skin as much as necessary until the cartilage is reached; and avoid the blood vessels of the blood, if you see nothing, and then cut through the hyoid bone as we have said;
And it is proved by the section of the jaw that leaps forth by the broken bone, and by the loss of voice.
And it leaves the wound open for a piece.
And when the hour has passed and it is doubted that the strangulation has ceased, assemble the four limbs of the wound together from the root, and bind them all tightly with the cartilage; then administer medicines which cause the flesh to swell, until it is healed.
The abscess does not yield until the throat is thoroughly distended, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the default is abandoned. When thus the epiglottis is grasped for this reason, that the patient cannot swallow, he breathes through the wound, and thus is preserved from death.
And for this reason they command the old man to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease has passed, and it is passed in two or three days.</start_of_turn> And thus they command to suture the wound and cure it, when it is cured.</start_of_turn>
And I will tell you what I saw.</start_of_turn I saw that a woman took a knife and plunged it into her throat, and cut part of the windpipe from its root.
and I went to call for help, and I found her already dead.</start_of_turn>
I discovered the wound, and found the blood that was issuing from it, and saw that it had penetrated neither vein nor artery except for the throat, and that the wound had caused this.</start_of_turn
I hurried, and closed the wound, and cured it until it was healed;
And she did not dare to speak for fear of her mistress, and returned afterwards when she was free.
For indeed in the handling of the epiglottis, I have never known fear.</start_of_turn>
of the great throat.</start_of_turn
These abscesses are called "throat hernia" and are large abscesses with a yellowish color, and are very common in women.</start_of_turn>
And it is in two ways: nature or chance; for the natural thing has no concern.
And the accidental is in two ways, as one is like grease to us, and the other is like an incision that comes from an artery; And there is doubt, and it is not right for me to work with fire except in this little thing, and it tries and searches all the surrounding area: if you find it thus as not like grease, and cannot do anything to any vein, if it bites, as we bite each other, and pulls at all its hair, if there is none left; And encircle all around, and cure it as it should be, until it is perfectly healed.
And encircle all around, and cure it as it should be, until it is perfectly healed.
Many are the methods of us, of which I shall speak of all the signs;
and it is certain that I shall tell you all the difference that exists between a wound and an abscess.
I say that the cause of dislocation is heat and fever that persists, as long as the inflammation has not passed, and is accompanied by swelling; then rest the fever and the heat.
With no new heat or fever or pain, and contains the pus, which is its own sac, and is like the colour of porridge, and begins like fat, and becomes thick;
and are like some seeds or grease, or moisture, and are of the colour I have mentioned before
It is appropriate, when you come to the cure of this wound, that you first inquire about the instrument which is called the "entromissoire", according to its form or chapter which follows.
And as for the inquiry of the abscesses of the groin, it is that you take or more moisture than you find in the abscess, and twist your two thumbs and two little fingers, until you know that the instruments have perceived the keyhole; then do as the size of the abscess dictates.
Then pull out the entrails, and take care that the urine does not spur out.</start_of_turn>
If moisture runs clear, that it color like this; if it does so like the others abscesses.</start_of_turn
And if afterwards no moisture comes, greasy discharges, if you do then cross your fingers and grasp it tightly with your thumb and index finger, and slightly burn the area around it with the cautery; keep the bandage clean and sound with the ointment.
If you do not manage to keep it clean, if you tear it piece by piece, so that nothing remains.
For if nothing remains, if it comes back many times;
And if it lingers still, though you grieve not, if you employ a wound of some caustic powders, hold the wound firm and apply soothing things nearby; and cure it with other cures until it is healed.
If it is greatly swollen, if you cut through three fingers of the wound, and cure it of what is festering inside.</start_of_turn>
If the vein swells against you or otherwise compels you, if you hurry and employ the broth of vitriol, and leave it for three or four days, until the wound has healed, and rest the swelling of blood; then return to cover what remains that has festered.</start_of_turn>
See here the forms of the instruments that are introduced into the body, and there are three kinds: great, middle, and small; and there are four quarters which are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb", and there are three kinds: great, middle, and small, to surround the fistulas.
And they are like nails with which one sews up wounds, and are of saffron, or iron, or silver, and move well those which are yellow, and are more proven with black soot to surround the cortices of fistulas.
And there are three kinds: great, middle, and small, according to the quantity of the size of the hole.
The shapes of the boils are like clusters of seeds, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and if boils have twice the curvature of two fingers, they are of the same kind.
If boils have twice the curvature of two fingers, they are of the same kind; and if boils have one curvature and are of two kinds; or if boils have half a curvature and are of two kinds, they are of two kinds in general.
The chief of these boils is trenchant, and there are some that do not split but one side only, which we must grasp by the nails, because neither the vein nor the nerve can be grasped.
And of these intruders are the bones that are rejoined in sleeves, so that the patient does not lose them when the incisions are made.
And there are three kinds: great, small, and medium, as you see
And one should not use them on the face, or in the groin, or in the armpits, or in the ears, or in the teeth;
and when they are used on the lower limbs, they should be bound around about an inch, and on the upper limbs about a thumb and a half.
And one must never put it back in the same place where it previously sustained the veins, arteries, and never again in like fashion:
And never again should one inflate the veins of some people when they begin to fester, so that they appear like the breasts of a woman.</start_of_turn>
and remain lying and limp, and those who see them cured, if they believe it can be cured in this fashion up to and including the .g.: line b. to line g.: then scrape off the fat, and apply medical plaster to the wound, packing it with wool, and assemble the two edges of the wound with stitches, and cure it until it is healed;
And if the breast is hanging downward, and is eased by its greatness as with women, if it happens in the.ij. ribs below, by.ij. similar rents; And if one is holding the other at the end of each, so that the greater line contains the less according to this form, from this line .b. up to line .g.; Then strip the leather that is between the.ij. arms, and oil the fat, and mix in what we have said of costure and powders, and what is necessary for the cure, until it is healed;
If he is not sound, or the incision is not fully made, because the patient does not want to rest, or for the discharge of blood, if you must, fill the wound with moist cotton wool in corrosive order. And leave it until it has healed the remainder and the fat, then cure it until it is sound again.
of abscesses of boils
These abscesses that come from the armpits are like hard scrofula, or there are bones there, and there is only fluid in them.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne b. jusc’a la ligne .g.: When all the bones that are in the appendage are emptied, if one employs the wound of fine cotton, and leaves it until the other side, then close all the cotton, and cure the wound that comes from that until it is healed.
If the abscesses resemble small carbuncles, if one does as we have said in cutting carbuncles, and if the wound is in the bone, if one joins cautery as we have said before.
Of the course of the artery.
When the artery is cut, and the skin is split above, there often follow abscesses, and also blood escapes from the vein and from the incision;
and if the surgeon knows that this is due to the artery, if the abscesses are long and deep and when it is the vein that is cut, the blood escapes more openly.
It is foolish to close this wound, and even more so when it is filled with pus, and boils and boils over, or in the mouth of other bones, for it is large. It is therefore necessary to abandon the cautery, and the one who is at the head must also abandon it, and in the one where there is swelling of a vein is made by cutting through the skin along its entire length
It is therefore necessary to abandon the cautery, and the one who is at the head must also abandon it, and in the one where there is swelling of a vein is made by cutting through the skin along its entire length then remove the size as one would remove a wound, and withdraw the vein from the flesh completely, as long as it is uncovered;
and maintain the fire of fire until it is no longer necessary.
Then point out the limb between the .ij. joints of an intro-miser, as long as there is no other that has it, and cut off the aponeurosis;
Then bring the cure that will join the limb, as long as it bites; Then cure the swelling that comes after this one, as long as it is healed;
and if the aponeurosis is of the size of the vein, if you must, keep your hand there that you put the aponeurosis on the whole skin, Then take the needle from your hand and pierce the skin, and there is one double thread, so that you can grasp it from the other side. Then tie the knot, as I have told you, or loop one of the ends around the other two threads;
And if you doubt that the thread will not hold, if it comes loose at another incision, insert another needle through the whole of the knot at the first incision, and tighten the threads in three loops.</start_of_turn>
Then pull the knot until it hangs loose, then pull the excess thread and leave only what is bound;
Then put upon one drapeil moist in wine and oil, and mix with cures of tents and unguents until it is healed.
Then put upon one drapeil moist in wine and oil, and mix with cures of tents and unguents until it is healed.
Then put upon one drapeil moist in wine and oil, and mix with cures of tents and unguents until it is healed.
Then put upon one drapeil moist in wine and oil, and mix with cures of tents and unguents until it is healed
And when the eye is strained, if the patient feels pain, and does not fear further discomfort, but hopes for relief;
and must remain still in all parts, neither going forward nor backward, neither downwards nor upwards, and he who is in joints must not be bound with iron; for by chance there will be contraction.
and whoever is at the head or shoulder or front, makes the leather buckle at the armpit. If the abscess is small, if he has one nail, and he grasps it at its root.
If it is large, if it hangs at the bone, and it is scorched, then the bone and unite the wound at the suture, and hold the cure until it is healed.
Until the swelling subsides and the wound is scorched, unite the bone and close the wound at the suture. Keep the dressing in place until healed.</start_of_turn> Never in the belly and in no other place does it occur, and is a disease that is called "fungus" because of its resemblance to nails, and is of subtle origin, and the limb is large; and there are many small and great pains.
And I saw two homes where there were two or more bellies that were more like nails than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had a white root, and were broken in two, and corrected with moisture.
I seize them and find in one sixteenth-eighth ounce, and in the other five and a third, and the work in the incision is such that if you look, if the patient is moist, the color of the artery is pale and moist and of slimy roots.
if the cavity of the large spleen is swollen, and if it is in your presence, for the fire cautery. For in the thigh often comes many great evacuations of blood, and if it does not go away, if you are delayed, then do you burn it immediately.</start_of_turn>
and if you see the patient groaning and pale from the incision of the flesh, if you take one thread of silk well made, and tie the artery as we have said, and leave it for three days;
And then the restraint, and do not cease to grasp the thread of the navel until it covers the cartilage, and ask from him the work; and if the roots are exposed, if there is fear of bursting the belly, but take hold of half,
And then cauterize that it does not recover; then cure the wound, and keep that you only cover the thick part which is of dark color and has little sensation and milk-like discharge.
For this is an abscess that is inflamed, and I will come to the cure of the abscess later on.
When the shoulder is swollen it is painful.
When swelling appears, it comes from cautery of wounds or bursting of abscesses, and is on the belly and there are some bumps, as in other places, or blood which clots veins or arteries according to what is before, or from infection;
When it comes from the bursting of the abscess or the wound of the flesh, if the color is like that of the postscript, it is a light thing causing little pain, and there are various discharges. When it comes from the discharge of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when pressed with the hands, if it returns and comes back, and by chance if it is caught, and grows out with water and great work.
And if it is due to moisture, it is a light matter, and open it easily when you press it with your hand; do not hold it tight. And if it is due to blood, if it is opened by these signs, the abscesses are great and hard, and are fixed according to a quantity.
And if it is due to moisture, if it is soft to the touch, and the work is if you observe that it appears due to the blood of an artery or a vein, or moisture. If you must leave the dressing. For there is doubt and fear, as I have said or as the chapter on abscesses teaches, regarding the artery and the vein.
And if the appearance is from the intestines or the belly, if you command the patient to hold his breath, and is stretched out straight, then mark around the belly; then command him to clench his fists between your hands.</start_of_turn> then go around the belly that you have marked with all the surrounding area, then extend the half of the appendix at the bottom to the whole great joint;
Then over half of the abscess is extended over the limb, and under this put the thumb and index finger, and hold the intestines; if you find it grasped by the limb, if you loosen it, hold the intestines away from the belly;
and if you find the bone broken, if you grasp it at the hinge, and break off the excess.
If the artery opposes you, or the vein, if it turns out well, return to your work and take again.ij. needles, and with.ij. pairs of pliers, and hold the.ij. needles around that which you did in crossing that you did perceive.
Then strain the abscess in three days on the needles, and if you see, break the needles, and leave the wound open until it has healed by itself; extract the dead flesh by itself. or you must support it when it is subtle and soft, then treat it of that which is convenient, and close the abscess as we have said;
or you must support it when it is subtle and soft, then treat it of that which is convenient, and close the abscess as we have said; And take out the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the root of this that is causing it, and bind the limb.
And draw out the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the cause of this that is causing it, and bandage the limb.
We have said in the division concerning the signs of the chancre, and how one must treat it with medicine, and how one must shun the treatment of fire; and we say that the chancre is like a tumor in the marrow, and has great caution in its treatment, and the old men say that when a chancre is in the bone or can be pulled out like a tumor in the marrow, and in the flesh, and similar things, and it must be completely eradicated when it is in its beginning; but when it is great and old, if one cannot approach it, for I know of no cure for it; nor have I ever seen it cured before me.
And as for the work, when it is in the bone or can be pulled out, as we have said, you must purge the black bile from the patient once; then make it whole if it shows any swelling; then drain the patient; that is, give him good liquid to make the work; then extract your nails or the tumor, and the head of all parts, and the bone of all parts, without leaving anything in place; and leave the wound open, and press your hand or anything else firmly against it, and if the blood flows from the artery or vein, do not cauterize it too much lest it be stained; then cure it with other remedies until it is healed.
De ydropisie. From ydropisie. Believe the patient right on your hands, and the minister presses the belly downwards towards the lowest part of the gut, then take the hook spicule as follows: And let it be trenchant from two and a half inches to the point, and do not make it so wide that it can pass into the intestine when you insert it, and do not make it slippery;
Then look if the dropsy is confined to the intestines: if it is likely that you will make incisions two fingers’ breadth to the right of the navel; and if the dropsy is caused by liver disease, make your incision to the left of the navel two fingers’ breadth; and if it is caused by bile, make it to the right, and do not let the patient rest on the incision except for the fluid which escapes from that weak limb.
Then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and the gut, and keep your hand over the entire area between the skin and the bladder as if you were escorting the amount of a nail or as thick as an entorse; then pierce the bladder until the area of the area comes out, and that is the source of the pain, then draw out the instrument, and this is the form of the instrument: it is like a silver needle, and is made of hemp or flaxseed, and has at the top a small perforation; or costs as much as half a penny, that is, two perforations; and three on one side, and one on the other. The head of the instrument is cut off like a pen, and that is the form of the incision which the writer makes like a pen
Then comes the ailment, if when the instrument comes into the water, if now you put your hand on the instrument; empty out half or a third of the urine, for if you empty more than that at this hour, by chance the patient will die from the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he will vomit, or he will approach death.
But according to the amount of its virtue, and according to what the arrangements of the virtue tell the patient and his pulse, then take the instrument and hold the water, for it is retained now by the thumb which is stamping the part which is above the facet, as I have said; pierce according to this method. Then repeat the instrument on the other side, if you see the patient suffering from this, and take up a small amount of water.
Do nothing further for the moment, and refrain from using any more water until it stops bleeding. And if you doubt the patient, and you give him more water, if the surgeon of the burial or sand cauterizes with water, and by giving him oil, sweat or bathe and sunbathe, and abstain from drinking; and let the surgeon of drying medicines be given until he is healed, and cauterize on the stomach and the liver and the spleen after the extraction of the water, as I have said before
of the belly of the limb. Never are children born without a navel, or if they are, their navel is small or not in its place. If the physician suspects that the navel has not pierced at all, or is too little, or is not in its rightful position: then let him cause the navel to pierce by a subtle instrument, and bind and hold it for two or three days. And when he has seen that he can urinate without pain, if he restrains the closing, he will urinate and then release it; for in this way it will not close again, for the urine that comes out forces it open. If the navel is too little, if it is treated with a clamp of lead, as we have said, and it swells up. Those who do not have the navel in their place are pale, for no one is born with the navel at the top of the belly, for they cannot urinate before they lift up their belly; and they cannot urinate backwards because the matter cannot come down to the marrow, and this is an evil sickness.
And the way of the work is that if the patient lies supine on his back, then stretch out the head of the shoulder and the arm as wide as a pen, if the navel is pierced in the middle, as it should be; and hold back the discharge of blood that comes many times, and if it comes, if the stain of this blood is seen, cure the wound until it is healed.
Des pustules de la verge. Many times these boils appear on the verge, and are a sign of foul matter; and there are both malignant and benign ones. If you wish to remove them, you must first apply a subtle ointment, then lance and crush them all, then apply a soaked cotton swab in Egyptian order; then bind with a diafinicon until it is healed.</start_of_turn> And if the boil is malignant, with black colour and discharging, if you wish to remove it, you must apply cautery. When you have lanced it, and if the boil is at the end of the verge and has part in the skin and part outside, if you wish to close the boil which is inside first; and when it is healed, if you cure the outside. For when you cure everything together, if you do not secure the shoulder of the verge that it is not pierced, there comes blackness and corruption in the verge and elsewhere; if you wish to avoid this, remove everything that is black and corrupted, then apply honey and flour made from pomegranate peel and sometimes, then cure with other cures until it is healed.</start_of_turn
If blood flows freely, if the lunar cautery is used as directed in this fashion: When blood flows freely, and the limb is corrupted; and if the head of the bone is corrupted and drawn back, if you drink or pass urine a fistful of lead, and urinate on the patient among other things; and when the hair has grown over the root of the bone which has not been circumcised, or if there is a wound or incision, then you must burn with the cautery over the instrument until the ligament is loosened and the bone is freed from all parts.
If this is a grievous matter, if you burn over the instrument without touching the head of the bone or the skin; then open widely between the joints and put in a soft bandage of wet linen on the cold water, so that it does not slip out of place.
from the circumcision.
Circumcision is not merely a continuation of other wounds; although when we make this work of our own free will, and do it properly, if we make it better, it is the lightest in health.
I say that the old ones did not speak of circumcision in their laws, because they did not use it in their customs, and we have only what we have learned through experience
For I have seen the greatest part of masters and physicians who made circumcision around here, with force and all their skill; but when the urine escaped through the pores because there were two holes, and by chance if we cut off these above and left those below, the patient fled.
Or la recovient coper, and the pain is doubled, and at the movement which is done too roughly, the point of the limb is not securely held; and by the movement of the bone by chance escapes the needle, and repairs the work, and many times they are born again without having had to move them and I desire it.
From the movement which is made there is force throughout the whole thread that I have proved to be beneficial in the experiment, for the forces tear just as well from above as from below.</start_of_turn>
For when you press your hand, if you make it even in every way; but if the thread is well twisted around the leather; and if the manner of the first work makes the child think, if he understands, that you do not force him to bind the thread around the limb too tightly, but that you make him enjoy it in all the ways that you can.</start_of_turn Then grasp your hands straight out, and restore the forces between your hands or withdraw your fingers so that the fetus does not see them, not any of the instruments; then bring your hand to the navel and breathe or cough, and pull up as much as the head of the fetus is ensnared; then thoroughly cleanse the area that is assembled, then tie the cord with a double thread, then tie it again with another thread; and hold the two ends of the second thread to the pouch and the index finger, and cross between the two threads, then keep the thumb relaxed and pull out the head of the umbilical cord.
Then grasp your hands straight out, and restore the forces between your hands or withdraw your fingers so that the fetus does not see them, not any of the instruments; then bring your hand to the navel and breathe or cough, and pull up as much as the head of the fetus is ensnared; then thoroughly cleanse the area that is assembled, then tie the cord with a double thread, then tie it again with another thread; and hold the two ends of the second thread to the pouch and the index finger, and cross between the two threads, then keep the thumb relaxed and pull out the head of the umbilical cord. Then let the blood flow freely without pressure, for that is the midwives; and sprinkle on and under the sprinkle a cloth glued with a soft egg yolk broken from rosewater, confirmed with rosemary oil and balsam, and leave it on until the other side is ready, and cure it again until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
The shape of the forces at the circumcision is thus: the two thumbs are tense and extended, and the fingers are as great as the thumb equally:
The pain of the mundane if it comes from the incision; therefore it is necessary that you extend your fingernail, even if the wound makes a postscript; and hold it equally, and if you do not wish to hold it at your fingernail, if you hold it with your teeth, and then hold it.</p>
And if they trespass for two days, and that which is beside the bone is inflamed, if you leave it as long as the swelling subsides, and the redness is slight; if you hold it as you wish, and keep the bone from the part of the limb, it will cause neither damage nor pain.</p
Cure then the limb of things soured with wound of powder, as we have said or treated with powders, and if we hold too tightly, it will go away, if it does not already; cure then as we have said, until it is healed.</p
Dou retenement de l’urine
The retention of urine is due to obstruction of the stone, or of blood congealed, or of fat, or of hair, or of similar things, which we have mentioned in the previous part.
If the urine does not flow freely, and you see that the retention is due to the stone which is in the belly or the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary that the patient be bent forward on his knees; and that his feet be placed outside the back, and that his abdomen be extended from the part below his back, and that he be restrained from straining himself as much as possible; and then the neck of the bladder is to be forced out towards the expression of the stone above, so that the urine may flow freely again.
And if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it is necessary that you administer extraction with all the instruments which are called "siringes"; and this is the form: either of silver with a lead weight at the end like a bird’s beak; or the caine of a palm of a long and a half, or of silver.
And thus it is done with the issuing of urine if you take one and a half threads of silk, and bind one end to the chief of wool or cotton, and pass the end through the bladder; and drain the surplus of wool and pass until the end reaches the head of the bladder, then join the bladder with oil or butter and beeswax from an egg, and make the patient sit on one seat, and raise the bladder and the testicles with oil moistened and olive oil and hot water.
Then put the bladder in the vagina until it reaches the root of the vagina, and double the vagina backwards against the pelvis; then drain the bladder until it reaches the bladder, and feel the patient urinate until it reaches the empty thing, and that is not done except in this order for that which leads or goes is twisted; then cut the thread at the wool end and the end, and the urine follows the wool, then pull it out forcefully, and correct the urine.
and start the bladder again until the bladder is empty, and make the patient align himself.
Des maladies de la vessie.
When urine or blood comes into the bladder, or when pus is assembled there, and you see urine and medicines distilled, if you do everything that is called the «clepsedre», which is its shape:
It is closed, and if it is pierced twice: once from one side, and once from the other, as you see; and the urine flows out as soon as the medicine is applied, so that the moisture is driven out, and the bladder is emptied as much as possible.
and when you see the medicines leaking from the bladder, put the chief of the cautery into the moisture, and draw out what is causing the infection; if you draw out the moisture from the wound, and then push it back forcefully; if the moisture enters again, and comes to the bladder, the patient will feel it.
It is in this manner that the bladder is ligated with a subtle twist, as when it is thus:
It is in this manner that the bladder is ligated with a subtle twist, as when it is thus: with silver or gold, and the head is higher; and the veins are cut at the breast or at the groin. Then take a bladder from a goat and put the moisture that you see ligating the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts, form a knot with a double thread, and burn the said moisture upon the fire; then withdraw the clamp from the twist in the belly, and strain your hand over the bladder with all the moisture that comes out, until the patient feels that the said moisture has reached the bladder.
and if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle, and pierce it round about; then withdraw a strong thread through these holes, and assemble the circle as if you were assembling a wheel, and put inside what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it with the instrument; and do as you would with a bladder, press your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
Of the stone.
We have already mentioned in the preceding parts the methods of dealing with stones, and their extraction with medicines; and we mentioned the difference between a retained stone and one that is not, and the signs of each. In what case should we perform an incision for a stone? In the bladder and the kidney; and I shall tell you openly and concisely.</start_of_turn>
I say that a stone which is retained in the bladder is often the cause of vomiting, and this is a sign that the bladder is greatly irritated throughout its substance; there is open hazing, and the patient feels great pain in the belly and has many vomiting spells, and then grows pale; and from these vomiting spells the foundation is loosened; and it is light for the patient to recover from vomiting until the age of three, and is much more difficult in the elderly, and is like that in young people and old people; and the cure for the large stone is easier than for the small one.</start_of_turn
And when we come to the treatment, if it is necessary, first cleanse the patient with a clustery solution, to remove all the filth from the intestines. For it never hinders to inquire about the stone.
Then grasp the patient by the limbs, loosen and move downwards, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and never reaches the upper part; then make him sit between your hands, and his hands should rest on his thighs, so that the bladder is completely relaxed below; then inquire and touch around there.</start_of_turn>
If you feel the stone in the space, if you hasten to cut above the stone. And if it does not yield to the touch of the whole hand, if the patient is fat, or your middle finger, if the patient is young and robust; press downwards on your left hand, if the patient is old, or your right hand, if the patient is young and robust; and hold it firmly, and inquire about the stone, and when you feel it in your right hand, if the bladder is full at the neck; then press above your right hand, and the stone will go out either by itself or you will see it cut.
And instruct the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend with his right hand the testicles upwards, and with his left hand to grasp the skin covering the testicles in the part where the size is taken; then insert the speculum covering, since this is the shape:
And put between what is between the testicles and the foundation, do not go inside but along the left edge; and be two above the stone, and two either adjoined or on the foundation, and be the size through if it is wide from the outside, and narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, do not go too big;
By chance the press if two must be at the stone or foundation, that it will leap forward in the work; and the folds that are in the stone or that are angled, and margins: if they are grasped to be still; and if there is any part that is sweaty, similar to a gland, round, from which issue is slight.
If there are angles or margins at this place, make the size larger; and if it does not yield, know that you must draw upon the tendons which are like a file at the head, in order to draw out the stone if it does not escape; or you may give it a blow with an instrument that is curved at the head. If you do not know how to manage it, it is better to leave the stone uninjured rather than to fracture the bones.
If there is more than one stone, draw out the largest one from the belly button first, then go up and down, and take out the smaller ones afterwards. If it is very large, cover it with silk and make a greater wound. For indeed, these things happen to the patient: either he dies, or his urine comes out too quickly and cannot be held together; but whatever you do to try to drain it, or to remove the tendons, as long as you drain it piecemeal.
When you have finished your work, apply incense, aloe, and dragon's blood to the wound, and tighten it. Put upon it a moist bandage of oil and wine, or oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the burn; then raise the patient up on his heel and do not loosen the bandage until the third part of the day.
And when you release it, if there is much swelling of the limb due to oil and water, then treat with ointment of beeswax and ointment of alum, until it is healed.
If pus comes out of the wound and corrosion, and blood clots in the bladder, and whether it be that the urine is retained, which is known to be in part like this without straining with the urine: do not then retain the urine in the wound, but draw out that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder and carry it away.</start_of_turn>
Then lift the wound of water and ease and bind it securely, and help in every way you can, until it is healed; and make sure that all the hours you treat it, that you bind the wound tightly and gather the medicines above the limb.</start_of_turn
And if the stone is small, and it is in a tube or passage of the kidney, and is fixed there, and the urine cannot pass; if the physician does this which I have said above, that you must loosen the stone many times, for we have seen that this is effective in this case. I have seen this already.
Take hold of the iron as described above and make it so that there are two angles fixed at one end in a loop:
Then take one thread and tie it around the kidney stone at the base of the stone, so that it does not come back into the bladder; then hold the iron against the kidney slightly, until it reaches the stone; and twist the iron back and forth at the stone until you can pierce the stone from the other side; if the urine comes, then press your hand on what remains of the stone that is in the kidney. If it breaks, and urine spurts out, and the patient is in pain;
If you cannot do this for any reason, take hold of one side of the bone and the other above, then draw the limb over the bone between the two joints, and then extract it forcefully, loosen the ligament, and massage the blood clot which is in the wound; and cure it until it is healed.
If you cannot do this for any reason, take hold of one side of the bone and the other above, then draw the limb over the bone between the two joints, and then extract it forcefully, loosen the ligament, and massage the blood clot which is in the wound; and cure it until it is healed.
When the bone is loosened in women, and this does not happen often, if it happens once, the cure is grief, and is hindered by two things: the first is that the woman is a virgin; the second is that one cannot find a woman who is truly virtuous, even among the most chaste.
And the third method is if by chance one cannot find a woman who is truly skilled in this work of hands; and the fourth method is if the woman's stone is more prominent than the man's, for in that case one can make a greater depth, and greater fear has it.
And if necessary, if one must take a mistress who is truly knowing, and prick her root firmly, and if you do not find one, no matter how much you seek; cast her out like an useless worm; and present a woman who is wise in life, or a woman who knows a part of the art, and command her to do what you command of her by the inquiry of the stone.
and look well if the woman is a virgin: then you must push her breast or foundation and inquire about the stone; and if she finds it, if you constrain her stomach, and command her to hold her left hand on the bladder, and press and pull her hand.
If that be true, if you must move the bowels from their entrance at the belly downwards as far as they reach the root of the thigh; then hold the heel on the piere at the root of the thigh and find the middle of the bone, where it is usually hidden, and feel the bone in that part; and do not move it from the heel downwards or downwards, and let the size be small at first.
Then put the heel back in place at the same size. If you feel the bone is too wide for the wound, and that many kinds of bones are like this: small and large, sharp and blunt, long and round, which have reins. If the bones resemble each other, it is an indication of discharge.
And if it does not go away, if you put in place a soaked piece of vitriol, and hold it for an hour until it is dry; then return to your work, until the bone is healed, and have the instruments I told you about for extracting the bone as your companions in your work.
If it does not go by itself, and it is the artery that is severed, put powder on the limb and bind tightly with thread and bandage, and do not attempt to move it again, but leave the wound alone and do not touch it, except by chance the patient dies; then cure the wound.
When the color of blood has subsided and the limb is relaxed, if you return to your work while the wound is still open, as long as the wound is still bleeding.
hernia of the intestines.
Ramice aquouse is nothing else but an assembly of moisture or white fat, which is as soft as the kernels of corn, that contains the yolk; and it is called "syfac," and never is it properly within the yolk, if we take care that it is not otherwise. And it is the skin of the kernel between the white fat that we have said. And these do not move together.
And the formation of this ramus is from weakness and comes from the kernels, and the matter is spread out.
And never does it come from percussion on the kernels, and this moisture has many colors: or it is pale yellow, or it is without red, or black, or pale blue, and such is more;
And these are the signs of a dislocation in this assembly, for if it is white or yellowish as we have said, if the abscesses are round like the head of an egg and do not open, because there is moisture all around.
And if there is moisture in the very flesh, if the abscesses are round with a part of the egg, and because of this it is thought that this is another egg;
And if the moisture is between the skin of the nails and the yellowish, if one feels well; then when you see the color of the moisture, if it extends to the whole surrounding area, that is like before. According to this, therefore, which follows the introductor, judge of that which is within.
According to this, therefore, which follows the introductor, judge of that which is within. When we bandage with iron, if it is necessary, that the patient be quiet and still according to his need; then bind on his back, on something somewhat high, and put on him a coat of cloth.
then sit on his left side, and command the minister to sit on his right side, and extend the limb towards one of the ribs as far as the ribs will go;
then take the sponge soaked in the liquid, and cut the skin of the ribs among the ribs as far as the thumb will go, and be careful to tear the skin completely straight by dividing the skin of the ribs until you reach the white layer, and do so slowly according to his need;
Then pierce the surface of the abscess with a large opening, drain all the pus, and then put on your gloves; extend the abscess upwards; and do not touch the core of the abscess, but only the surrounding area; cut through all or in pieces the cost of its substance, for if you do not cut it thoroughly, the pus will return.
If the upper part of the abscess has burst forth from your work, if you leave it in its place when you have finished the work of the abscess; then join together again the parts of the core of the abscess at a costure, and cure it as with other wounds, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
And if you find the abscess corrupted by another disease, then you must tie up the blood vessels that are suspended, doubting the decay of blood; then cut through the abscess thoroughly, drain the pus, and cure it as we have said.</start_of_turn>
If it is put together with its other half, and there are two roots which make up these two parts; if you have made the other part even like the first, then dry the blood, and put into the wound a cloth soaked in rose oil.
put on another cloth soaked in wine and oil, and put on the two bones, and put on doubled cloths, and bind it up in the fashion which is proper for this form:
Then take two cloths, and use coarse wool like this in the semblance and join them together at the armpits, and one of the arms grasps on the foundation up to the shoulder, and the other to the part below the shoulder; and the other two fingers grasp the two angles, and all be assembled so that the restriction is in the loop of the arm.
And never is this cautery branch useful for the size of iron; take only a superficial cautery, and burn the skin of the joint, and if it be eschaufed as we have said, so that the white substance which contains the pain is discovered.
If you take the cautery as we have said, and pierce this membrane as we have shown, and burn with this superficial cautery,
And keep doing it in all ways that you can, until you have burned through everything; and keep the fire away from the flesh; and be careful that this matter is more salve; and do not remove blood, and do not make haste in the work.
If nothing else hinders you, or if a vein bursts or blood vessel bursts or any other thing, if you can, remedy what hinders you, according to what is said before.
If the patient is faint and cannot endure this work because of its horror, if you perceive an opening, as I have said, and if you are quite certain from the signs we have mentioned that the wound is fluid-filled,
If you make the patient sit up; then pierce the abscess at the lower part with all the surrounding tissue wide open, and pierce the hole through the bone; and if the wound is large, so that all the pain is expelled immediately
Then put cotton on the limb and bind it, and let the remaining pain run its course; then cure it until the wound is healed.
If the white cloth does not stop the pain at the wound's source, if you should drink a penny or the instrument used for treating the hydropic wound, as it is formed in this way; and make it wide. That is, enlarge the wound, and drain that the pain may return, and reassemble after about twenty days or until it heals, and when it is reassembled as before, the patient will then be well again.
of the excision of the testicles.
Hair that is in this section of the limb has doubt and fear in many places, for I think that it is worth leaving it as it is.
I will tell you about the work and the signs of the incision
Therefore, when the abscess comes or bursts, and there are stitches; and this is often the case
It is known by excessive swelling and pain, which is spread out as stitches, or by percussion;
And it is the color of the abscess according to the color of the urine; and there is no pain, and it is an abscess of grief.
And sometimes an abscess is grieved with fear and pain, and is of a dark color, and never comes from a vein or swelling of a vessel.</start_of_turn>
When it is not from a vein, if it is known by the disposition of the cautery abscess, when you press it at your side; and you must not touch it.</start_of_turn>
He who makes an engorgement of a vein is known by his disposition at the expression of touch of the two thumbs.
and can well make the size of this semblance, and on the other limbs and that you clip the nerves like nails, then the yolk is up, and the thread from the white sack comes out, and release the suspension from all parts of the yolk.
If the yolk is already clotted with these nails, if you must then treat the yolk, and clip it.
And if it is towards the socket, or within the blood vessels, if you must deliver all that is tense, and round off the edges.
And if it is towards the socket, or within the blood vessels, if you must deliver all that is tense, and round off the edges.
And when your work is done, if you apply a bandage of coarse wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then cure with other cures until it is healed.
of the abscess of the testicles
This is an abscess enclosed by a covering similar to a berry, with softening of the bones. The patient groans in pain when he moves it
and the treatment for this disease is very painful as well as this one before
And all these things we will tell you about in the following chapters, according to what the ancients have made.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit on the edge of the bed, and then hold the supporter of the collarbones above his shoulders. Hold all the ribs that protrude at the waist, and keep them stretched out, and hold the master steady and extend them forward;
then grasp the scapula wide and uncover the blood vessels until they are fully exposed,
and then support the shoulder blade from below, as we have mentioned in the extraction of arteries from the temples;
Then I insert a needle or if there is a double thread, I tie it to the first root or where the nail has come out, and I tie it to the other root. Then I press them [the roots] together firmly, according to the length of the hair, and I extract the corrupted moisture.
Then I treat the wound like the others or I bandage it, so that no blood vessel is torn except for those which nourish the surrounding parts;
for in this way there is no harm, and if all the blood vessels are torn, if you must, you can pull out the bones from all the blood vessels. If the oes does not lose its nourishment through the incision of the vessels, and dries and does not yield aid.
If the oes does not lose its nourishment through the incision of the vessels, and dries and does not yield aid. If the oes does not lose its nourishment through the incision of the vessels, and dries and does not yield aid
If the oes does not lose its nourishment through the incision of the vessels, and dries and does not yield aid.
And the signs when it is an extension of the jaw, if there is much swelling and much tension, long and sustained, and does not come immediately; And the swelling is equal on both sides up to the earlobe, because the jaw presses the intestine.</start_of_turn>
And the sign is when the jaw is fractured, that it suddenly causes pain in the ear, and the swelling is different from the normal, with the skin taut and pale, because of the escape of the intestine and the swelling of the jaw.</start_of_turn
And never do the bones move with the intestine, and is retained when forced, and causes great suffering to the patient, even when pressed.</start_of_turn>
And in these fiery cures with fear, for fear itself suffices.
And if you command or patient that he grasp the intestines with his hand in the wound, if he can reinsert them there; then either hold his neck between your hands, and grasp his genitals;
then extend the arm at the shoulder, and strip all the hair along the groin; Then from the depth of the wound, take the leathers of the size of uncorns according to what you must master to open the wound, and be such that they can be easily removed.
Then pull out the fat that is under the leather of the wound, until the white fat of the marrow is discovered throughout;
Then put your thumb inside the wound where the marrow bone is, between the white fat that is under the outer skin and the second fat layer,
and pull out what is behind the marrow, and between the second fat layer; and hold the thumb of your right hand inside the wound, and extend the white fat upwards with your left hand, and keep the marrow bone towards the size of the wound. And command the minister to extend the arm upwards, and loosen what is behind the limb.
And ask at the same time if there is any intestine or white fat wrapped around the limb, and if you find nothing, if it is in the belly below
Then take a needle or if there is any thick thread made of thread, and insert it into the back part of the fat, which is after the skin of the buttocks; after that, the size, then cut the nails that appear from the thread, until there are three threads left; Then assemble the one over the other in the manner of a cross, and bind the fat, which we have said is the skin of the buttocks, with a strong thread of.ij. parts. Then cover the head of the shoulder with cloth, and bind it firmly with .ij. parts, so that no vessel except those that nourish it can enter there, only at the incision it must remain. Then straighten the limb according to the first limb that is long .ij. two of them, and after these .ij. limbs leave out the fat which is as soft as the kernels of corn at the greatest heat of a pot of lentils
and after that the rest according to the curve that the egg carries; then press in the part which is as soft as the leather of the nails, as much as it will stay put, and bend, as we have said above.
Then apply soft wool soaked in oil to the wound, and put on a dressing, and I will tell you what to do. Never cauterize the flesh except as I have said after the incision, in doubt of bloodletting
For this often happens, and leave the limb until it bleeds by itself; and if it bleeds too slowly, if it happens that the wound has become infected with hot water, and put on what I have said, until it bleeds.
Then cure the wound with another dressing, until it is perfectly healed.
De hernie carnouse.
In this limb I have never seen anyone who could cure it with iron.
And the old folks say that it is made just like the limb which is bound to the screw, in part like when you bind the blood vessels, after the size above lightly at the bottom;
Then put some salve on it, and cure the abscess of what it causes; as long as the blood vessels bite; and cure it as we have said, as long as it is healthy.
Never comes routine with anger, as we have said, and open the veins; and do not leave any intestines inside, for if there are any, that is enough, and repair them at all hours.
and if it stays too long in this place, if one believes the wound or tumor, as long as the intestines are leaving;
and this comes from the swelling of the flesh which is angry, as we have said, because it is stretched, then it is softened and relaxed, and opens the veins
and it is cured by cautery, as we have previously said; and never by iron in this manner:
And it is that the patient lies prone upon his back between your hands, then seize the limb of the affected area with a large clamp according to the quantity of two thumbs.
And then draw out the scab which is below the skin that covers it, then take hold of the root and pull out the limb that appears from the scab.
And press at the navel, then cut the two thumbs that appear from the scab on the top of the root, and cut one and the other;
Then draw out the root, and do not cover the scab or extend the belly or anything else, as I told you in the treatment of the hernia of the intestines.
Then cure by the treatment of wounds. And when you have closed the wound, if the moisture and cure the wound, as long as it is healed.
The swelling is constrained, and has no apparent cause in the course of treatment, and the cautery is mute in this limb, and more proximate to safety.
of the softening of the skin of the nails
Many times the skin of the nails becomes soft in old age, because the nails themselves are softened, and it is seen; and it is necessary, when it is seen to be cured, to make the patient lie on his back, and to remove the soft skin from the natural skin; then join the two layers together with a suture, and if you see that, leave the excess of soft skin at two or three sutures; then close between the sutures, and cure as with the other wounds, until it is healed, and cut the thread.
Dou chastrement,
Because of the chastament,
of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc deux manieres: une si est que entre les deux coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine. Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et deux coions. Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.
Hermaphroditism is in two ways: one if between the two testicles is open as in the figure of nature in a woman, or if there is hair, and sometimes in the urine is held back. And the other way if in women, and has on the navel as a beard and two testicles. And the cure for the swelling and fame is if you crush the testicles completely, and the cure is like for other wounds; in the second way, of men whose urine spurts through the skin of the testicles, if there is no cure.
Tentigene is a swelling that appears on the natural part [of the body], as long as it is too heavy to see; and many women have it just as much as a hand. And the cure is like that of a hand. It is necessary to keep the excess of the swelling down by your hand or as one would with a bandage; and do not press too much, for blood will not come, and then the cure will be of no use; and another disease that comes from the mouth of the marrow, and the spleen, and by chance spurts out, and is like the figure of a cow, and for this reason it is called the ancient "madness of the cows". If you can keep it down, as we have said, and the cure will be when it is healed.
De erratique.
When something is out of its proper place.
From boils.
Emorroids are openings of veins which without support are usually not cured; and when they are old they become thick; and we have already mentioned in the division the signs and symptoms, and I will say here those which bring about healing. I say that emorroids and thick blood, when they are mixed in the marrow and are not perceived, can only be cured by iron. Those which are at the mouth of the marrow can be perceived, and can be cured. It is therefore necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then strengthen the ankle and hold the shin bone in its roots, then sprinkle upon it medicinal astringents such as acacia and dragon’s blood and incense, and similar things; then close the wound an hour later, then bathe it in cold water; and if there is any remaining blood, if she sits in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate seeds and barley and similar things, and then drink barley flour, and mix it with honey and oatmeal, and make one application on her back. And if it stops bleeding, that is good. If not, if there is still bleeding, make her breathe with a cloth over her back and apply pressure; then take linen, and moisten it with the juice of plantain or the juice of elderberry with wine vinegar, and make her breathe. And when the wound has healed, if it is not completely cured, it will become white like a rough chief; if you cover it as I have said the thick blood. And then it will be cured when it is completely healed.
Emoroids are openings of veins which without support are usually not cured; and when they are old they become thick; and we have already mentioned in the division the signs and symptoms, and I will say here those which bring about healing. I say that emorroids and thick blood, when they are mixed in the marrow and are not perceived, can only be cured by iron. Those which are at the mouth of the marrow can be perceived, and can be cured. It is therefore necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then strengthen the ankle and hold the shin bone in its roots, then sprinkle upon it medicinal astringents such as acacia and dragon’s blood and incense, and similar things; then close the wound an hour later, then bathe it in cold water; and if there is any remaining blood, if she sits in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate seeds and barley and similar things, and then drink barley flour, and mix it with honey and oatmeal, and make one application on her back. And if it stops bleeding, that is good. If not, if there is still bleeding, make her breathe with a cloth over her back and apply pressure; then take linen, and moisten it with the juice of plantain or the juice of elderberry with wine vinegar, and make her breathe. And when the wound has healed, if it is not completely cured, it will become white like a rough chief; if you cover it as I have said the thick blood. And then it will be cured when it is completely healed.
Emoroids are openings of veins which without support are usually not cured; and when they are old they become thick; and we have already mentioned in the division the signs and symptoms, and I will say here those which bring about healing. I say that emorroids and thick blood, when they are mixed in the marrow and are not perceived, can only be cured by iron. Those which are at the mouth of the marrow can be perceived, and can be cured. It is therefore necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then strengthen the ankle and hold the shin bone in its roots, then sprinkle upon it medicinal astringents such as acacia and dragon’s blood and incense, and similar things; then close the wound an hour later, then bathe it in cold water; and if there is any remaining blood, if she sits in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate seeds and barley and similar things, and then drink barley flour, and mix it with honey and oatmeal, and make one application on her back. And if it stops bleeding, that is good. If not, if there is still bleeding, make her breathe with a cloth over her back and apply pressure; then take linen, and moisten it with the juice of plantain or the juice of elderberry with wine vinegar, and make her breathe. And when the wound has healed, if it is not completely cured, it will become white like a rough chief; if you cover it as I have said the thick blood. And then it will be cured when it is completely healed.
From infancy
From infancy, the midwife first perceives the natural figure of an infant when she sees the woman press down on the navel and desire to smell the afterbirth; then the child immediately comes out; so that when the child is born according to the natural figure, the head comes out first, and the second hand follows; and when you see these signs, if you gently press on the abdomen, the child will come out headfirst; for when it descends on the head, the second hand follows, and the mother is saved from the burden of her afterbirth by the bones of the body; and this is not natural. For it never comes from its joints, but from force of the womb or the child, or the hands, or it comes from the abdomen or the navel, and is converted by an accident from its collar, and by other harmful figures; if the midwife is skilled in the art, she will be wary of errors and deceptions, and I will show you all the figures that we must use to aid her.
When the child comes out naturally from the head and the woman gives birth and the strength of the child is weak, if you make her sit on a stool, or the women hold her; and when she has relaxed with oil or rue or fennel, which is customary, then you should hold the child between your two arms and gently push the little heel that gives it its shape: And cut the second [bone], and hold its nail until the moisture that is within corrects itself; and seize the woman’s belly until the fetus descends, and if it does not descend, if you must, clench the woman with muscle from fennel seeds with olive oil; then make her gulp and cough up phlegm, and keep her mouth and nose closed for an hour: if the fetus is now out. And if the thumbs come out too far, if you must, keep them lightly flexed back and forward; and if they will not enter, put the woman on her side, and hold her feet high; then withdraw the seat from the earth, and hold her, that she does not cough; and if the thumbs do not enter, and the fetus is dead, if you must, clench the thumbs at the wrist which is above, and pull out the fetus, and raise her equally.
From the issue of the child from its feet. When the child comes from its feet, if you can push upwards; And then the shoulder joint will pop forward and backward, until it is even.
and then take hold of the limb and extend it forward and backward.</start_of_turn>
until it is even. If the limb leaps up again, God help us.
And if it is not forced as we have said, if the joint hangs too low or too high, as long as it is according to the natural figure. For in such a case it is easily displaced.</start_of_turn>
And if it is not forced as we have said, if take muscle from above, and oil of lint, and gum masticated, and grind all this together in a mortar;  </start_of_turn and put on the nature of the woman inside and drive away this swelling.</start_of_turn> Then let him sit upright in water up to his ribs;
And when it is moist, let him drink a spoonful of myrrh and give him wine, and leave him for an hour. Then let him sit on a chair, then make him spit and strain his mouth and throat, and gently palpate his belly, for he will now jump up. because of the child’s discharge from his genitals. When the boy comes in this shape, if he puts his hands on his face and on his head;
and the boy cries out loud; and instructs the woman to look after him until the boy is well. I must order you to restore the limb: if it cannot be restored, if you must leave the woman, and call for help;
If it does not move, if you manage to grasp it by the lit, and it lets go of the legs,
then support the limb as I have described;
and if it still does not budge, if you manage to hold it in its seat, then study how to remove the limb; and gently pull it out in its natural position, and make it spit, and command it to remain stretched out until it is relieved.
From the issue of the child on his neck, and his hands spread out, and his face turned towards his mother's back. I believe that the boy is holding out his hand, then turning it back and forth, and pressing it lightly;
When it is even, if you put on the muscular substance of altitude and oil, as we have said, then command that it moves back and forth.
When you have done this, if you make it sit on its seat, and command it to bend; and it will sneeze. From this same manner at all the second time.
From this same manner at all the second time. When it comes forcefully in this manner at all the second time, if the second time reaches your nail, as long as moisture is evacuated;
and if the nail is bent over its face and its collar, if the head of the bone is loosened, that it does not remain, and the patient dies.
then withdraw the child, as long as you have put it as it should be, and command the woman not to move at all:
Then if it is easily pulled out Then if it is easily pulled out, the nails which grow often do not grow at the same time; and this is not a strange thing, and often happens. Two are strange things, and do not live long, if only for that name.
I know well that they are numerous, and they are loosened by the substance which devours them, which is bound to the bud.
and never depart so naturally as all at once, as we have said before.</start_of_turn>
And if it departs cruelly, if the cure is as we have said, and be it a subtle seizure, and make haste and lightly do what it does; and do so as it is worth doing for health. Moreover.
Moreover. Moreover, sometimes they are formed in masses, that is to say in groups of one, two, three, four, five, six, or seven, or more up to fifteen, and are all formed in the shape of a child by the measure of their glorious stature.
and it is necessary that she should dance all this, for by chance many things happen; if you do it as it should be done.
Of dead children.
When you cure the woman of a dead child or unborn child, as I have said in the division, and there is no immediate relief, and you are compelled by the work of your hands; you must believe that the woman is of sound mind and has no accident or fear of death.
if you believe that the woman is conscious on her back, and her limbs are inclined downwards, and her legs are lifted;
And if the handmaid grasps her wrist with fifteen fingers, or if she is bound to the bed if she does not descend from the child;
Then wipe the mouth of the basin with moist oil, mixed with alum and fenugreek seeds and linseed oil, and anoint her hands with these oils and these mixtures. Then place her in the basin lightly, and give her one or two leeches that are convenient for this purpose,
Take care that the child is not left hanging over his head. If the hair in the armpits, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or on the face, or on the beard, or in the hair of the eyebrows, or on the eyelashes, or on the cheeks,
and if they detach downwards on the face, it is grasped or plucked out, and the eyebrows droop down.
and you must hold the hair with your right hand, and place the thumb between the two of your left hand, and grasp with all your hand lightly, and hold the hair in none of these ways that we have said, until it comes to the empty thing;
Then the limb finds another support, or the third party intervenes, if so the extraction must be even.
Then it extends equally by moving from side to side, because of moisture, and the nails of the fingers are loosened by moisture, or the teeth of the bones are loosened by moisture which must be held, as in this case:
And if it remains in part, if once the limb has been bailed with oil around its circumference, and the nails of the fingers are bound in that part, and the other part is treated;
And if there remains no part, if you put this ointment or higher up inside, and do so until it has gone away entirely.
And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be pulled back by stretching, then you must wrap around the drapeil until it is whole.</start_of_turn>
then hold it at the joint of the limb or at the root, and ensure that you do the same with the other hand, and have two thumbs.</start_of_turn>
and if the shoulder joint is large and is twisted in the extraction, or if there is pain in the assembly, If it be certain that you have pushed back the bony prominence between your two hands, and have fixed the head, then draw out the pain. or you shall bind it to the instrument which is called the «almidach», from which it forms along with the instruments or bandage which follows this;
and thus make it swell naturally with great force; and then treat for the bones as tenacious,
If the shoulder joint is forced out by force and is strained by the forcele, if it is fractured, as long as the moisture which is either coming out or has come out.
if it cannot be restored, if the bone breaks into pieces at the muscle that you put in place;
if it is swollen in the belly or deforms the ribs, if you must pierce through as much as the moisture goes out.
if it is above its pieces, if the attraction is slight, and the receiving end of the tube is lighter.
And if it is twisted in the belly or the wrist, it is necessary to draw it out, that is, to uncover it that is covering the hand. and hold the belly or the wrist, until the moisture that is causing the pain is expelled.
and if another part is fractured and the limb is immobile, if the limb is pierced by an iron or the like, from the armpit to the wrist; Then I command thee. I anoint thee or I join thee, and I force the evil away.
and if there is moisture in the mouth, it is pushed back by the cautery which has come, if I cannot bear it, then I must bring moist and oily things. and I mix plaster, and soak it in soft and moist water.
And if the fetus is on its side, put it even, if necessary reminding what was said about the living child.
and if it does not move, if it is forced out by pieces, and you leave nothing of the afterbirth.
And when you have done this, if necessary remind what was said about the afterbirth that comes with the mare;
and if blood comes out, if there is any other cure.
And I saw a woman who had a child in her womb that was dead, then consulted with another about it, and refuted death for the other. After a long time, there came a swelling in the belly that opened, and caused great pain
I went for help, and for a long time I thought, and could not stop the pain.
I put on a strong plaster, and out came a bone, and after a while another. I marvel at your mouth, for your belly has no bone.
I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
I want the wound, and with hands of bone, as long as the woman is better; and I saw the woman long tense in pain, and that was already a little bow of blood in the body.
And I have never seen this chapter except for the time when the master found a strange thing, and he had to give aid.
to reset the dislocation to its place
And thus comes the form of the pressor, as we must do in the books; and two returns are made for two limbs. However, the horn should be more subtle than the restraint, and be made of ebony or boxwood;
And let the lips be wide open, like a large mouth, and the chin be drawn in, and the tongue be long half a palm. And between them let the two lips be closed with a gentle pressure from the middle of the face, which should be held together, half a palm or more in length.</start_of_turn>
And these two pressures are placed in the mouth of the patient when the two corners are opened.</start_of_turn>
Another form, more subtle and lighter, can be made of ebony or boxwood, according to the shape of the nails.</start_of_turn And he has thus two joints of the shoulder, as you see, of a palm of length, and two of width;
And when you see the arm open at all its joints, if you make the woman sit down a little, keep the arms still and the legs over then hold the two joints of the shoulder together in the arm, and keep the chief of the instrument between her thighs; Then move your hand over the entire instrument, as you have done to keep it even, according to the quantity that you see the arm opening, until the limb itself makes what it wants.
These instruments are all very strong, and their resemblance is multiplied; and when you behold them appear, the work hastens and the houses are higher in quantity.
If you do not despair of the instrument when you do not see it, because its need is not excused
When the second [tooth] is retained in infancy, if you command the patient to retain its socket, and then make her expel it with conditions, and strain your hands at the mouth and the nose; and if it leaps out for this, that is well.
If not, take one pot and make a hole or cut, and put herbs in it that can open the mouth of the marrow, as for example, rue, anis, chamomile, cassia and centaury.
All these herbs, or some of them, whether cooked or boiled in water over the fire; then put a sponge or hole in the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the marrow.
and hold it until steam comes out of the marrow; then make it cough, as we have said. If the second joint is affected with the illness. If it remains after this treatment, and does not go away, as it is commanded in the dance, let her moisten her left hand with oil of sesam or in almond oil, and then put it back in its place.</start_of_turn>
and touch the second one; and when she has found it, if she grasps it and extends it forward and backward, so that the mark does not bleed during the extraction.</start_of_turn but must move slightly to the right and to the left, and then treat; if it comes and disappears again.</start_of_turn
And if the mouth of the marrow is swollen, as we have said, for the cure we recommend yesterday, and the fumigation of herbs.
and if it is not from all that we have said, if you do not find it helpful, do not hesitate to leave it alone.
but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the marrow, that you bind to the hip of the woman, then press it inwards with a tetracycline poultice.
if the swelling persists and returns, force will arise; however, whenever there is blood in the stomach and head, and vomiting, the patient must be bled.
If it be necessary, then fumigations which are useful for these: none of the ancients have proved the efficacy of fumigation with rue and dried figs.
The form of the instrument which allows us to fumigate the woman at the retention of urine and the secondine if it is this:
And it is seen to be like a cane, and put on the bridle over the face, and the large hairs above the fire;
Or be it fumigation upon charcoal, and the pitch until it is consumed, and begin again.
To pierce the foundation
When children are born who do not have a firm foundation, they have it struck by an obscure substance, which makes them limp. Then you must take hold of the dance so that it strikes that substance at its source, and do not pierce with any sharp object, and keep the wound closed so that it does not touch it;
Then put on soaked linen in wine and oil, and then the ointment until it is healed.
If you doubt that it will stay in place, if you put in or pull out a sliver of lead, and you leave it hanging there, and remain still as long as the boy sees it lying there in bed.
Never again comes this stamp of suspicion of wound or abscess; if you cover that suspicion: if it is cured, as we have said of the sliver of lead.</start_of_turn>
of fistula from its foundation Fistulas that come from the foundation are nodular and greater when they come from below the foundation, or between the two parts,
If there is a fistula or several; and when that swelling is old, if the afterbirth is thick, and is accompanied by moisture that flows from the wound,
If there is ever a fistula, these are known by the fact that they discharge pus or blood, or wind, when the patient evacuates, or by chance some other time.
If there are fistulas that reach the bladder, and halfway up the thigh; and reach as far as the hip joint, and even to the bone.
And thus one knows the persistent fistula at its foundation, and does not see it again. And it is that you bite down your thumb or foundation, and insert a subtle needle of spider or iron into the fistula when there is no twisting.
But if there is twisting, if you insert a slight attempt of sponge or horsehair, as long as you feel the attempt or the hair on your thumb;
and if you do not feel it, and there is no bleeding or vomiting or wind, as we have said: then you must be quick to cure.
When the fistula persists up to the bladder or the urinary tract, if in a leap the urine escapes and cannot be stopped by medicines.
If it is perceived up to the hip joint, if the vein that runs up to the thigh is torn if there is no swelling and the limb is not in pain, if it is only slightly twisted, and no medicine or ointment can help;
and in these persistent fistulas there is no other cure than work, and the vanity of the fools who meddle with it.
In that which is neither new nor old, hope for health by fire, as I have experienced.
and the patient lies between your hands on his back; and keep the legs extended until they reach his buttocks, and his buttocks are tilted towards his belly then try to move his arm, or push if there is swelling, until you feel the bones line up or the attempt comes.
if the patient feels pain at the root, if you must, bite down on your thumb and index finger,
He feels that he has grasped it; and whether it is uncovered or you feel between your shoulder blade and the hip, then the limb that is affected is stiff. if it does not slip away immediately, it cannot be cured.</start_of_turn>
We can do nothing to cure it well, but this is enough;
we must support it so that the cautery can be applied according to the size of the fistula, as it is said; And the other part right up to the fistula, as far as it comes from the foundation; and make this once or twice, until you know that these hairs that need to be cauterized are burned, which are like a goose feather.
And then the cure for soft boils is to burn them out, until their hairs are loosened, and then the cure for an abscess is to drain it and sew it up.</start_of_turn>
If it is healthy, that is good. But if not, it cannot be healed;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule à ce qui enseut la coverture dou keur. and if it tries to enter, and does not pierce until it reaches the root which is or is the foundation, and between your thumb and the attempt there is a thick covering of leather or silk, and you see the fistula at that which supports the covering of hair; if the root of the fistula comes out before the attempt, and you burn afterwards, as long as it comes up to the head of the attempt.
and will be delivered the attempt, and will be cured; then smear those hairs that seem like a quill of oil, and there will remain nothing.
If he does not go away of his own accord, and stands between you and the work, let the fire cautery or the medical potion suffice.
For indeed, the fire cautery brings together three things: namely, the burning of these bones, the evacuation of blood and the drying out of moisture
then the cure for soft swellings buried under burr or split bones, as long as they yield to the burn; and the bones become softened in the burn.
then cure the wound of wounds saturated with soft dressings with lasting herbs, and the dry medicines.
For when it is restored, if it is healed and does not come back.
When the fistula comes up to the root of the bone, and is loosened from the flesh, if the bone or root is grasped or grasped at the root, ask for that.</start_of_turn>
If you feel the spasm, and between these two things is the cloth or the sponge or the horn, or it is close to piercing, if there is no other way but to go forward, by the administration of one of these three remedies:
or you cauterize as we have said, or you press it until it is healed, or if you wish you may put some attempts and cure as before.
And do not linger too long, for you cover only the dwelling that holds the foundation, and come out in the reverse direction of your intention. Then flee, as we have said;
Then flee, as we have said; By chance if you are well, or you loosen that covering and the mud has already covered the foundation, or by hook or by any other pointed instrument; Then hold fast this thread which is in the wound, as you can;
Then study to restore the wound, and to stop the fistula by the lower part of the foundation: if it is more convenient for the patient.
And never are fistulas as described in this manner: and it is when you bite at the attempt in the fistula, and it is either too late or too costly to remove the underlying skin from the foundation.</start_of_turn> if you take a perceived attempt at the head according to this form: And thus .i. feel the thread twisted in two, and hold the attempt at all the thread in the fistula until it is at the head.
If the limb hangs limply from the socket at the root, then draw out the thread of that which is torn, so that you may swallow the root or the foundation.
If the head of the limb hangs limply from the socket at the root, then draw out the thread of that which is torn, and reunite the fragments of the limb together, and strain one over the other, and let it hang there for a while or two.</start_of_turn>
and do not hold it tight at any time, until the thread has caught hold of these hairs that are between the bones, and has become tight.</start_of_turn>
Then cure the wound until it is healed and healthy.</start_of_turn
If the fistula does not break through, if you force it to break in every way you can, it will not be too deeply seated.
For it is not right to force it from the surrounding tissue if it is deeply seated, and then it will cure, as we have said, when it is sound.</start_of_turn>
The form of a thorny spine from which the fistula is made is rough and has a part and trenchant.</start_of_turn> and on the other hand, for this reason we must not cope with that which we must not cope.</start_of_turn
Emorrhages are in several ways: when they are deep-seated in the foundation, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and they adhere steadily without blood, and there is one or more of them, and they are driven out of the foundation and the root of the limb; but those which are driven out have moisture.
and are accompanied by blood clot or yellow bile or blood, and have the color of flesh;
And the treatment for those who have it in the foundation, if you command the patient to rise up and go to bed, as long as the foundation is strong, and the child will recover; if you hurry, and you grasp it with your nails, or you hold it at its root, then you can pull it out from its roots.</start_of_turn>
and if the joint cannot be held by its moisture, if you grasp it with a bandage, or with cotton, or with a piece of chammyl; and stretch them out to your shoulders, then pull them out, and powder with warm powder that is in place of the cautery. Or thou causest them to be cauterized as it is said or the book of cautery, and then thou dost cure them of other cures while they be sound.
And if the foundations cannot resist, if thou dost cluster the patient fiercely biting and grasping to uncover that which is or is like a foundation, so that it can openly resist
The patient cannot remain in pain, and if the limb is fixed by force to the foundation, if the cure is light; And that thou take them at thy finger or hold them, and pull them, and cure them as we have said, while they are sound, and that they fear the incision by fire.
If you agree that you can restore the fracture according to this method: take one thread, pierce it with a needle, then pass the thread through below and pull out the needle from the other side, and twist the two ends of the thread around the needle, If it is large; tighten the thread firmly, then knot the thread, pull out the needle, and do the same with the others, leaving one to correct the excess blood.
then put on the foundation one moist bandage in rose oil or cerate, and put on the foundation, and command the patient to rest.
And then leave them until they cease to bleed, and when they are dry, if the wound-dressing and other treatments are complete, while they are still sound.
When the wound is dry or healed at its base.</start_of_turn> There is often a dry discharge of blood in the intestine, and by constriction of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine is of no avail.</start_of_turn>
If you can prevent it, do not let a scab or nail remain moist under the skin; Then he must be cured while he is still bleeding if it is necessary;
and if he cannot be stopped, if he must be treated again, do so more vigorously than before, until he vomits, and be escorted. Then he must be cured while he is still bleeding if it is necessary;
because he is groaning. Formice is a small outgrowth that appears before the bone, and goes through and around it;
And never does it cease to hurt, and it is felt as if from the bowels of death throughout the limb, and there is more pain there than anywhere else.
And the cure is to take a needle of goose quill or a needle of strong vulture, and put that needle on the wound, as long as the circle turns the wound all around then turn your hand to the utmost extent so that you can encompass the wound all around, and put it through and through, and press the wound from its roots.
If you see that it is done with a wasp or iron according to this form, and that the edges are blunt and the underside is rough:
If you see that it is done with a wasp or iron according to this form, and that the edges are blunt and the underside is rough, do not be afraid, for it is necessary to hold tightly and press firmly. If you see that the fire is applied, if it is before or alongside the cautery.
of this form. Never is copper or silver cautery made, or of wasp or molten iron; and never are these small and great instruments made as they are brought.
Those who are feeble and painful in their upbringing and in their treatment are petty.
The form of a small and great blister is thus when it is surrounded by a wide area, or when the belly is bound in this manner:
and if there is a swelling or the belly is bound, as you see, and the head or the foot is pierced; and there is a wound at one of the sides, or from the other side.
or if the belly is bound with a bladder of horsehair or parchment, or if it is pierced all around the wound
And has between each hole [of the dressing] one must put space, then pass through these holes one strong thread of strong thread twisted in a cross or in a knot, and assemble the belly as though it were a spoke. And when the medicine is inside, if the thread has in front of it a strong thread, then clip it; and this is the form of a circle:
And let the medicine neither too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the clip with oil or balm of egg, or something similar, and then bind it lightly;
Then the minister grasps his thumbs together, as long as he is whole, and pulls out the clot, and the patient extends his legs at the surface.
And if the physician sees that it is necessary, if the wound is large; and if he sleeps all night whole, that is a greater help.
And if you cauterize it in a state of sickness of swelling of the belly, and the physician hasten to leave, if it starts again as long as it is sane.
And if there are swellings or foundations, or abscesses, if the clot is as subtle as for a child;
And thus it is with the form of a subtle blister on the skin that the leather is strained:
And thus it is with the form of a subtle blister on the skin that the leather is strained: from wounds.
We have already said in the preceding section the treatment of wounds; or rather the treatment of hands and medicine, as it is completed.
I say that wounds are various according to the way they are made, and according to the place or the wound is made, and of what material it is made.
The things that cause wounds are done by the bite of stone, or the size of spear and nail, or of lance or fist or sickle, or similar things.
or that are made according to the hardness of the flesh, as when there is a wound that pierces the neck, or the head, or the hand, or the belly, or the liver, and similar parts.
and I will tell you the cure for simple wounds, and I will begin with wounds of the head, because the memory will come back to you in this chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes or a wound of the head, and the bone is not broken, if you take care that it is from the bite of stone or from similar things, and the skin is completely torn and the wound is large, And you doubt with reason about incisions: if you do them too soon after an injury, it may bring about more blood than from the wound itself; or let the blood flow in the opposite direction to the affected part.
and listen carefully to the patient’s complaints of vomiting and loss of appetite.</start_of_turn>
If he does not recover, if he has lost his appetite for meat and does not drink wine, does not eat bread;
and remove the wound, if there is swelling, apply a wet compress of rose oil only, or in astringent wine.</start_of_turn>
If there is no oozing from the wound, if you place a swab on it while it is fresh with all its blood, and it does not move by air, dust, or anything else, I will tell you later.
If there is any movement, place some sponges on it until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
And if the wound is great as if made by a sword and similar things, and the edges do not come together by tension, if you join them with sutures, as I will say, for wounds of the belly, with sutures.</start_of_turn>
If the wound is exposed by bone, it is wide open and will only hold together by a single thread; then cure the wound with medicine, and restore flesh in place of skin. Instruct the patient to consume large amounts of broth, such as broth and oatmeal, as well as poultry and other things like that.</start_of_turn>
If you find pus or decay under the skin, but there is no bone exposed, if you grasp it firmly and pull it out, then cure it; then.</start_of_turn
If there is an artery or vein in the wound that cannot be staunched by medicine, if you see the artery and you can dislocate it, grasp it with a thread; </start_of_turn If this does not help, if the cautery fails,
If these wounds are small and simple, if it is a mild cure: and if you put on this powder that adheres as soon as it moves.
The manner of the powder is: take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; chalk that burns three parts, and mix the powder thoroughly. and apply the wound, and hold it firm, until it is well aired and reunited with all its blood.
Then hold it firmly, and leave it loose, if it does not swell; for we do not bandage the medicine until it is whole.
Never do we make this burn only, when we do not have incense or dragon’s blood, but that the wound has not moved.</start_of_turn>
If the wound has moved even a little, do not put anything else on it.</start_of_turn>
but put on some digestive herbs or poultices made of oatmeal and honey, until it has sweated blood.</start_of_turn Then the treatment for other ailments as long as he is conscious.
And if a fracture of a bone comes with the wound, and it is small, if you extract the fragments cautiously;
Then I will tell you of the fractures of the skull.
of the neck wound.
Wound comes from the collar and it is simple, if there is no difference between the neck and the chest, but if the neck or the artery is severed.
If the neck is severed, if there is no other cause except to leave the wound open, and do not put anything restrictive, because it is night and it makes the neck withdraw; do not put anything cold on the wound, because the substance of the neck is cold, and the continuation of the pain is with the brain, which is the most tender limb.
but if there is medicine, such as warm water with sweet oil, and mustard boiled in sweet water, apply it as well And other stones of mine according to this manner, and wet wounds.
And if the wound is great, if the pain and swelling persist, then the treatment must be continued until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
And if the wound is deep and is swollen and full of pus, if the opening is low or deeper.</start_of_turn
And if a vein is cut, and blood flows out, if the bruise, the swelling, and the cautery mix together.</start_of_turn
And if the tonsils are scraped, or the carbuncles, and the esophagus is kept guarded, because the meat will go down. if the tongue is cut on the back of the throat, and the throat is not touched but is simply reset to its natural position. and then the swelling will go down, and leave it alone for a while, then cure it with soothing balms as long as it is healthy;
and if the wound has made an imprint in the bone, if necessary; If there are bone fragments, if the wound edges are torn out, do not take them out; leave them until the wound has healed. or let the bone fragments be loosened and aligned correctly.</start_of_turn>
and if the wound is fresh, sprinkle over it the powder I have mentioned.</start_of_turn> And if there is bone in the wound and there is fistula, do as I have said in this chapter.</start_of_turn
Of wound from spear or knife.
If it be from spear or knife, and the wound is deep, look that the wound does not swell; if the patient is not taken in hand, the wound will be deadly.</start_of_turn>
and if it is not deep and is fresh throughout its extent, do not put anything at the first hour the powder, do not bind it up with the blood that comes out until it has clotted.</start_of_turn and rejoin the body and soothe the patient.</start_of_turn> But I put an attractive weight, and I bind it once with the loop;
and if you do not have a weight, put in the wound much cotton to suck out the moisture.
and make the patient sleep on the wound for two or three days, or more; if there is no spasm, do not tremble badly of body or signs of faintness. And when you see the bones displaced, if the wound is saved. Then do the same with bandages and other cures, as long as it is safe;
and if it cannot be cured, and if there is an abscess, remove it as soon as possible; if this is necessary.
If the wound is an incision of a spear or knife, and it is simple or deep, or at the back, if the cure of what is in front is necessary;
If it is great, suture it; and if it is small, powder it; if it is squeezed in the bone, and has broken pieces, if you wish for the wound, and the threads will burn if they are loosened. If they are not loosened, if you leave it to fester, if it will align the extractions;
And for other wounds as for other members, the judge will know as we have said.
The belly has been dislocated.
The pain of the belly is great and violent and small.
The great pain of the belly never stops the intestines from moving, or the nerves of the intestines, because of the emission of pus from the bowels
the greater the wound the less it is worth,
because if they are not sutured in layers the intestines will not stay in place. Forasmuch the intestines swell so much that they feel the fruit, if they return more at points,
Therefore, because the intestines swell so much that they feel the fruit, if they return more at points, it is worth considering that the spleen may be injured, for because of this we must keep the intestines in their place rather than others.</start_of_turn>
And the swelling of the intestines is according to three methods:
the three common causes of swelling in the intestines appear in the costure of the belly,
And the costure of other wounds with thorns and such other costures as are proper are common as other wounds;
And indeed they are more proper with the costure of the belly, and I will tell a little tale and declare it.</start_of_turn>
I say that when the wound is small, and there is no bowels inside, and if there is no bleeding and no blood, Or for the slightness of the wound, as we have said. Or because the intestines are swollen with the fruit.
And when it is cold, evacuate the urine in a moderate amount: moisten a little sponge or a cloth with cold water only, or thou cutest in water squinting and dripping and spiking. and the intestine will arise as much as the belly swells with bones.
and never make this wine restraining, and is mute that there is enough space for the belly to swell
and when you see the swelling depart, if moist blood or meat and vegetables be cooked, For in this way, the entrance to all things is aligned.
and if it cannot enter, if there is an opening in the wound at the instrument, we grasp the haemorrhoids to prevent them from bursting.</start_of_turn>
and the first cure is silent as the size, because it should not be cut with great necessity or without reason.</start_of_turn
And this is the instrument for cutting.
if the tooth breaks from the gum and does not come out, and when you see this shape:
and when the wound is swollen and the intestine bursts out, if you reset it following its natural form in its own place, If you are in doubt, for this is of little worth.
When the wound is large and is in the lower part of the belly, you must manage the patient on his back, and raise his legs above his head; And if it is in the lower part of the belly,
and if it is in the lower part of the belly, and if the root of the stomach is in one of the two lower parts. and if it is in the lower part of the belly, if you put the head and the arm higher than the lower parts,
And so it is appropriate to administer this in great and moist wounds.
Small wounds require this that has appeared to you.</start_of_turn>
then hold between your hands. i.e. minister pity that sustains all the way through, until you assemble the leaves; And this is the common method of stitching.
And this is the common method of stitching. and take a needle or several, according to the quantity of the wound's size, then leave some space from the wound. i.e. about, and pierce with a needle or there is a thick thread; and make a knot at the end of the thread and make it firm.
and join the head with the shoulder, join the two arms together, then assemble the two arms of the wound gradually,
Then leave some space there, and I insert another hook. then leave some space there, and I insert another hook like the first one you made, and do not stop doing that until you have made several hooks, until all the wounds are held together;
And let the nails be blunt between the thumb and the index finger, because the blunt nails catch all the hair, and the too long ones if they do not penetrate well will enter: therefore it is advised that they be blunt;
and it is not advised to push the nails too far into the hair and skin,
They do not hold and open the wound before the suture.
and then hold the head of the nails, that they do not wound the patient at night, and put tentatives or bandages on the head of the nails to hold them, and leave them until the wound is closed.
And this manner of stitching with needles is more convenient in small wounds. because there is often a needle or two.
The second stitching is common, and it is that you assemble the hairs of the leather and the hairs of the silk together with a needle or there is much fine thread. And when you have perceived these things altogether,
And when you have perceived these things altogether, if you remain vigilant at the root or where you have begun, in the manner that it will cost the threads.
and put between each stitch the thickness of a lesser thumb;
this stitch will hold the home,
And I closed a wound with one horn had or belly,
which was made by a knife, and was more than a palm wide. and there were intestines well almost two palms long,
And it was the wound in the middle of the belly. Then I returned the intestines when it had been twenty-three hours since it had left
and the wound was closed for fifteen days, and the patient recovered and was healed.</start_of_turn>
And they praised God that he had saved him, and this was a miracle.</start_of_turn>
And do not fear to omit it, for I am in a place where there is neither remedy nor medicine; And do not fear to omit it, for I am in a place where there is neither remedy nor medicine; for in this place, the remedy is more than sufficient once in ten times, and the healing of honey suffices until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Or you will say the two ways of dressing:
take the needle, and pass it through from the lower part up to the top;
When she has perceived the right shoulder in its place, if at that moment the head of the shoulder is swollen or painful or the needle has pierced her,
and makes her perceive from the inside outwards until it escapes from there.</start_of_turn>
you must take as much care as a skinner does his pelt.</start_of_turn and once you have opened one side, you must leave it open and then close the other side, until the dislocation is completely healed.</start_of_turn>
The second method of stitching, which Galiens does indeed know well,
if it is as if no one does it, who assemble the parts together naturally, and join the two ends to each other in a straight line:
piercing a needle or a piece of thread nearby, and pass it through only this one. et laisse les poils dou syfac. then prick at their base, and hold the eyes steady from this point downwards until this point grows out. as the hair on the face;
then prick at their base, and hold the eyes steady from this point downwards until this point grows out, like the other hairs that are on the other side;
And this is the commonest and most painful method of stitching.
And this is the commonest and most painful method of stitching.
... one must sew up the belly with two needles, or there is thread in the flesh;
... and must push one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew wounds;
And the wounds that when they are rotated are within the belly. And if they are more painful than others in the belly
We judge the wound as being like other wounds:
and that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, even though it has moved, If he returns to stop the intestine, and looses the knot; then put on the powder that absorbs fat.
If he returns to stop the intestine, and looses the knot; then put on the powder that absorbs fat. and if he has moved it, if you put on no dressing that is present, until the wound has healed; and bind up the thread, and keep the wound covered, and apply pressure; then treat the wound like any other, until it is healed.
And if you have no medicine, if you put it on, as soon as it begins to swell, cotton wool, and it moves once or twice, while it is still sane.
For you have no need of any other medicine in many cases when the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound does not make common cause with the principal parts of the body, If it is necessary, moisten a linen bandage liberally with warm oil of tempor or rose oil. and put it between the joints, and hold the ankles still.</start_of_turn>
and if it feels pain or stiffness in the bones, and this happens many times, if the swelling of black wine bothers you, and the same pain comes up to the intestines.</start_of_turn>
And the head of the pancreas, and the intestines that when they are large, if they are lighter to cure than the small ones.
And the large intestine which is called the "jeun," cannot be cured when it is bloated. And it is because of the swelling of the veins that they are, and because of the subtlety of the whole body, and the proximity of its nature to nerves.
And if the blood spurts from the wound, if it is returned backwards as quickly as the intestine, while it is fresh;
And if it is dark and has become black, know that you must bind the black limb, and do not remove the blood, because there are veins and arteries there.
and then bind what is between the limb, and put the blood away until the wound is healed and aligned.
De la routure dou boueil.
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
And it was the wound at the side of the stomach. And it became filled and formed a fistula, and in this there was vomiting and windiness;
I put it to cure according to what I could, and did not cease until it was healed, and the wound was closed.</start_of_turn>
And when I saw it closed, I doubted that the patient would be well in his belly; And there is no harm, but it takes many precautions, meals and drinks.
And they say that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be ligated carefully: taking forceps from great tests, and then joining the layers of the wound, and when the forceps have opened the mouth, if you put on the two layers,
then put another remedy afterwards in that manner as before, until the wound is fully healed;
and heal the wound. If the head of the shoulder is dislocated in the intestine, and causes no trouble to the patient,
If the head of the shoulder is dislocated in the intestine, and causes no trouble to the patient, and if it can be held in place by a fine thread which is cut from the intestine of a beast,
in this way. take hold of this thread of intestine that is freed from the flesh, Then he sews it to the head of that thread, namely a thread of fine linen, tort. Then he passes the thread through the needle, and sews the intestine, and holds it in its place;
and this way of sewing is not fierce except according to the way of the vein and the hope;
and if the wound is great and wide, even though it is in one of the great intestines, if there is no other remedy, save for subtility.
From fistula or whatever it may be. Every wound or incision, when it opens, if it be called a fistula universally.</start_of_turn> and the same when it is shut and healed.</start_of_turn>
A fistula is when the wound is long and white, without pain, And it is also like the quill of a bird;
never in a clean leap does it bend, and sometimes widely open.</start_of_turn> never thus, and sometimes much so;
and as I have spoken of wounds, every wound that is not healed, and there is no ointment, This is not fire but by one of the eight causes:
That is to say, by the smallness of blood or bone; or by its malice; or because there is hardness within and on the eyelids, that does not allow hair to grow. Or there is too much bow; Or the flesh is swollen, and the matter is of bad quality. Or the medicine is not good in the cure; Or because the corruption is like pestilence. Or for its property in the region is late the digestion, and late the health, and flees by nature; or there are veins or bones:
and I have already mentioned these causes, signs, and remedies in the division.
Or I must tell you the cure for fistula, which is made by an egg of the hand.
Hairs that have become fistulous exist in all limbs plagued with pain. for there are fistulas that come from great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or at the spleen, or the intestines, or the bladder, or at some of the bones, or at the shoulder blade, or at any joint of the hands or feet;
And all the fistulas that are of this kind are of grievous healing, and there is nothing but toil and ignorance.
and if there is no fistula that does not arise except just as I have said, and you have undertaken a cure, and you see that it is known, if you take an attempt to drain or cauterize, if the fistula is straight, if it is cured;
And if the fistula is tortuous, if the hook of a subtle [substance] attempts to sink. for the swelling swells inwards towards the curvature;
and if the fistula has holes and you do not keep it closed well with hooks, if the bladder bursts through one of the holes,
For the moisture is so strong from a pierce to another, and the earth;
then the earth is pierced through to its very marrow, that you know if there be bone or nerve, and is cleft to the marrow
and ask the patient well about the pain he feels when you press his hand, and the limb or where he feels it;
then you will know truly the limb or where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery or a vein, Or in those which I have spoken before, if the bone follows what I have said,
Or in those which I have spoken before, if the bone follows what I have said, and the bone becomes flexible and the corrupt marrow which is inside.</start_of_turn> then the cure must be completed as soon as it is healed,
and if the fistula is deeply placed, if you must break it, do so as well as you can.</start_of_turn> Then I put sponges wet in medicine again, and I hold them until the tip of the fistula.
Then I put sponges wet in medicine again, and I hold them until the tip of the fistula. until the medicine consumes the excess which is dissolved at the bottom.
and then I put on greasy sponges so that it is safe;
if it is not safe, if I must cauterize as we have said,
And if the bone is corrupted by fistula, if possible. If the vein or nerve does not cause you pain or the principal limb, as we have said.
And if the bone is discovered, and there is corruption and blackness, if you can wait as long as the corruption is entirely bony, then cure the infected things until they are healed;
If he is not well, and his brow is sweaty as before, if he is not well, and his brow is sweaty as before,
if he is not well, and his brow is sweaty as before, if he discovers it and is tormented as before,
If he is sound, that is well. If not, take note that the corruption is too great in them, that you will not be able to do anything about it; unless there is some other way except to leave them to their nature;
and if there is any slight fracture, and you try to handle it with tweezers, if the extraction is made with a convenient instrument it covers that.
and if there is remaining bone, if the teeth are loosened, do not leave it there;
if moisture opposes you, and there is no error or fear, if pain and moisture and force are applied, and the bones are freed.
And if you do not remove them at an hour, if you put something on the wound that encourages corruption, leave them as long as the flesh is buried in the bones.</start_of_turn>
and thus will have greater ease of the bones.</start_of_turn>
or if it is a large bone, as a limb or a thigh, If the head of the shoulder is so much swollen that the blackness is all bony, Then restore the limb;
and if there is great part of the limb that is corrupted, and comes up to the bone; if you can cover and cover all until the corruption, and then cure it until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
And I shall tell you of a fistula that had its origin in the home of her leg. if you take this as an example and aid in your work.
There once was a young man about .xxx. years of age, who had a pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body,
until the matter came to the leg, and there was an abscess that did not have any known cause;
But the marrow above is more abundant than the abscesses below. and in corrupting moisture of matter, it becomes fistula, and there comes out moisture of rupture that all together go out of bow and moisture of pus;
and maintain marrow there remains whole for about a year, and there is no wise man in the art of healing who can say,
since I do not recall it, and know of the limb and medicines which were used for it. And this that corrects by the wounds with great force. And thus the limb became red like that of a young boy, and had the colour of citrine.
I bound up one of the wounds, and then bound up all the wounds,
and I found that one wound was finding the other throughout all the parts of the limb.
I have grasped it then, and grasped in one of the holes until I discovered a part of the bone, and found it broken and perceived it, and I saw the corruption right down to the bone inside
I deemed what appeared to be a broken bone, and I thought there was no other corruption except for that which I saw;
and began to restore the wound with various medicines so that it did not bleed;
And then I recommended it, and I discovered the bone as before.
And I found the corruption continuing in the bone, and the marrow, and then the bone itself, and I considered welding the limb together.</start_of_turn>
but I could not until I had grasped a palm of the bone, and the traitor forced me to all his might.</start_of_turn then I restored the medicine; and he was healed and bound soundly.</start_of_turn>
And he must not attempt to renew the work urgently because of the weakness of the patient, who cannot endure it. and because of the fear of death that I avoid for him. For often there is the evacuation of blood, but he remains whole and sound,
For often there is the evacuation of blood, but he remains whole and sound, for his wounds are not so deep as to cause death;
And thus he must hold the head firmly in place, if you pull out the corrupt flesh from the socket. and uncover the flesh thereupon where you see marrow, so that the marrow does not stain the flesh; and put in place a sponge or a bowl below the bone to cover the corrupt flesh; and cover again so that you can neither see nor feel the corruption, and cover once more.
And if the bone is corrupted, and does not open wide, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, if the cavity of the marrow is discovered whole; then put in one spoonful of salt,
and then pull out the corruption from end to end, and if necessary for a long distance as we have said;
and if the corruption is in the joint, if you break the corrupted joint, and pull out the bone or what it contains from the other side;
And if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, if there is no other angle except that of the cuticle.
And if the corruption is of the thumb or the great toe, if it is very strong in that matter, but in any case it is necessary to inquire about that corruption, how it appeared to you. and take care of all the ways that you can, but that the vein or the nerve does not impede you;
And the nails that he cuts and the thread that he uses to bind these bones are many, according to the size of the bones and the appearance of swelling. and their greatness and their thinness, and their size and their shortness, and their hardness; and for this reason it is necessary to consider the appearance of their instrument;
and the nails that he cuts and the thread that he uses to bind these bones are many, according to the size of the bones and the appearance of swelling. And the testimony of the manners of diseases. if you think the instrument that you have mastered according to what it is commanded.</start_of_turn>
fire The shoulder joint is dislocated due to moisture, or by pressure, or by force;
And when you have treated that corrosion with medical remedies, and it has not profited, if it is necessary to cover that limb until the corrosion subsides.</start_of_turn> if the patient escapes by this death, or by malice, which is greater, the defect of the limb.</start_of_turn>
if the patient escapes by this death, or by malice, which is greater, the defect of the limb.</start_of_turn> and the limb becomes black, as if it were burnt by fire, And after the darkness, then comes the corrosion of members against members. and grasp by all the body; if you are hasty,
and if there is percussion from venomous creatures like scorpions of the sea and vipers and others,
then the corrosion is at the head of the bone, if it is struck, and do not give it space to come up to the hand.
And if it comes up to the hand, if the socket is at the joint, so that the corrosion does not reach the arms;
and if it comes up to the arm, if the socket is at the wrist, so that the infection does not reach the forearm; and if it passes the wrist, that is death. and there is no greater remedy than the quantity of its virtue.
and do all that when the corrosion comes or goes: if it comes in the first joint, if the socket afterwards the other joint;
And if she comes or goes, if she bites all the way; And if she reaches the limb, if she bites at the shoulder joint.
And if she comes from below the elbow, if there is nothing else wrong with the patient but that he is dead already.
and you must bind up the limb above and below and tie it down, And extend one minister from the lower lip, and another minister from the upper lip, And you shall spread the lip which is between the two lips to one spatule's breadth, until the bone is uncovered.
then grasp the tooth or gum, and put a strip of linen under one side so that the gum does not touch the sound tissue, and come to the patient with other wounds and incisions.
And if bleeding comes from the wound when you work, if you cauterize the flesh urgently, or you put on some restraining powders; then return to your work until it is accompanied.</start_of_turn>
then bind the limb securely with a coving bandage, and treat it until it is healed;
and I will tell you that there was once a home in this matter.</start_of_turn>
He had a dark complexion that seemed as if it were burned by fire.
and that corrosion first appeared at the root of his teeth, so that it blackened all the teeth.</start_of_turn>
and when he saw the corrosion, if he covered the teeth with copper, he was healed.</start_of_turn
and long after that he returned with the corrosion or the hand, and he came to me,
And I put upon him things that rebound after the softening of the gum, and I cannot stop the corrosion;
And he swears that I must hold his hand, and I do not wish, for I avoid any hope of rebounding the matter. and I doubt also that if I cut off his hand, he will not die. for the strength of the man was weak; and he awoke all, and returned to his land, And so he covered his hand, and it healed;
And I have heard of this matter only because of that, if there is any need for it.</start_of_turn>
Never comes a vein close to a nut, and remains for a long time so that it makes a great swelling of blood.</start_of_turn And then it bursts and breaks, and the blood boils up, and it leaves the vessel like a vessel; And the skin which is below is as subtle as a silken drape. and does not reach the bone, nor the nerve, like these diseases are called "sain".
but if it is so elongated that it reaches the bone embedded, if it is called "fistula";
And if he grasps this skin too tightly, and even when it is subtle, like a drape; it does not remain pure from its corruption.
and if you have grasped that the skin has become soft, and the corruption is not in its entirety, and the skin is thickened like a leather bag, as in a burn:
Observe if the wound is large, and if the bow of the wound is of foul odor. Then make the dressing of Egyptian medicine which is thus made: take acacia, oil, and alum, equally, and mix them together in a vessel over the fire, until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey;
Then take according to your need, and make it hot and sweet. And in clinking the sound, restrain the opening; And leave the medicine in place for three hours, then remove it cautiously.
Do this four times, until the skin is soft and the bone is weak;
And never is the spleen clustered with water of emeralds. when this medicine is not present, and you take emeralds of nutmeg, and vomit water down,
then the swelling will go down, and be clustered, until you know that the flesh is well healed.
and if the patient cannot bear it, neither the Egyptian medicine of emeralds, If the cluster of water and honey is boiled, or if there is a drop of bile broiled; or you boil it with honey and wine, which has the property of cleansing and washing away.</start_of_turn> and the wine makes the blood purer.</start_of_turn>
and when you have done this, and you have confirmed that the blood is well cleansed, If the patient feels a tingling in that which is born,
and that thou take a plaster of embalmment, and do it with rosemary oil and wine. or thou shalt cauterize it with some medicines and ointments, of which I have spoken the properties or treat with ointments;
and if there is little pus within it, and the wound will not open, If the tip of a burn extends, and one puts in an attempt of Egyptian oil, or basic oil, as much as it is swollen;
and if the wound is too large, if the thumb and index finger cannot be moved freely without causing pain or discomfort,
and if the opening of the wound is below the thumb, if the thumb or index finger is lower than it should be. For when the limb is in a wound, if you do not leave some hair; then you must not cover its hair completely as you see.</start_of_turn> if the limb goes down further than before.</start_of_turn>
And if you do not cover your head with your sleeve as you see, it will appear in parts: that the bow will bend lightly forward, and do not leave anything of the bow behind. and take consolidating medicines to bring down the swelling,
and leave it still and calm. Then press as force as forces towards the inward part, that is to say more extensive than before, Then press as force as forces towards the inward part, that is to say more extensive than before, then extend somewhat the wound above, according to the quantity of the wound,
and that which is above the wound, often stops the bleeding, And the wounds which run from the navel, if it be poison or pus or enough, or digested, or indigestible.
And take care that the patient feels no pain or not, and if there is swelling or not,
and when your medicine has reached its proper extent and you see the nature of the swelling within the wound. if the wound has already bled, approach the health of the patient.
Then he unpins the wound in the morning, or the third day, and when you unpin the wound, if it has shifted, remove the dressing and renew the packing.
and if it persists swollen and painful after the third day, remove the dressing and observe the wound and if subtle venom remains long after tension, if it does not cause concern for your health,
For indeed, health is approaching. For there are some who linger too long in their ailments, and others who hasten their recovery;
and if they stubbornly stay stuck in their wounds after remaining quiet for a while, their veins swell up and their flesh does not mend properly.</start_of_turn>
if they are delayed in their recovery, and if they are forced out, if indeed medicines are applied with moisture in bulk and are dried out in use.</start_of_turn if like the ointment is finished, for there is a great part of vitriol, and this is the last medicine.</start_of_turn>
Take oil of cypress and rose, and vinegar of wine equal in substance;
Then confect them and use it; and this makes honeyed wounds that swell up. when the swelling of the wound is not present,
or take myrrh and aloes and incense, grind them, and sprinkle them over the honey when it comes out of the fire; And then with glue, that is to say a drape, and extend it over the chest, and never administer an aristologist of long stature. And root of lilies celestial, which is also like fine flour sometimes and a hundredfold;
And root of lilies celestial, which is also like fine flour sometimes and a hundredfold; and in the use of simples or compounds: grind them, and make powder, and mix with honey that I have mentioned, and use; and if the cure is prolonged, and is not cured by this cure,
and if the cure is prolonged, and is not cured by this cure, When the swelling has subsided and the corruption has receded, it makes an imprint on the bone, or the limb becomes stiff, or the membranes are affected. If the treatment of the fistula cure, as we said before.</start_of_turn>
of the incision of the abscess.</start_of_turn
Panarice is an abscess that arises from the socket of the thumb, Or do pain, or by chance it comes to pass in others too.
when it is unwanted, and we take no heed, if it comes to pass as with an abscess, it tears and breaks as much as it can until it reaches the root of the bone, and by chance it breaks through all;
and comes to corrosion up to the bone, so that there is great pain, and the limb is pale.
When you treat it as we have said in the dislocation, and the treatment brings no benefit, if you must, do all the superfluous things that are left over from the dislocation. then cauterize the wound afterwards. The cautery is a great help if the bone is sound, and the limb is painless;
And if a nail is pressed quickly into flesh and begins to penetrate, and the blood spurts, then you must put in place the nail that points towards the head of the nail that has pierced the flesh. and hold the nail firmly and lightly in its place. and apply to the remainder of the nail medicinal and corrosive ointment to remove all;
And if the infection is in the bone, if you break it, and drain it out, for as much as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal;
and if you see the bone corrupted, if you break it here as it is before said, Then treat the wound as long as it is clean;
If he is fierce, spitting blood, and feels great pain, if you can, you must first subdue him. then grasp the limb at the spittle and cut across below.</start_of_turn>
and guard that the cut does not go beyond the cartilage which is below the limb, because the patient would feel too much pain;
If he is fierce, spitting blood, and feels great pain, if you can, you must first subdue him.
The two joints that are most likely to be affected are those of the hands of peasants, because of their laborious works.</start_of_turn> and in their work there is a part where there are bones, and never without nails,
and no hair is born at the root of the joint, or the birth is in some way that does not cause us two.</start_of_turn> He who is born of no mother must not move. He who is born at the joint of the mother, by chance must move;
his size if great in part is light in weight: his size is like that of a large spagnum
He who is born at the root of the joint if he is grieved must cure: if you keep him covered.
If he is born or must at the rear not, if you must cover him first the rounded flesh until the bone, then cover the bone to a suitable extent, and then cure as long as he is sound.
The wounds that come as a result of these things come from birth, or from the swelling of a wound, or from the burn of fire, or from similar things.
If it seems that you can manage this dislocation, if so it must be repaired in its natural form. then put between two bands or cloths soaked in rose oil, which will not stick together; or you put between two pieces of soft lead, as long as the bones are soldered, if it seems necessary.
When a swelling comes to neither of its two ends with the palm of the hand, if you manage that dislocation as it seems necessary.
Des vils.
The veins are full of thick, black-yellow pus, which comes from many members suffering from pain;
and more often from those which go to the feet and which work and bear weight, than from others.
It is proper therefore that you do not give him any purgatives of colocynth, and then the rest of the balsam.
The cure for iron is in two ways: one is with vinegar, and treat the black wound; and the other method is to ligature the vein and treat it with force.
The size is as follows: arise the first the hot limb, very strong, until the great one is not thinned out, Then strain the limb of the patient from below the knee up to the part below the knee joint. Then place the thumb in one loop, or two, or three, of a large size,
Then pull and strain the black blood out of your hand from the one hand to the other, as much as the patient can suffer;
And then bind it, and command that he hold flesh around the black vein;
And resume the evacuation and bleeding when the veins are full, and do no harm to the patient.
Then the limb must be restored to its proper position: if there is any hair remaining on the patient, then stretch out the limb, wash it, and if there is swelling in the veins;
and if there is no bath available, if you put the limb in the fire and then cool it down by applying pressure to the vein at the armpit or at the ankle.
Then open the skin at the navel, and support the belly from under, until it opens when you feel it;
and you will see red and black, and when it enters or the skin seems like a white cord;
then stretch the wound downwards until it is level with the skin, and then close it at the navel gently,
then cover it with another layer of skin inside and outside; and support the belly until it opens again, Then the limb should be raised, as you have done, and the pain should be repeated on another side, as you did first.
Then take a larger size, or several if you need to, and then raise the limb, and take hold of the limb at the shoulder blade
Then stretch and raise the limb until the second size; then pull out the limb piece by piece until it is completely straight, then grasp it
and if you do not pull and raise it, if there is a strong double thread there, And the shoulder and the arm, and there are some who say, right, stretch out your hand from one side and the other, until it is finished. And keep that it does not slip, for if it slips, it cannot be treated or lifted, and comes to harm the patient.
And when you have treated it, if you put out the limb of the wound with soaked wool in wine and rosemary oil; and cure it until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
And if the limb is contracted and tortuous and bound together, and it is not right, as we have said, If you think it is necessary to force it, do not cover it up; and treat it as we have said before.
If you think it is necessary to force it, do not cover it up; and treat it as we have said before. The shape of the iron from which the pin is covered is crooked, do not burn it, but only cover the vein;
it is of great curvature, for if it were subtle, it would cover the vein, but make it large as we have said, and that is the form:
From the civil vein.
This vein is engorged in the leg, in hot regions where herbs or trees do not grow, and in the earth where there is no moisture.
and sometimes it happens elsewhere in the leg, and this comes from the decay that comes from the softening of the leather
if it comes from the entrails of the serpent and towards, swell between skin and flesh.
and if there is a great swelling in the leg when this vein swells, Then the limb becomes stiff, and the vein becomes taut as a root of a plant.
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated, if you suspect that the shoulder is dislocated, cover it with a piece of lead from one and a half inches to two inches thick, and hold the limb still,
until the swelling has subsided. and if it is too long, if you cut off a part of it, and cover the rest, and do not cover it in its root, until it is all gone. For if you grasp it firmly, if it returns to the socket, make an incision and extract or retain the foreign body; and make the wound worse.
Therefore it is necessary that it be treated promptly and thoroughly, and that nothing be left behind or remain fixed there.
never is this vein treated with only five or ten fingers and once has happened to me that from ten fingers it has bled, and when you grasp it, if there is a wound or hole, and you pierce it to the bottom,
If all is well; and having emptied the contents, restore the matter within; and bring to light remedies which are nourishing and restorative, then cure as with incisions.
Never has this vein hands rained, even when it opens at the shoulder joint, or at the elbow and blood spurts forth, and which causes fainting; cure it therefore as we have said before.
From veins that arise between skin and bone
This ailment is called in our land "beef disease", forasmuch as it often occurs with boils.
it is a small swelling that arises between skin and bone, and spreads throughout the body, ascending and descending and causes the skin to wrinkle or burst, and sometimes bursts through the skin or the bone itself
it is accompanied by the discharge of various humors, such as blood, bile, serum, and worms or abscesses.
And doubt arises of its wickedness, for when it goes through the flesh, and it ascends to the head, and it comes to the oil, And thus it returns by chance, and destroys the oil; and this has happened many times.
When you see it cured and treated, if one cannot force it until it goes away:
then you must bind the limb above and below with a strong and well-stitched ligature.
Then hold above and support the limb, and if it is grasped by the heel in the char, and you do not find it, Then hold above and support the limb, and if it is grasped by the heel in the char, and you do not find it, if the fire cautery is applied there until it swells;
Then hold above and support the limb, and if it is grasped by the heel in the char, and you do not find it, if the fire cautery is applied there until it swells, and it causes greater harm if oil is added, as we have said.
Then hold above and support the limb, and if it is grasped by the heel in the char, and you do not find it, if you see it coming or close to oil, grasp the heel firmly and support the limb;
And it is advised to use the patient with the application of solid medicines that dissolve for bad humors carried,
and be wary of eating fatty foods.</start_of_turn>
Of the pain that comes from windiness. This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and is a pain that comes in the limbs, And thus, when a limb moves from one place to another; and I have seen that which I have told you of.
I went to a sick woman, and found her arm swollen in the armpit.
and then, as time went on, I saw that her arm had become like a worm in the armpit, more swollen than anything, like living silver when it is cut from its root.
The pain departs from that limb and settles in the shoulder,
and then afterwards it is turned wrong by the whole limb, so that it comes into the other arm.
Then I heard that it twisted back towards the limb, just as I saw it
I wondered what caused such a movement of the limb against the limb, for I had never seen such a disease in this way before. Whatever be the case, I advise you to keep still and do not move, for pain in the limbs is often caused by movement to another part. but I do not advise it for a woman;...
and I think that this is because women have dry skin and uncovered veins, because of this appears that constraint;
And they do not appear to me in this regard for those who are pleasing, and who have moist flesh and veins that are well filled.
And when you see this disease cured, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears to you as we have said, if the swelling above and below has remained, and then ceases as soon as this constraint of the limb is overcome burn the limb; and if you do not see it at your eyes,
If the antidote for those who suffer from wind-sickness, as with foul pills, and oily pills, and similar things.
If the antidote for those who suffer from wind-sickness, as with foul pills, and oily pills, and similar things.
If the antidote for those who suffer from wind-sickness, as with foul pills, and oily pills, and similar things.
If the antidote for those who suffer from wind-sickness, as with foul pills, and oily pills, and similar things. And those which have three angles, and those which have tongues, and those where there are pieces. And those which have three angles, and those which have tongues, and those where there are pieces; or in the principal limb it breaks by shifting.
or in the brain, the shoulder, the elbow, the wrist, the thumb, the intestine, the bladder, and similar limbs. When it breaks in no limb of these members, and the sign of death is shown, which I will tell you later, you will learn: If you suspect that the extraction of this arrow will cause more harm than good, for the body comes afterwards in various conditions. And when this sign is absent, do not believe me, for the arrow is not withdrawn from its wound, if it is not treated, it will cure the wound.</start_of_turn>
And the sign of the brain when the arrow pierces the bone, and forces the fatty substance which is above the brain, is when scotomy, sodomy, spasm and convulsions, redness of the eyes, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasm and confusion of the mind, and vomiting of bile; And sometimes it happens without any cause, like nosebleeds or earaches; or sometimes speech and voice are lost. and sometimes a moist white pus appears resembling boils, and sometimes like burnt hair
and if these signs appear, if you stay firm in your treatment, draw out the splinter if it does not leave itself
The signs of the splinter when it hurts or swells, are that it is close to the left breast, and feels as if it were stuck in something hard, do not make it empty. And by chance the seat moves as well as the poulps, in dark blood, and comes cold sweat and cold sweat, and fainting. Indeed, doubt now suggests that death approaches.</start_of_turn>
And the sign of the seat that never lets go of its wound is that it leaps without prompting, the throat swells, the patient turns pale, and breathing is difficult.</start_of_turn
And if the seat breaks in the armpit, if it is between the ribs; it causes great swelling and great pain and breathing; and all the limbs of the armpit move.</start_of_turn
And if the arrow or the stone comes out through the wound, by chance nothing of the indigestible meat is left.
And if the arrow or the stone comes out through the wound, by chance nothing of the indigestible meat is left. If there is no hope of recovery, do not attempt to extract the arrow.</start_of_turn>
And if the arrow comes out into the bladder, and the urine comes out in spurts and comes out forcefully, and the patient feels great pain: the wound is mortal.</start_of_turn
As for the other limb, if it is made up of flesh and bone and the jaw and the shoulder and the elbow and the wrist and the hand, and the limb that is similar to these, they are all subject to many variations. When the splinter is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I have said before, for this reason you must do something else.
When there is a splinter in the nerve or artery, which is not venomous, as I have said previously, for this reason you must do something else. There is at least one home remedy for this: I will try it, and I will use oil from the ear and it was healed without any other treatment.
And I took out a splinter that was in the oil of the ear from the membrane of the ear. And the arrow was positioned back, and it could only reach the tip towards the wound. And it was an arrow of Turkish bow, very strong in every way; the wound was clean, and there was no further mishap
And drew an arrow from the throat to the groin, and the Arabic arrow had ears:
I soiled the beards, and held it until I had drawn it out, and was clean of the wounds.
And take out an arrow from its home, whether it be shoulder or belly, and thought it was dead.
and then that it did not pass .xxx. days, if it did not mend its position; I cut off the arrow, and engaged it, and pulled it out, and there was no bad accident.
And if one comes home with an arrow hung or lying, and it was the wound closed up on;
And immediately take hold of the arrowhead within, and do not change its natural position, And immediately take hold of the arrowhead within, and do not change its natural position,
And thus did another man, who had an arrow in his face, and was cured of the wound;
and immediately took hold of the arrowhead within, and did not change its natural position,
And carried out a splinter at the house of the prince the king, who was sitting crooked among the nobles. and was leaning to the right side; and the splinter was completely withdrawn.
I fled away from the cure after two days. If I found the wound very swollen.
I would do everything I could to make it disappear, and did not feel it; And he felt no tingling and pain in his outer ear. I thought it was the tip of an arrow.
I put on the leu a plaster that absorbs excess moisture, so that it does not swell; And I saw the tip of an arrow emerge.
And I saw the tip of an arrow emerge. I place the thumbs on the wound and bind the right side, and hold the patient’s hand long tension,
I place the thumbs on the wound and bind the right side, and hold the patient’s hand long tension, until he feels the arrow inside his flesh; and he tells me about it.</start_of_turn> I put on the wound an acrid medicine by hand, until it was overdone,
and held the hand, feeling the tip of the arrow that was coming out; Then I saw in the opening of the wound by that wise doctor, as the head of the arrow appeared visibly.
and it exceeded very well its limits for three months,
and then became so swollen that I was unable to support it, even with my hands on either side, and was unable to bear it;
so that I had to resort to various tricks and devices, until finally I took hold of it with strong pins According to what is said at the end of this chapter, as long as I remain here, I will treat the wound and restore it.
And it is judged that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored. I restored it, and the wound was healed, and the patient was completely cured
Or as you said the quality of the extraction of some arrows, If you place your remedy on that which I do not say, for your book cannot understand me entirely;
but you know well masters, I can teach you much about many things, and about what is present and lacking. Find nine works, and a new instrument, for in descending order are the strange things that arise in this art.
I say that the towels do not arise from limbs or are fictive except as follows: Or by the thigh or by the foot, or by some other place;
Or by the thigh or by the foot, or by some other place;
Or by the thigh or by the foot, or by some other place;
Or by the thigh or by the foot, or by some other place;
And thus she leaps, and if she does not leap, if you pierce around all around secretly, as long as her limbs are bent, and then pull her back.
If the splinter is returned to the bone if it cannot be seen, if the pain persists despite all attempts.</start_of_turn And if you feel it, if the pain has no perceptible cause;
and if you do not feel it, if the cause of the wound is not obvious, and if the depth of the wound or the thickness of the arrow is great.</start_of_turn> and there is no bone, nerve or vessel, if the wound is large.</start_of_turn and take out the arrow if you feel it, and if there is an ear in the arrow that holds it,
and take out the arrow if you feel it, and if there is an ear in the arrow that holds it, if the bone that is stuck in the flesh of the arm is pulled out by the muscle that you put, if the bone that is stuck in the flesh of the arm is pulled out by the muscle that you put in, and then breaks or tears the ears of the splinter, as long as you can pull it out;
if the bone that is stuck in the flesh of the arm is pulled out by the muscle that you put in, and then breaks or tears the ears of the splinter, as long as you can pull it out; and take care that you do not break the splinter, but that you pull it out firmly.</start_of_turn>
and if you do not do it once, if the limb remains stiff, then pull it out again, for extraction is better than suffering.</start_of_turn> And if the discharge of blood opposes the treatment, if necessary recall what has been said concerning the cure in this chapter.
And take heed of the incision of the vein and the opening of the abscess, and take care lest you cause the arrow to move in peril
or turns or twists, or closes tightly or slightly; and hold the patient as he was when the arrow went in, for it is the greatest aid that there is, and if you do not know what to do, take heed of what the sign shows you.
The bandage that comes from another place, or if it opens up without a mark, or the skin is swollen in the place where it is seen or felt:
The bandage then lies down, until the nails can take hold, and then it is withdrawn: if the swelling now increases.</start_of_turn>
And if it is held to the bone, if you round your hand around it, until it enters the bone, and enlarge the bone, then withdraw it.</start_of_turn>
And if it cannot be dislocated, if you leave it in, and then resume the extraction until it comes out.
And if it is from an arrow, it is, if it is fully stuck;
and if it is from an arrow, it is, if it is fully stuck; and if you see that it has penetrated deeply, administer something promptly, if you administer anything, that is to say, a pointed instrument.</start_of_turn> if the tip of the arrow has gone into the socket of the instrument; and then withdraw it forcefully.</start_of_turn>
and if the arrow is deeply embedded, if the instrument has a pointed end entering to ease the extraction.
And if the splinter is surrounded, if you must, grasp all the surrounding flesh or the venom is, if you please. then treat the wound if it is possible.</start_of_turn>
And if the splinter pierces or hurts the chest, the belly, the bladder, or the ribs, and it is nearby, and you must cover over it, if you grasp it.
and keep covering the vein and nerve, and then extract the splinter, and then sew the wound, if necessary.</start_of_turn> And the treatment is as long as it remains sound.
And the shape of the tweezers used to grasp the clots is like the beak of an osprey, and thus be the form:
There are various sizes: large, medium, and small, according to the amount of the clot
the common veins bleed easily. those veins which we usually see bleed easily.
It is known that: the bats which follow the ears, which are named after the thorns. and the two arteries which are in the temples appear; and the four veins which are in the armpits, which are named after thorns and the vein which is in the middle of the forehead; and the vein which is at the back of the neck; And the little hairs which are brown or black; And the little hairs which are brown or black; and the little veins which are in the cheeks under the mouth, which are called "augeherich". And the little hairs which are brown or black; and the little veins which are under the tongue.
The most common veins are those in the arm:
One is the head dislocation, and is said on the left side of the breast, and they call it the people "neck vein." and the lower one is called "fast," and is composed of the head and arm bones. and they call the lower one "neck vein," and the arm bone is either on the left or right side of the breast and they call it the people "belly vein," and is above the navel, And it is that one which we know, which openly manifests itself above the pouch.
And the saving one is the vein which is between the auricle and the ring finger, and if it rains;
and in the limb and where there are two veins: one if it is outside the elbow joint of the left costal cartilage, and the second is beneath which is at the ankle of the right costal cartilage; and the vein which is called the “nesse,” which is in the ankle of the other costal cartilage;
And on the other limb are two veins that descend from those.
The blood of the veins that are behind the ears helps to expel the old blood and evacuate; and the quality of the blood, as I told you, is that you must raise the head of the patient,
and the quality of the blood, as I told you, is that you must raise the head of the patient, and wipe the blood or the veins are rough; then stretch the patient’s neck with a finger, As long as the veins open behind the ears towards the head, they depend on the chief. When the teeth bite down on your jaw, and you feel the pulse throbbing in your jaw, take notice of it immediately.</start_of_turn>
then take the lancet and hold it against the vein until you reach the bone, then keep your hand firm over the upper part of the vein.</start_of_turn and press and cut the leather and the vein well through, and make blood flow until you see it.</start_of_turn
Then it is strained and held, until it is healed;
And I have already said about the incision and the cautery, or the first book.</start_of_turn>
The blood of the two arteries that are in the temples, if it is like the ancient emigration, and sode, and habitual vomiting, and at the root of tears there are blisters;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: and the patient must strain his neck, so that the veins open widely; and feels the pulse of his thumb, and then grasps it tightly;
then take hold of the thumb over the vein at the top of your index finger, and insert the lancet there, And hold the vein high up, and the cuff, as you have done in the last three veins, and do draw out blood according to your need.
Then loosen the patient, and put your thumb on the vein for an hour, then put on cotton;
Then bind the wound, and leave it until it is healed; and we have already spoken of its treatment and its evacuation, or its beginning from the book.
The blood of the forearm is worth as much as the blood of the cephalic vein has diseases of the face of old age, and has migraine, and has redness;
And if the patient strains his neck by twisting, as when a vein bursts. then take the instrument which is called the "fosseur", which is like this:
And put the point on the vein, and hold it with your hand, or something else, and let blood spurt out according to the quantity you see; Then deliver to the patient the head, and bind the vein until it is healed and no longer bleeds.
However, it is not proper for me to tell you that the flames must be too great; and the same throughout, for the bone is close, and by chance breaks the flames when they are subtle.
The blood of the veins that are in the armpits is of great help to the eyes, and to the teeth, and to the redness, and to the yellowness, and to fevers of the face; there are diseases of the face also
and the quality of their blood is such that the patient should strain his neck by twisting from side to side like before.
Then, the latter, and let the blood run through, a long flame a wide flame, for there is no hair.
And if the flame is fickle, by chance if it breaks; then make a drain of blood, as much as you are able, and then bind it up, and hold it firmly.
The blood of the vein does not retain its worth like water, and for sode it is expelled, and for facial diseases.</start_of_turn> if there is migraine and redness that comes to the face, and even when it is old;
and if the patient is spitting blood from his collar, then strain his neck with your left hand, And take the burning flame slowly long, and hold it in the space between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open easily, and it will not begin to heal now.</start_of_turn>
and do not go too far in your bleeding, and do the cure according to your need, then bind it for a night, for it is moist and will be restored.</start_of_turn
The blood of the armpits helps to loosen the swelling of the armpit, and to initiate the mixing of matter, and in the mouth of maladies, and in sweating, and in corrosions, and in herpes, and in tumors.
and if the quality of the blood is that the patient pulls out his beard alternately from one side and the other, as we have said. or that the master is standing above the chief of the patient, and the patient sits on one seat,
Then again, let the vein be long and widely open, then draw out blood steadily, or as much as seems necessary;
then do the other part in the other vein, then join them back together, and hold them tightly in the middle.</start_of_turn> but do not strangle him; and leave him until morning, when the wound is healed.</start_of_turn>
Of the blood of the leeches.</start_of_turn> The blood of the veins of the upper limbs helps to clot in the mouth, and to corruption of gums, and splitting of the lips, and toothache and pain.
And as for the quality of the blood if it is to make the patient sit before you, and restrain his collar as I have said; then turn the lip, and see the two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left lip, and you will know them by their black color, and because they have small black veins running through them. Cope donc l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les connisses, et tu en es en doutance.
Cope donc l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les connisses, et tu en es en doutance. Therefore do both of them; and if you do not know them both, and you are in doubt,
It comes from the lower veins. The veins that are below the tongue help after the blood of the head, and it is at the widening of the throat, and there are diseases of the eye, and there are diseases of the mouth;
And if the patient be a madman, if he sits between your hands before the sun, and he stretches out his tongue, and looks down at every rib a black vein:
And if the patient be a madman, if he sits between your hands before the sun, and he stretches out his tongue, and looks down at every rib a black vein, then take hold of one and the other, and do not handle them too much, for these are the arteries.
The veins that we commonly take hold of are usually healthy in two ways:
or if you prick at their base with a large or olive-shaped flame as if you were digging trenches, and it is called "anesil". And they are wide and subtle according to the size and spacing of the veins. The shape of the flame is often mentioned as a mirror, and is wide as you see it:
It has to mean that it has to contain large blood vessels filled with large blood and blood clots; and it is the shape of an olive flame:
And it is more subtle to burn at the point, and it is for the health of the veins that are subtle, or there is subtle blood that has clotted.
The blood of the basal vein, which is one of these veins, helps to relieve ailments such as swelling of the throat, or swelling of the collarbone, or swelling of the feet, or swelling of the belly;
and it is necessary for its health that it should flow smoothly, and that it should be supported by the artery which is nearby. and if the artery is closed, and blood comes out, if the clot remains stuck, as I have said; And it must not make the flame flicker, but keep it like an anesile.
And if the flame does not burst out immediately, if you must take hold of it, and chain another; or you wish no rain from it, or you must hold it in the arm: it will burst out immediately; and the flask at the flame is like an anesile, as we have said.
And if you see the limb of the blood stained, if you must draw the arm, touch the limb until you know the pulse; then sign the limb of the incision, and then bind the arm, and hold the vein with fire anew.</start_of_turn>
and beware that you do not cut the artery when you see the limb inflamed, for it is of the artery: stop immediately.</start_of_turn>
And if you see blood flowing out like the urine of a child, and it is pale and transparent, take that it is without an artery: Haste then, for thus, place thy thumb upon its length, and hold thy thumb steady, for many times it has been thus.
Hasten then, for thus hold thy thumb steady, and let it rest, and move it not; and be cautious, for fear lest thou move it while it is sound.</start_of_turn>
And if it is without stain, and thou feel pain, and the physician is not present, if the vein should burst, for the head of the shoulder retires itself; hold it still without stain.</start_of_turn
And take a support of figs, and make it firm, and take one of the halves and bind it well up to the other shoulder;
If it remains without stain, that is good; but if not, if the doctor wishes, as we have said, powders that stain blood.
And staining does not hold in many situations because of the small size of the wound, and the power of the liquid blood.</start_of_turn>
The blood from the vein helps to treat without head and chest, and bones below.</start_of_turn because it is made up of the balsamic and cephalic humors, as we have said.</start_of_turn>
And it is necessary for the physician to warn the patient that he must beware of the nerve that is below, and if it is not too deeply immersed, and he finds the nerve, and he inflates and the sensation is either gone, or by chance cannot be cured;
it often bursts open several times, and if it does not burst in some people because of its subtlety, it is necessary to know that you must remove the cause of the pain; and take hold of the nerve with your hand.</start_of_turn>
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, if the wound is deep.</start_of_turn
The blood of the head helps, that it attracts blood without chief, and aids the eyes.
And it is advisable to cauterize with the olive or myrtle flame, for this is the safest of all veins, for it has neither nerves nor arteries.</start_of_turn>
However, it is necessary to inquire more gently this first time, and do not grieve if it fails the first time, and we repeat.</start_of_turn and by chance it inflames the limbs of some people, which we cannot avoid the first time, but it does not grieve us.</start_of_turn The quality of blood is as you think.
The first thing you must know about health is that blood is not only for maintaining health
but also for expelling diseases to come; or in the cephalic, fasting, and basilar veins. And it must be ascertained at the outset of treatment when the patient groans, sighs, and yawns after eating, when the sign of repletion appears.
And it must be ascertained at the outset of treatment when the patient groans, sighs, and yawns after eating, when the sign of repletion appears.
The blood that is administered for diseases does not have a fixed dose, but only when necessary is of juice or nut, at all hours and in all tensions;
and it must not be administered to children under thirteen years of age, nor to women who are pregnant more than four months until childbirth. They should not remain alive who have passed .lx. years.
And when anyone sees himself alive in any way, if it be known that he has defiled the intestines with a light fistula, he has eaten excrement, so that the veins do not bring forth nourishing humours from the principal members
neither too fat, nor too lean, neither too hot nor too cold;
And if he suffers from vomiting, pain in the belly, multiple fits of vomiting at women, childbirth, watching and guarding, and all his strength, either from the weapon or from pain;
Then subtilize the humors, if they are not great, by meats and by drinks and by medicines, if you have the power to do so.
then enter or bathe, if nothing hinders you, to subtilize the blood,
and keep warm the belly or the chest, as we have said before.
And keep that of work, of pricking, of luxury, and of similar things.
And be careful not to bind or restrain them, and let the patient rest higher than his hands which are to be warmed once or twice.</start_of_turn>
Then draw out the thread slowly, because if it is too tight or too loose, it cannot be corrected without.</start_of_turn
Then rub the limb with your hands, until the veins swell up, and you feel them.
Then moisten the wound with a little oil, and put the thumb of your left hand on that vein below where you saw the wound, until you see the patient recover. Then the vein is not firm and liable to be cut.</start_of_turn> For there are veins which flee just like strings to the patient, and if there are some which are filled with windiness, if when you put on the flame, if you take away the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus is this;
If he grasps the vein too tightly, if the wound is too wide, for this reason it is necessary that the attendants be informed of these matters.
If he grasps the vein too tightly, if the wound is too wide, for this reason it is necessary that the attendants be informed of these matters. And if he grasps it too tightly for the first time, that is good; but if this does not suffice, he must begin again, slightly loosening the grasp or the patient will faint.</start_of_turn>
And if the limb is swollen, and the patient sighs, letting go for a moment or two, do not bind the limb: By chance there will come apostemes; do not enter or bathe, but begin again when the bleeding has stopped.
And if he loses a little blood, or if he has a wound without a visible cause and you doubt that there is not as much blood as you see, even if you are sure of the loss itself with all the flames directly above;
And if he loses a little blood, or if he has a wound without a visible cause and you doubt that there is not as much blood as you see, even if you are sure of the loss itself with all the flames directly above; so too does this often happen when the wound is small.</start_of_turn>
If you see the limb inflamed, if you do not renew the bleeding, put on a little oil of lavender, for it smoothens the pain of blood, and is mild in this limb the oil that is on it.</start_of_turn
And thus apply the leech of oil to the wound that has bled, to staunch the course of blood.
And thus this same thing makes the wound tremble and swell up, when it is put on the limb; if it is too thick it will tear when it is too large.</start_of_turn>
And if there comes a large abscess, which has happened many times, even though it is not very deep, because if you open it too wide,
And you must know that you must do this after the evacuation of blood from the vein, and if it remains in place after a few days, neither black nor green mark will appear; if it does not harm me. And if you see, do not put anything of aloes or myrrh moistened in juice of alum, mustard, or similar things.</start_of_turn>
And often there is abscess and appearance to the blood of the basilisk: put your hand there, and if you find the limb soft under the compression of the hand, if that is the bad appearance.</start_of_turn Except that you do not put anything of what we have said, for by chance in court without an artery; but you must do indeed plaster dry to harden the limb, then treat it with another treatment, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
And treat each wound according to the quantity of its virtue and the color of the blood.
For if it is black, leave it be until it is red; and if you see it large, leave it until it is subtle; and if it is too thick, leave it cool down.</start_of_turn>
And it is proper for the blunt and firm, and has the business of extracting blood, to make the wound larger and the flame greater.</start_of_turn
and for the weak one, make it the opposite, and make it healthier rather than worse, and you must make it healthier by cutting across, not by pricking.</start_of_turn
And this method of bleeding is useful for preventing the discharge of blood and for calming nerves, and is worth more than blood that remains long rather than wide.
And for him for whom the flesh requires blood, it is to be given soft bread soaked in the juice of green apples; if he is faint, give him blood twice or thrice.</start_of_turn>
And if he is of a cold complexion, let him beforehand eat soft bread soaked in honey or in aromatic honey with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and fragrant honey.</start_of_turn>
And if he sweats after the discharge of blood, it is to be understood that he should drink broth of barley, and fragrant broth that smells like herbs,
And use other things that we have said in the section or chapter on fainting, for the evacuation of blood.
And if he sees it is going to vomit again, and is well another time, if it is caused by great bleeding, he must rest and lie still, as much as he can
And who vomits after the first bleeding and has a strong pulse, if he rests for nine hours after the first bleeding or after the twelfth hour.
And who is well otherwise, if he must be well in two days or three
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the discharge of blood from a wound which has already been evacuated, and causes fever; if one can bear to remove a great quantity, and dilate the opening so that it bleeds profusely. having removed all the blood, and placing your hand over the wound while it is still bleeding, so that no more blood comes in its place. and this often happens when the patient is negligent;
and you must not attempt to pull the limb out once it has been dislocated, but must press firmly on the wound to stop the bleeding again. If the limb is crooked, extend your arm strongly, for this would be bad.
but leave it as long as it remains whole the second time; or you point at the tip of the flame, until it has completely consumed the contents of the vein, which is enough to burst open. and put upon it some water and press lightly.
And if the vein has escaped, if you leave it and do not restrain it, until the abscess is calmed.
And if necessary, it is good to drain blood a second time, if the same is in the same limb, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The blood in the arm is pale in comparison to the vein of the shoulder because it is composed of it.</start_of_turn>
And the color of the blood is that of the patient's hand when it is in warm water, as long as the flesh is red.</start_of_turn>
Then it should be bound firmly, if the vein opens well, and the same now through, not too wide or long;
And let the wound be large, or be very close to the wrist joint; and if it cannot be closed, if you restore the hand to its natural position, let the blood flow freely until you have enough;
And if it is thus, if you do not return the hand to its normal position in warm water, for more blood will flow into it than in this state.</start_of_turn>
The blood of this vein is more useful than all the others, for there is neither artery nor nerve.</start_of_turn>
The saliva of the right hand is worth against all the diseases of the liver, and this is the method:
Strain the hand, and hold it in hot water, until the vein escapes if it is seen. and if the vein runs through, and you grasp it all the way round, if it does not bleed;
do not go too deep, for the nerves are exposed without flesh,
then put the hand back in hot water, if it is not frozen in the wound, and do not move it.
And when you have treated the wound as well as you can, if you put oil on the vein or abscess and keep it warm, and do for every wound.
The blood in the left hand is worth the disease of mice, and do the same as I have said before concerning the right side.</start_of_turn>
The blood of the armpit is worth for all the diseases that are upon the body.</start_of_turn such as the disease of the marrow, retention of flowers, the disease of the rains, and of the veins, and of the old legs, and similar diseases.</start_of_turn>
And if the patient has a wound that is somewhat filled with hot water, and wets on the wound until it blanches, then he must keep the limb immersed in hot water until it turns white, and wipe it dry from the joint down to the ankle; and if it is at the elbow, from the elbow down to the hand there will be plenty of pus.
the wound will be dry or even yield pus, or at the ankle, where the limb is bent, that there is a great flow of pus.
And if you wash the wound on the limb, if you take care of the nerves which are outside, and if you move the limb as if you were combing; and let the flame go out.
And if it cannot be moved, if you reset the limb in the water, and let the vein drain well.
If it must be forced, do it the first time; if you do it again, it will be in vain, for the limb is already salted.</start_of_turn> Do not doubt, as we have said, and make the other limb equal.</start_of_turn>
The limb of the sciatic vein is at the ankle of force, and its blood is worth the pain of the groin, when it is for blood that has clotted.</start_of_turn
And if the patient is between or bathing, and strains below the ankle three times,
then the vein will not open; and if it does open, do so in all ways you can, and across.</start_of_turn> it is better to leave it alone, for the liquid is thick, and it is easily returned by hand.</start_of_turn>
it is better to leave it alone, for the liquid is thick, and it is easily returned by hand.</start_of_turn> and if you do not find it, if any rain of it escapes or remains stuck, and towards the little toe, and you are wary of the nerves;
And do as much correction of blood as you see, then loosen the connection, and put on a bandage and hold; it is now healed.
It is now healed.
Ventouses are made of horn, or cobwebs, or glass; and are applied according to two methods: either by cutting and drawing out blood, or by cutting alone.
And this method of applying the cautery if done according to two methods: either it is with great heat, or with less heat;
And there are also three others in the twelve costae of the neck; and the wound causes swelling of the chin. And the wound causes swelling of the armpits; and swelling on the shoulders; And the blisters cover half the arms; and the blisters cover half the legs. And the blisters cover half the ankles; and the swelling does not affect blood, except for little veins that are scattered in the flesh,
Therefore it does not cause pain, as if we were bleeding from a vein; It is not painful, as if we were bleeding from a vein; and it is not to be administered with fire or any sensation of heat, in any disease caused by excess, until all the corrupted matter is evacuated.
And if necessity demands it, or by custom, if the attendants bring a woman into the chamber during the course of a month, at the beginning or at the end, and every time she is there,
because there are some who, when they must speak, have a heavy head.
and there are some who have swelling and redness in their face, and in their head, and at the throat, and their eyes are dull.
and there are some who have a drop of blood in their mouth, and have lost their tongue, and spit blood. And if I have those who think, and see by no blood and no wound and blood and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and indeed when moisture is in the air, we command them to wait for two hours before they can go outside.</start_of_turn>
The blood of the physician helps with the pain of the head … that comes from these ulcers, and we must only do this after the evacuation of all the flesh;
The fire should not be more than 30 palms high, and never be bigger.
And it must not be done by anyone who is of a cold complexion or who has a hangover, for this causes great discomfort.
And for this reason it must not be done by anyone who is suffering from a cold temperament or who has a hangover.
And he who is sick in temperament, if he becomes unconscious, and for this reason it must be placed a little lower by the doubt of unconsciousness.
The application of the ventouse below the chin is in place of the blood of the head and the marrow, and for this reason it is worth more than the greatest value, And at a fissure of the windpipe towards the tonsils, and at a swelling, and at repletion.
And it is obvious that the swelling will burst, for if it remains too tightly, it will obstruct speech or eating or both.
The windsings cause pain in the chest as well as coughing and vomiting, and strangulation, and toothache.
It is in lieu of the blood of the veins; and you must command the patient to express his hand to place it, that he does not pierce the artery, and does not bleed excessively.
The winds of the south blow low over the mouth, and at the corruption of the gums, and similar diseases which are in the mouth; and it is in the power of the healing of the twelve leaves.
The winds of the south blow low over the mouth, and at the corruption of the gums, and similar diseases which are in the mouth; and it is in the power of the healing of the twelve leaves.
The winds of the south blow low over the mouth, and at the corruption of the gums, and similar diseases which are in the mouth; and it is in the power of the healing of the twelve leaves The winds of the south blow low over the mouth, and at the corruption of the gums, and similar diseases which are in the mouth; and it is in the power of the healing of the twelve leaves
And instruct the patient not to fear too much pain, for the blood vessels are numerous, and he knows of bones and arteries.
The swelling that is on the buttocks is worth as many bruises at the foundation, and as diseases of bones, and it is known that the swelling should be great, and of a coarse texture, that it must be thoroughly treated; and by chance, if it should happen to be superficial, if it breaks, it will cause great wounds.</start_of_turn>
The swellings of the legs swell widely open, because they draw blood from all parts of the body, and cause old wounds of the rains, and of the marrow, and of the bladder, and reduce the flowers; and are in place of the upper jowls, and of the calves, and all of them cause the body to swell afterwards along its length, and cause vomiting in various conditions.</start_of_turn
When the vacuum is placed first thing empty, and then with moderate warmth, put it on the patient immediately, and move it equally, and do not cease doing so until you see a little redness of the flesh and blood; then stop, and remove the vacuum, and take care of the body, for there are many who have suffered with this, and clear pores: if you do but wound once only, you will make large wounds and deep incisions; do it gently.
If it is not too large, if you must wound it, do so but once: the first time to staunch the flow of blood.
If it is very thick, if you must wound it, do so but three times; and when our wings draw blood from the wound, if we are only slightly wounded once.
And if our veins burst with blood, if we repeat this often; and if it is not expected, if we are in pain, we must finish if we suspect the cause is recognized.
And it is fitting for those who have thick skin and tough hair, and who have large pores, that you wipe away the pus of the oily aperitif and dissolving poultices: if it is like this, with violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil;
or if it is ivy, with cumin oil, or heather, or chamomile, or something similar.
If excessive sweating is great and cold, take oil of marigold, or balsam, or oil of angelica, and the like.
If the skin is pale and has large pores, do not put on oil,
but must wash afterwards with rosewater, or cold water, or chamomile water, or cucumber water, or vinegar water, or some such thing.
And if anyone has a moist mouth, if he gets up easily, or from mistletoe, and sumac, and the like things.
And those who have superfluous swellings rise from wine strong, or from the water of sow, or from decoction of elderberry or chamomile, or from other such things.
and do not remember to keep the patient still before or during the bath, but after the bath for an hour or so; and do not let them sleep after the ventosation.
and must be warned when they must be ventosated and when they are ventosated. And beware those who are sickly are cold, and those who are too hot and inflamed; If it is known that he has taken cold things, as apples, grapes, radishes and lettuce at ease, and similar things;
and meat juice, mustard, broth of broth, and moist meats.
And whoever has a cold complexion, if he takes syrup of honey, and fragrant wine middle between vinegar and oil, and broth, and broth juice and small oils and herbs;
and when the wind is blowing, he must drink more than he eats.
And you must give no more alms to anyone at any time frivolous or mischievous before or after, in order to comfort the principal limbs. And be discreet about it, but do not let anyone know who is worthy of alms except those who truly deserve them.</start_of_turn>
The wounds which are made for the application of the venouse are those which are made upon the liver, and upon the spleen, and under the tongue, and upon the belly and the buttock, and the armpit and the groin, for in these parts the limb does not suffer wounds upon the bones.</start_of_turn>
and it is done only to draw blood from limb to limb, If we put on the thumbs when they do not swell; to remove the viscosity that is in the limb, if we put on compresses on the belly and the buttocks to make the limb more flexible.
and loosen the pain, when there is a swelling or a stone, if you loosen by its natural attraction from an accident the swelling, or take out the stone from its place
and make it limp when you put it on the liver and the heel when there is retained moisture.
and these compresses are administered empty so as to suck as little as possible; and never are administered together with fire, and never completely filled with water.
If there are diseases of the chest or in such a way that the wound is filled with hot water, or water, or where there are herbs covering that.
The form of the wound administered with fire is thus:
It has two inches of width and half an inch of depth, and has or comes out towards the middle like a pierced wound, just like a wound caused by a needle,
or be placed on the front if it does not bleed the patient when placed on the limb;
And he has in the middle a stick of wire or iron, to put a bandage around.
And there are great and small ones according to the diseases and the severity of those who take them
for the wounds of the veins are different from those of the intestines, and the lean from the fat.
And must one put this bandage upon the limb:
Take the candle or line and put it into the suction cup through the hole in the suction cup. If it sticks at the bottom of the suction cup, it will not burn the patient;
and then put it on the limb, and you must keep it either above or below the hole we mentioned above, so that when you see it, if there is vapor, withdraw the suction cup immediately.
and take hold of the candle or line as before, and do it often, if you must.
In the case of a pleural effusion, which is administered for chest pain, there is no need for a vein or an incision, and it is only administered when it is in a state of acute inflammation, and is placed upon the limb as gently as possible.
it is in this form:
They are only administered in members or where it is not possible to put on a ventouse because of their small size, such as livers and gums, and similar things. and in the case of wounds without hair, such as boils or nails, and other similar things;
And if you observe that the joints that are in soft and smooth movement do not make sense to you, take them.
And put them into gentle water, until they are well-acquainted, and do not have anything in their bellies; Then either keep the vein open with a ligature and a vacuum, and then rub the limb until it is red, and place the bandage on it;
And when they are full and swell, and if it is possible to put on a vacuum, put it on, for this is worth doing afterwards.
If not, raise the limb easily, then with force, move it well, and then release it.
and if the limb remains too long after the hair has been plucked, if moist, i.e. a bundle of linen in cold water, put on, until the hair is stretched out;
and if the hair is multiplied, put on broken glass, or nails, and similar things, until it is stretched out.
or you put out half of the beans peeled, and let them burn on the limb, if you stop it now.
And if you have more pain, take other unguents.
And if the unguents do not suffice, rub the limb with fresh blood, or insert a needle into it until the pain ceases. Then apply them once more, and as soon as they feel relief from the pain, if they bleed;
And when you see that they bleed, sprinkle some powder of aloes and saffron over them, or charcoal, if they will now stop bleeding.
Ci comence li livre des brisures.
This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is the restoration of fracture and displacement.</start_of_turn>
Listen well, dear son, for this chapter teaches you something that none of the old books have ever mentioned, no letter has ever written.</start_of_turn
Therefore, in our land, this science is strange, for I have never found anything like it before.</start_of_turn
And I know of nothing else, save by the science of ancient books, or because I have studied so much that I have treated this science, and by experiment, and by the custom of my life.
I have described in this chapter what is contained in this book, and I have abbreviated it at the end, and I have made it clear the forms of the instruments which are mentioned, as I have done in the preceding chapters
Therefore it is necessary that we say or write in the prologue of this book the sum of the word and the chapters or the sayings which put understanding into it, and remain on the truth, so that those who are proven to be learned may learn this noble art and learn it from others.
I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twist or sprain occurs to anyone, if you must hasten the patient to a physician from one side to the other, if nothing else hinders you, if from weakness of body, infancy, or old age;
or if he is too weak, or too cold; and eat only cold broth, that is to say cold broth, broth of herbs and vinegar, and drink no wine, eat no fatty foods, and do not fill the stomach too much with meat, until you are certain that the patient will not suffer from excessive bleeding, or swelling of the limb; if he recovers, let him rest first for a moment before continuing treatment.</start_of_turn>
And when the fractured bone begins to heal, if you must order the patient to eat meat which causes great swelling, or if it has viscosity, as with wheat flour in water, and rye, and testicles, and spleen, and pancreas, and fish, and large wine, and similar things.</start_of_turn> For in part of nourishment, muscle and bone grow more brittle.
Therefore, bones broken from marrow and decrepit ones do not mend well because of the drying out of the limbs, just as bones that are too brittle;
but it is healed by large tensions which hold the limb together, as much as they are strong; and it does not cause any damage, so it is recommended to feed on strong foods, as we have said.</start_of_turn>
And it is observed that fractures are of various kinds in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot, or of the arm, and I shall tell you in this chapter all the ways of fracture. For there are fractures that go to the marrow, and others by bending, as with the size of a nail to write with.
For there are fractures that go to the marrow, and others by bending, as with the size of a nail to write with. And if there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture with a small tear.
And concerning the bruise of the breast has its means, and its own instrument in restoring, according to what he remembers comes to his mind;
And it is known that a fracture of the bone is caused by that which twists the limb, and it opens well by pushing, and sometimes by the pressure of the hand.
And when there is no swelling or touch, and the patient does not feel much pain, there is no fracture;
but it can well have swelling, or fissure, or a small fracture. If you do not know how to move the limb, but put on medicines that will come later, and then strain it gently now.
And the threads that break that go into the marrow, and are the third parts of the joints, it is now necessary to put them in order equally, even as after incisions remain.
and if incisions remain, if you leave them without care, as long as the incisions are still inflamed; then put them in order with the muscles that you must gently and prudently stretch, and the threads that restore them are lighter than those of other parts; then restrain, as it is necessary afterwards.
And if there are broken pieces in the bone, if they are two parts, if they are hands or feet, or at your hand if it is a small limb, or at two strings, or at a string and at your hand;
And set the limb according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the limb break, remain by all means the adjuncts of its flesh to the muscle as you wish, and keep that by your work there comes no lesion or pain to the patient.
And adjust well the joints of the bones according to the best forms.
And feel well with the hand if you think that it is not well: if the wound is healing well, and it is not strained too much, do not press as those who do who make it come by their work to swelling and contraction in the limb, as we have often seen
And when the limb is at a point, if the patient is truly sick and does not move it, neither awake nor asleep, neither turning nor in any other way; and take great care that the limb is firmly secured so that it feels no pain at all.</start_of_turn> For when it feels no pain, if it is not at a point, and you must put it in a position where it feels no pain.</start_of_turn>
For when it feels no pain, if it is not at a point, and you must put it in a position where it feels no pain.</start_of_turn> and keep it straight, so that there is no twisting when you restore it.</start_of_turn>
And as for the quality of a broken limb, that is as I have said.
The quality of a broken limb is diverse in small and large pieces and in shape.
For there are small limbs, such as bones and thumbs and the like: if you cover them with linen cloth and silk;
and those which are large, such as thighs and legs and arms: if you cover the limb with coarse linen cloth and silk;
Then lie down and stretch your limbs lightly, two or three according to the limb, and strain your hand one palm to the other, then go up to the break and strain less, than the break then dislocate one palm from the break.
and soften the limb one palm and the other, as much as you grasp a great part of the limb, then take hold of another limb, and turn the shoulder back in place over the limb that is broken
then raise to the lower part of the break, and strain moderately, neither too strong nor too weak, as we said earlier;
Then put between the layers of staples, linen or cloths, as many as are even; and bind them together with bands, and then put your pins well made above, if there is no incision or swelling.
And if there is swelling or incision, if you put above soothing things that calm the incision, and which hold the swelling, and leave them in place for some days.
Then strain above your pins, and let them be half the width of a broad thumb ring, or of a clove of fennel, or of barleycorns, and let them be in this shape:
But it is necessary that the staple which is put on the fracture be larger and broader than the others.
And be of equal length as it is necessary for the limb in its entirety or in its breadth
Then is strained upon the staples as you did at the first hour, and then bind under a thread that will remain firm, as in the first hour on the fracture;
more is tight, the less; and it is necessary that the thread be neither too thick nor too thin, and be of linen wool.
For if the threads are thick, as I have seen fools do who bind their wounds with linen cord, it is a great mistake, for the cord will not be even if it is too fine, and it will not hold securely unless there is some space between the stitches.
And if the patient is bruised by the blows of the stones after the stretching of their bones, if you put sponges of linen or coarse cloth on them, they will not swell up.</start_of_turn>
When the wound is with the fracture, and the bone is broken, I shall speak of the cure for that later.</start_of_turn>
And the threads that he cannot bear to hold are those which break first of all. For when the limb is large, he cannot bear to put these [stitches] except after five or seven days, or more according to your suspicion of the wound coming out;
And when the old plaster must restore a fracture, dislocation, and torsion: take a little flour that is held as by the walls of a mill, and mix it with much egg, and make this confection, not too thick not too thin, and use it; for this is the common method of plastering which restores the fracture in many positions, and even among women and small children, for it is neither too harsh nor too rough.
Another method of plastering that restores the fracture and dislocation and torsion: take three barley grains and linseed, mugwort, asafoetida, gum arabic, and mastic, in all; myrrh and aloes, in two; aloe vera, in seven; and grind them together, and mix them with egg white; for if the patient's complexion is hot, use this plaster, for it is of good composition and restores the broken bones very quickly, and is worth more than many homes.
Other method of displacement worth torsion: take mugwort and vismut, 3 each; mix with mire and aloes, 8 each; acacia, 5 each; arnica, 10 each, and grind well, and confit with water or abundant oil, and administer.
Other method of displacement worth torsion: take mugwort and vismut, 3 each; mix with mire and aloes, 8 each; acacia, 5 each; arnica, 10 each, and grind well, and confit with water or abundant oil, and administer. The plaster does not restore immediately, but it is good for soothing post-cautery pain, and the bones properly the pains.
Other method of displacement that restores fractured bones: take dried fig tree leaves and terrestrial pellwort leaves, and grind together, and make plaster.
Other methods of restoring the fracture of the bone and removing the remaining abscess. Take root of vismalve, chamomile, violets flowers, wheat flour, and nutmeg one part; and grind, and mix with wine, and if the limb is swollen, mix with vinegar of coriander moist, or vinegar alone, and use.
Other methods of support are more forceful than the first, when a hard abscess comes with the restoration of the limb. Take root of vismalve, flaxseed, barley, melilot, violets and chamomile flowers, all of one part; and grind, and mix with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Hippocrates in his book does not put anything on the broken limb to restore it except for some fat and oil, and nothing else, and he says that it should be between two and not too soft or too hard
And it seems Galen recommends putting something dry and warm on the broken limb, such as myrrh, aloes, incense and the like, as we have said.
Another way of dressing that is worth for pain and swelling: take mugwort and chopped onions, or poppy seeds, and mustard, and mix them evenly, and grind them, and make a dressing of it and bind it.</start_of_turn>
Then loosen a little afterwards, and take care that the patient feels no pain, that the bone is not displaced; if you do not loosen by hand for a while.
And if pain comes to the limb, or swelling or itching, if you hasten, and loosen it, and support the limb in place; and take a light bandage, and a sponge of salt and moisture, and immerse in water, and elevate the limb, until the itching ceases, and the pain is calmed. Then leave the limb rest for an hour, and put on dry linen, soaked in water or rose oil, and bind up with a knot, until you are certain of the healing of the wound
And rest the inflamed limb, and relieve the pain, then bind up again with a soft bandage, and a little more of support, and do not bind too tightly; and be discreet until it is healed.
If you see swelling, redness, pain and swelling around a bone, and if there is a recurrence, you must repeat the procedure as you did the first time.
If there is no improvement in the limb after the things we have mentioned, if it does not straighten out after two or three or five or seven days, do not leave it for twenty days, as we have seen; until the fracture has healed, and the limb is brought back into its natural position.
Therefore you must support it more strongly than before, and nourish the limb as I mentioned earlier; and if you see that the limb is drying out more than usual, do not attempt to force moisture into it, for it will not help. The fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When the fire cautery is used, do not remove the dressing from the limb too quickly; and do not be hasty in handling the matter, for if you do, you will make the matter worse, and if you are uncertain, I do not see anything better than to leave it alone and treat it directly.</start_of_turn>
various methods of fracture.</start_of_turn There are many methods of fracture, and various figures, and the causes are diverse.</start_of_turn
For there are fractures that are made by the percussion of a spear, and the collar of bone is fractured throughout to the syfac which is the socket of the bone, as is done by a saw or an axe; and for this reason this kind of fracture is called a fracture of the bone.
Or if the spear pierces the bone in a reverse direction, it is called this kind of fracture 'absolute'; and there are wounds of these two kinds, great or small.
And if there is an embedded percussion, or fracture or collar of bone, or fracture of bone on bone, or other similar things.
And if there is a fracture that approaches the socket which is below the bone, or it is above the bone, and is this wound, or large or small.
And if the wound is filled with bone as densely as a braid, and the fracture is small, it is called a "capillary" fracture.
And if the wound is made by a pierce, or by cutting, or by a similar thing, and if it makes the bone marrow enter, and if the limb is as limp as when broth is boiled on pots; if the marrow comes between the bones.
And this has more under it that those who have drunk too much wine; like children who have drunk too much.
And thus in all these ways of fracture, small pieces are detached from them as with stars; and I will speak of it in its place.
And thus in all these ways of fracture, small pieces are detached from them as with stars, and the tension on the tense parts, and the corrupt matter that is above.
The blood vessel is known by this that when we have discovered the bone, and we wipe grease over it, if the black fracture is opened
In the treatment of the fracture, take care of the patient’s ailments, and if you see no other mishap, as vomiting of bile, emission of urine, extension, and swelling, and fever, and the eyes turning yellow and red, and other similar things in various situations, if you cannot otherwise make sense of it.
If you do not see an imminent accident, and you hope for health, if so, begin the treatment.
When the limb comes first to you, and that is in the armpit, if so, it is best to remove the bone from the fourth space above the muscle as you do.</start_of_turn>
And if it is in this state, if you hurry to remove the bone from the seventh space above the bone, so that the marrow of the bone is corrupted, comes the accident that we have mentioned.</start_of_turn>
And if the breaking of the bone comes up to the marrow that covers the brain, if so, you must make an opening in the part that is broken: and that is that you take hold of the head of the patient and uncover the bone in all the ways that you can, and on the figure of the wound more severe than you can.</start_of_turn
And if blood comes out when uncovering the bone, or incisions are made, let him hold what he can to his aid; and fill the wound with cloths soaked in rose oil. And rest the wound until the incisions are healed; then when the bleeding has stopped, begin to bind up the bone steadily. This is done in three ways: the first way is if the tail of the incision is narrow in front, and this is the form:
And then there is another incision which is greater than the first.
And thus if you have many different sizes of boils, some are soft and some are hard, and are pointed, and of iron inde; and in a slight wound, do not lance the head.
And if the bone is firm and hard, if you must pierce through, do not make holes except where the bone actually breaks through; and must have above the point a margin or circle, which does not leave the point pass beyond the bone; and you must have several of these, so that the flesh comes out in place of the thickness of the bone, if you have holes throughout the test; and this is the form of the two methods of holes.
The quality for piercing through the bone is that you put in a tarer on the bone, and twist your two hands until you feel that the bone is pierced; then put the tarer back in another place a little later, and do everything around, and close the incisions of the space between the holes, and do this more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you have moved the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments that you have like pins or tweezers; and keep your hand away from the brain and the jaw.
And when you have pierced the bone, and treated, if it is possible, reset the fragment which has broken away from the bone to all other instruments which are like an incisor, but it must be firmer and more flexible than the others.
And if it has not fractured any of the small bones, no teeth, if the bone is slightly fractured with some instruments; then cure the wound with sutures and bandages as we have mentioned.</start_of_turn>
And the other method of treatment is like that of the Galenicians, which is more reliable; and the lord is very strong, and that is his word.</start_of_turn It is proper first that you uncover a portion of the bone, either the fracture or break open muscle, so that when you have uncovered that portion, you must place the index finger of your left hand over the pointed end of this incisor lens, as follows:
Do not pierce from one side only, but rather from the edge of the joint, so that if you pierce through the bone; then take hold of a little mallet above, so that you gently press the bone around, and take care of the surrounding tissue that is below.
If it is tough against the bone, if the bone is slightly bent, because one must well feel it when it is badly injured, and feel no pain.
If the bone breaks without piercing the skin, cut the bone as little as possible; there are small pieces remaining. If it is possible to rejoin them, do so with the blunt end of a scraper, using various quantities as needed, to fill each cavity adequately according to the work and the nature of the fracture.
If there is abundant scraping beforehand, and afterwards more subtly, and it does not cease to do so until it is well done
In small cuts of other sizes and breaks that are subtle, it is prudent to provide the cause according to its location; and this is something that is not mentioned in this art by anyone who has put their study into this area.
And if the wound is discovered, you must take one drape of linen, according to the extent of the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and place it upon the wound. Then take another drape of linen doubled in half or in quarters, soak it in wine and rose oil, and place it upon the first drape; and make it more gentle than you would, that you do not damage the wound further. Then administer from above another piece of linen, and do not tighten it more than is necessary to hold the wound in place only.
and leave it thus for one or two days until the swelling subsides, then remove it, and administer medications such as roots of ivy, alum, and incense, and arnica, and similar things; from these things make powder, and put it upon the wound, and administer appropriate medications as before.
And beware that the wound be perfectly closed, that you do not leave it open, neither do you leave it gather bones together, for when bones gather together on the soft brain, if they bind and swell, it brings great harm to the patient; for when one puts upon the surface of the wound something biting, if it does not desist from below.
Beware then, if no other evil befalls the patient, as we have said, if there is doubt, it is better to be uncertain
And if there is no other danger than the medicine we have put on, that some virtue has, if you can, take a part of honey, and two parts of rose oil and glue one. Put it on the surface of the wound; Then comes the treatment in various ways that it is appropriate, as long as it is healthy.
Then come the treatments in various ways that are appropriate, as long as it is healthy. The veins that are never broken in two parts do not bleed, or bleed only slightly; for these are bones; and when cartilage is involved, it does not break unless something forces it to bulge or twist, and then it is well healed.</start_of_turn>
And if one of the parts is broken, if you should swallow your little finger or the hole of your thumb, and put the break back into your index finger and the wrist in turn, until it returns to its natural shape. and do this gently, and beware that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
And if the break is in the upper part of the arm, and cannot come from the bone itself, you must know that you must place a splint equal to the breadth of a thumb at the chief of a finger.
And if the break is three parts, if you do another, and hurry to restore the limb first, if you wish;
otherwise, after the seventh or tenth day, when the limb's swelling has subsided, and you bathe the upper part of the arm at the chief of the break, if the break is in a part.
Or you bathe the other side as well, if the break is there; and let the bandages be so thick that they fill the hole of the break.
And they say no restorer should moisten the tents in the burrow, and die each one for himself. It does not seem to me that this is good, but it is necessary that they be moistened in the making of an ointment of egg yolk, and wheat flour; then leave the tent until the bones are firm, and the cartilages hardened.
And never should one put goose feathers in place of tents, and if there is too much soft drape, and it hangs there, and blows the patient among them; or do as you will
If swelling comes to the neck while you are working, if you put some cotton or gauze moistened in rose oil or some vinegar.
And if the afterbirth does not come, if you put on a plaster by force, of lint, and powdered incense, confirmed with the yolk of an egg, then put on soft patches, and do not bind them tightly.
And if the fracture is slight, and is broken into many pieces, if you have suitable instruments available for this, then cut the fracture, and cure with absorbent dressings, soldering, if with plasters and ointments available for this.
And if there is no swelling at all on the wound, if you cure with stitches, and put on lead weights, as long as it is necessary.
De la routure de la mandibule.
When the mandible is fractured without any wound, and the break is only slight, and is not seen to be broken thoroughly, except for the prominence within, if one grasps it lightly.
It is appropriate, if the break is on the outer part, to bite down on the index finger of the affected hand; and if the break is on the left mandible, if you take hold of the index finger of the right hand, and gently hold the fracture, and move the other hand away by force, and make it equal.
And if the fracture of the mandible is displaced in .ij., if it is necessary to administer extension of .ij. parts, as long as they are equal.
If movement of the jaw comes loose, or is dislocated, if it is strained by a thread of gold or silver or silk, then put upon the broken jaw a cerote, and put upon it a double drape; and upon the drape a great staple well made, or a piece of leather equal in length and width to the jaw, and bind it upon the muscle as you please, and command the patient to rest, and feed him soft food.
If you see that the figure changes, if it dislocates from the third part of the jaw, and then returns to its place; put on a dressing of powdered alum with plenty of eggs or oatmeal, after this has been osteized with the cerote; and put on the dressing a soft linen cloth, and if the dressing comes loose, and the patient’s condition does not change, leave it as it is until it heals; for often it heals in two weeks.
And if the abscess comes out, if it is as we have said many times before.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, award that no piece of the bone is left osteose; if subtle of the bone has instruments covering this.
And if the wound is wide, if the edge has been burned according to your need.</start_of_turn>
And when you have ossified all these pieces, and there remains no more, if the wound is wide, and put upon it such coverings as cover this, to prevent suppuration, as long as it is healthy.</start_of_turn>
forcefully The forceful fracture occurs many times before, behind the shoulder, and the fracture is according to two methods: when it is broken and desevree in three parts, and there are pieces, and it is the lightest to restore; or if there is a fracture with a wound.
And when the fracture is towards the wound, you must have two assistants, one of whom will hold the limb that feels the forceful fracture; and the other will extend the collar towards the part; then put the fracture back in place, so that it forms as it should, and there is no sign or swelling.</start_of_turn>
And if you have to extend further, put under the patient’s shoulder a round ball of lead, or cloth, as thick as you need; and hold and keep the forceful fracture steady, and strain the ball with your hand, so that you can put the fracture back in place as it should.</start_of_turn>
If you do not manage to push the head of the arm away from the shoulder, because it is coming out of its socket, you must know that the patient lies still on his belly, and put on the arm .i. middle forearm, and keep the hand of the minister on the lower arm, until the bone of the arm is raised up.
Then direct the fracture towards your side, and if you find debris, if you must, make an incision there; and force out the pieces gently, and if the bones cannot reunite by any support, if the pulp has reached one of your incisors, but put on the arm that is the instrument, in order to prevent infection.
and seems like a scoop, and is neither thick nor thin, and be as wide as it should be, according to the size of the bone and the ability of the work; and has two holes, as you see, and one is large, and the other is small, as is the course of the wound that you made when you treated the bones;
And when you are assured of the depth of the wound, if the wound is small, or if you doubt the depth, if you employ a dressing and a bandage, according to its quantity.
If the wound has bled, if it is small, take oil of roses, assails, and wine, and put on top.</start_of_turn>
The hardening of the bone, when it has wounds and senses of the tailor, is that you put on the bone the plaster of the powder of the mill and the yolk of an egg, and put on a bandage, and put a sponge under the armpit if necessary.</start_of_turn> Then take a very great bandage of a broad palm, then put on a double drape over the wound, and support it; then take a slender needle of two palms wide and long, and wrap it around that bandage, so that the head of the bandage remains in place. And put the needle on the fracture, and turn the bandage on the collarbone, and draw out the inner skin, and draw out the outer skin; and retain the outer layer, and when you see that the ligature holds the fracture steadily, and you clearly see that the needle does not move from the broken bone, if you reward each jerk, and when you loosen the restraint;
And make the patient lie on his back, and put under him one little pillow under the buttocks, to lift the bandage up; if it will align the fracture by the alignment of the scapula, or you will bind the arm to the collarbone, and do not unbind it until it is well healed, for at least twenty days.
Then resume the displacement, if you see that it is necessary, and hold and leave it in place until it is restored; and it is usually restored within .xxviij. days, and in fewer than most homes.
Then resume the displacement, if you see that it is necessary, and hold and leave it in place until it is restored; and it is usually restored within .xxviij. days, and in fewer than most homes.
When the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, or if the limb is too large to fit through, do not force it out; if the limb appears according to the shape of the dislocation, reduce it according to its natural form in every way that you can; then put on the limb powder with plenty of eggshell, and bandage firmly, and put on a wide and soft cushion, a little wider than the shoulder, and if the cushion slips from the shoulder, use a bandage of flaxseed, so that the cushion rests evenly; and then hold firmly at a great bend, so that the cushion does not move from its place, and watch the limb carefully; and every time it relaxes, if you hold it, and put it back in place if it has moved from its place, and keep the patient lying down; and the shoulder is restored in .xx. days or less.  And when this number is completed, if the limb is flexible, and so be sure, for it is not the bone that easily recovers.
And if a piece of the bone sticks out beforehand, and does not yield like before, if it persists, hold the bone steady and do what we said in the breaking of the forceps to soothe the abscess.
And if a piece of the bone sticks out beforehand, and does not yield like before, if it persists, hold the bone steady and do what we said in the breaking of the forceps to soothe the abscess.
The limb is never broken in the middle, but this happens often; but it often breaks on exertion. And when it is broken in two, if it declines at the root, and causes the patient great pain, and swelling, and vomiting, and by chance blood, and opens the marrow in the broken bone, and they feel well.
And if the patient lies supine on his back, put one cushion between the shoulder blades, then press the shoulder blades together, and unite the edges of the two ribs with your hands, and subtilize that it be even in all ways that you can, until the shape of the bone is as it should be; then put on bandages and stamp under the staple of salt, or some other soft substance, and cover with a single bandage, and bind on the bone break, if it does not move; and turn the limb around the back, and strain gently, and reward somewhat the limb after an hour, and if it relaxes, strain it again; and if you fear that it will slip, due to corrosion or inflammation that comes to the limb, or pain or swelling, haste and slip it, and wipe off the bandage, and address what has come from the way of treatment; then rebandage the wound and strain it until it is healed.
And if the patient lies supine on his back, put one cushion between the shoulder blades, then press the shoulder blades together, and unite the edges of the two ribs with your hands, and subtilize that it be even in all ways that you can, until the shape of the bone is as it should be; then put on bandages and stamp under the staple of salt, or some other soft substance, and cover with a single bandage, and bind on the bone break, if it does not move; and turn the limb around the back, and strain gently, and reward somewhat the limb after an hour, and if it relaxes, strain it again; and if you fear that it will slip, due to corrosion or inflammation that comes to the limb, or pain or swelling, haste and slip it, and wipe off the bandage, and address what has come from the way of treatment; then rebandage the wound and strain it until it is healed. And in the case of a broken rib.
The fractures of the ribs only come from great blows to the back, and at the shoulder, and do not bend but for that reason that they are glassy; and the patient feels well at the inquiry as two.
And the restoration is that you must set the fracture even as before. Then put on the support, and bind with a bandage. If you need to.
And if the fracture of the ribs is declining inwards, if the patient feels great pain and swelling, as if there were pleurisy, for the bone is pressing on the lung; and there is vomiting and copious bleeding, and this is a great danger to life, and it has often caused great suffering.</start_of_turn>
And if these things are said, it is advisable to administer nourishing foods that will swell the belly, to push out the fracture.</start_of_turn>
We do not make this treatment for burns that are fresh and new, if they have not begun to fester. And if they have begun to fester, so be it.</start_of_turn>
They say that no one should put a dressing on the wound, for it causes swelling; and this is similar to reason; however, there is doubt that the dressing will draw out the superfluous matter from the wound because of the disposition of weakness.
They say that no one should cover the wound with coarse cloth soaked in oil, and put on tents between the ribs to make them equal in length, then either bandage the pleurisis, meat and medicine.
If the patient experiences great pain that he cannot bear from the bone that points towards the loin, and there is doubt in the patient, if it is commanded to cut above the fractured rib, and to put in place [a foreign object] as an instrument to hold the swelling; then one must pierce the bone, treat lightly, and then suture the two layers of the wound, if it is large, and cure it with pus. And if the abscess bursts, if put on moist cloths soaked in rose oil, and put on the wound; cure while the bone is held in place, and be calm about the ribs or it must be so, until it is healed.
If the abscess bursts, if put on moist cloths soaked in rose oil, and put on the wound; cure while the bone is held in place, and be calm about the ribs or it must be so, until it is healed.
Never comes a fracture of the collarbone at the same time as a falling blow; and in the same way at the spine of the back. When this happens to no one, and you know if it will be healed or not, take care if you see his hands limp, fleeing and dying, and that he cannot move or extend them, and if you prick him with a needle, if he does not feel it. Wounds that are mortal in many situations, and if you move them and he feels well when you extract them and point, wounds that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured, if we put treatment on it.
When something like this happens on the back, and you know if it will be healed or not, take care if the pieces are softened and if the accident is what is in the hands or on the back there is an upset and vomiting without will; and when it is bound up on the belly, there is an upset and vomiting without will. And when it is bound up on the back and he sees blood gushing, he cannot urinate. Wounds that are mortal: if it does not work out in its cure.
And if this accident does not happen, if the thing is lighter.
And the treatment is this: if there is a wound at the root of the hair, put upon the spine oil of roses or oil of egg yolk, until it is calmed; then put on one of the comfortable and drying patches, and bind it with a thread, and command the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where he feels pain, until it is healed. If bones are broken, cover with a bandage; and straighten the bones, then unite the joints of the wound, if it is large, with a splint, and support it until it is healed; and if the fracture is broken, which is called the "fracture of the marrow", if you feel a swelling in your left hand, and equalize it with the right hand in front, then put on the dressing and support, if necessary; then strain, and if there are broken bones underneath, if you do not stop, and straighten, and cure the wound until it is healed.
from the fracture of the thigh bone
When the thigh bone is fractured, and if there is no sign of injury to the head; then keep it long and still, and do not move it; and the patient will suffer pain at the place of the fracture, swelling, and bruising.
If the fracture is at the top of the thigh bone, extend your hand over the fracture as long as it is on the fracture; and keep the limb in the position of the fracture; and if the fracture is only at the head, make it even so that it is in its natural position.
If the fracture is long or slopes downwards, make the patient lie on his belly, until the restoration of the fracture is apparent. And when you have set them even, if you place them on the support, then place a splint of wood or bone, and hold the brace, so that it does not move; and use the weight of the limb to compress the costae, until the limb is even.
And instruct the patient to sleep on his side, or on his back
If swelling comes, if it does not go away, until the swelling has subsided, put on what we have previously said; and then rest, and strain if it seems convenient, without any mishap; and this is the remedy.
De la brisure de l’ajutoire.
The shoulder joint is the one between the shoulder blade and the ball of the shoulder, and if it is dislocated, it must be restored in one of two ways: which is to take a fistful of myrrh, as follows:
And as two fingers are bent, two thumbs are bent, and hold the patient above a seat; then grasp the limb with the fist, until it reaches the armpit, and put in the middle of the fist a corb of the fist, then put on no weight or the attendants extend downwards; then put the joint back in its place, as it should be.
And the other method is that you support the patient on his shoulder, and you bind the arm to his collar, and order the attendants that one of them holds what is on the joint at his hands, and the other holds downwards at all the bones, and stretch the scapulae outwards.
If the extraction is too violent, if it strains, that is, if it tears the flesh, on the base and on the top, extend thumbs of the assistants to their side. And if the fracture is close to the shoulder-blade, it is necessary to insert, that is, to place, the middle finger between the scapula and the bone; and in the same way if the fracture is towards the elbow, it is necessary to insert, that is, to place, the little finger between the scapula and the bone; and just as if the fracture is between the elbow and the shoulder-blade, if it is possible, place the little finger lightly, with effort, until the fracture is even on both sides of the bone and the shoulder-blade; then place the fracture evenly, if possible, and strain, if necessary, because the after-effects will not come.
If the after-effects come, do not strain for more than thirteen days; put on moist linen and rose oil until the after-effects have subsided; then strain, and the method of straining is as follows: if you place the support on the fracture, assemble the limb on the assistant, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; put on the bandage and strain on the assistant, and on the limb, so that the limb is steady, without any hindrance, or without the bone being fractured.
If you doubt that the bone is not moving, use splints, and on the fracture put on a splint that is wider and stronger than the others, and have between the splints a space of about two finger-widths; and let one splint be as large as to pass over the fracture two finger-widths; then strain on the splints, as I have said above concerning the chapter on the fracture, stronger and less flexible.
If you see the shoulder blade slipping out of place, and the limb is straightened, as we have said, while restoring the limb, if you doubt the fracture, let it bind for seven days, as we have said; then watch for two days, that no swelling or pain arises in the limb, or that the nerves are not damaged. If the wound persists, as we have said.
If no such misfortune occurs, if not for at least two days or more, and the patient lies down on his back and places his hands on his stomach; and give the limb support equal to a cushion of wool, and watch for an hour or two to see whether the limb is still straight, or whether the ligaments are slack. If the wound persists, as we have said.
In the event that the shoulder joint has been dislocated due to moisture, and has been reset but remains unstable, resulting in recurrent dislocations with even slight movement, as we have observed, you must first stabilize the dislocation.
The arm consists of twelve bones, which are called the "femurs," of which one is small and is the one that supports the pouch; and the other is large, and is the one that is hollow, towards the little toe; by chance the large femur only breaks, or the small, and by chance they break together.
When the small femur is fractured, the restoration is easy, and the healing; but when the large is fractured, if the healing is bad, it is more painful than when they are fractured together. If only the small femur is fractured, if the limb is slightly extended, and made even.
And if it is the large femur that is fractured, if the limb is strongly extended; and it is supported on one cushion, and the pouch of the hand is held higher than the other, and the small is lower than the others, and the patient's hand is crossed over itself, and the cushion is placed in front of it higher than the patient's hand; then the patient does not suffer any pain. Then extend the limb at the shoulder to the part below the hand, or to the elbow, and one other hand at the other side above. And then put the limb in its normal position, according to its best form.
If it breaks into pieces, if you put some together in its place, and if there is no displacement that has pierced or torn it, you shall not be able to restore it to its place, for it will remain fractured as before.
If with the fracture there is a wound, as I have already mentioned in this chapter; take the cure.</start_of_turn>
If in the beginning of restoration after the fracture some blood appears outside the vein, if you glue [it] with a bandage made of cerate from rose oil and white wax, which must neither be too thick nor too thin; and bind [it] with strips of silk so that the blood outside the vein is calmed. Then put the bone back and put on the dressing of powdered meal with a lot of eggshell. Put in the pins, and make the pin of the fracture stronger than the others; and leave the wound open more widely than the others. And keep the patient still for more days than usual: either because the fracture is in the bone or in the joint; and it is more painful around the fracture than elsewhere; and it is less painful to move the limb when the fracture is still unstable. And let the bandages over the fracture be soft and moist, neither too hard nor too rough; and let the thread used for the pins be neither too thick nor too thin. And rest the limb and the limb bone after a few days.</start_of_turn> If other bad accidents happen to the limb, if there is itching that happens to the limb, then you must raise the limb with warm water until the itching subsides; and let the limb rest still. And then repeat the stretching, and if the tendon is softened and the bone is loosened, and like that for everything that causes pain.
If you take care that the swelling does not come back to the limb, because it is too tight, then you must soften it somewhat, and leave it a few days, until the swelling goes down, and then strain it again.
If none of these things that we have said help the patient, if not to loosen for about twenty days, or even more, then you must take his hands to his collar, and keep his collar even, and keep him from moving and from eating, and let him sleep on his back; and give him food when this wound is healed in about thirty days or in fifty, or even in twenty days, according to the composition and temperament of the remedies.
Of the fracture of the hand
The bones at the back of the hand have often fractured here, and it does not cease but rain many times.
When the hand is fractured or rains, if it is necessary to prevent the patient from screaming, if he looks straight ahead without moving; then put his hand on the extended cloth, and extend the fractured bones equally; then put the plaster and bandage, if there is no opening, and put on a splint according to the degree of displacement; and cover with a linen drape
When the fracture is at the elbow joint, if you make a ball of gauze and command the patient to hold it on his fractured limb; and then strain with a long bandage, and make a splint as large as the fractured limb itself, and strain it as much as it is necessary.
If the fracture is lateral, command that you place a splint above and below the joint, so that the hand is fully extended and straight, then bind the limb tightly around the hand, and seal the wound between the two.
If the fracture does not go through either bone, if it is in the flesh, if it is necessary; and strain with the bandage, and if you see that it does not move, put a splint in place to raise the fracture, and do not move it; or if the fracture is in another place, if for example in the index finger or any other, if you put it in the flesh, and bind it with the two fingers which follow; or you bind them all together, holding them firmly in place, as long as movement is painful, or put on a splint, as for a pouch; take care of the restoration and the arrangement of the cautery, and secure what comes from it, as I have said.
of the broken limb
The bone of the thigh is often fractured, and one can see it when it turns before and behind; and it is restored when it is bound with a loop above the fracture and below. The patient lies on his face, then extends his limbs symmetrically; and it is when the fracture is fixed to the bone
And if the fracture is close to the thigh bone, if either of the limbs above the knee or the other limb below the fracture is fractured; and in the same way if it is close to the knee, and then either the limb above the knee or the lower limb; then put the thumbs of both hands at the same level as the limb, until it is according to its natural figure, and then put on the dressing and bind it, without causing any further damage.
If there is swelling above the wound, if you leave it quiet and return to your work and your cure, the ligation is made hastily. If there is swelling above the wound, if you leave it quiet and return to your work and your cure, the ligation is made hastily. It is necessary to wrap around the limb with a strong bandage, doubled in two or three places, and to keep the excess taut, then to draw up the limb until the nails reach the root of the nail, and to pass through between the heel and the limb, above the kneecap, and under the heel bone, and to draw up the limb and the bandage on the heel, then to put on the outer bandage and an external splint, and to place a splint on the bone of the limb; and to employ between the limb and the bandage several layers of soft cloth to make equal the tension, and to begin to tie in two or three places on the bandage; and as you go on adding more to the bandage, reduce the tension; then take out two or three stitches that you passed between the limb and the bandage, and tie two external stitches that are below, and replace at the top with the needle, until you see that the swelling has gone down; and the tension, if it does not move from its place, then leave it alone, and do not cause any other swelling or wound.
If there is swelling above the wound, if it comes loose, and you address what has come, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that prick, it is necessary to remove them, if possible; and if that is not possible, it is necessary to cut the limb open, and drain the pus. Treat the wound as we have said, as long as it is healthy.
And never is the bone broken in this case where it is set with pins, as in the arm or leg; nevertheless, in the restoration done in this way, I do not feel any pain in the patient.
And the swelling that remains in the bone after it has been restored, lasts for one or two days, or less or more, according to the variations of complexion.
of the groin region.
The swelling in the groin region often breaks, but it often happens again. And if it breaks, it is no longer just a tear, or a perforation, but there is bleeding, pain, and this is well understood.
And if restoration is to be made, set the round things that are round back to their place until they are properly assembled; then put on the dressing and put on a round splint, if you have need of it, and strain it as it should be strained; then reward all the arrangements that we have said above in other cases, as in the case of an abscess or other similar things; and if you put in each mishap what it should have, as long as it is sane.
And if restoration is to be made, set the round things that are round back to their place until they are properly assembled; then put on the dressing and put on a round splint, if you have need of it, and strain it as it should be strained; then reward all the arrangements that we have said above in other cases, as in the case of an abscess or other similar things; and if you put in each mishap what it should have, as long as it is sane.
And if restoration is to be made, set the round things that are round back to their place until they are properly assembled; then put on the dressing and put on a round splint, if you have need of it, and strain it as it should be strained; then reward all the arrangements that we have said above in other cases, as in the case of an abscess or other similar things; and if you put in each mishap what it should have, as long as it is sane. Saiches that there are in the limb have two bones; one is called the "mustel" and the other is called the "foscile"; and there is every break as it comes to the arm, and because of this the restoration is just like that of the arm, and the work is all the same.
And if two bones are fractured together, the limb is twisted from every part.
And if a bone is fractured at its root, the limb is twisted forward
And if a large bone is fractured, if one feels great pain and sees it well fractured; then one must extend it, and set it even, and bind the fragments evenly; however, if the fracture is serious, and there are multiple pieces, it is better to extend slightly and more gently; and to adjust as you are able
And when you have completed your work, if you take four strips of cloth that cover the limb from one side to the other, and be as long as the limb from the hip to the foot; then wrap around with four layers of lint around and below, and bind firmly in the middle, and to this bandage will not allow the limb to bend to the right or to the left, and that is good; and no one will administer anything more long than the limb, and if there is swelling, and it has several pieces, it is better to extend slightly and more gently; and to adjust as you are able.
Of the fracture of bones in general.
At the ankle, there is no fracture; but in bones of marrow there is never a fracture, and two must suffice, and there is no other treatment except for numerous positions.
And if there is a fracture in bones of marrow, and you see these bones crushing one another, if you place the limb so that it would appear to be flying away, then put the limb on the ground, just as if it were falling, and then put the limb back in its place; then press until it returns to its original position; then put on the dressing and bandage, and put on a little stool under the belly of the limb, about an inch high, and strain the limb gradually, and when it has recovered, wrap it in bandages, and other things as you deem necessary
And when two or three days have passed, if the limb is still loose, because you will find the bones either broken or dislocated.
If there be any two breaks, if you restore them as we have said must be two-handed; then put at the break a splint according to the length of the break, and make it somewhat wider; then put on the thumb that I have mentioned, and strain immediately; and if there are three or more breaks, break them, and put on over each break a splint as per their quantity, wrapped in one layer of linen, and strain the thumb from the bone.
Remember also the other things that I have said about other breaks; and secure each accident as it should be secured.</start_of_turn>
of the fracture of the humerus bone.</start_of_turn>
When the bones of the nature of a woman are broken, if she sits enlarged, then lean her towards the back; and hold her there by behind. Then fill the belly of the nature with cotton, and put as much as a sto on it. Then pull out the woman, and keep her back and front; and immediately jump the cotton out, until it comes to the entrance of the nature, and bring back the bone with the sto; and when she sees her piss, if she has pulled out the cotton, and when she has pissed, she will recover, and make face for seven days or more: if the fracture is restored, and if you see her, take a bladder of berbis, and tie a string around her belly, and empty the bladder into the nature; then blow through the string until the bladder is emptied: the nature will return the fracture; then fill it with cotton, and leave it alone for a few days, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the arm of a man is broken, or of a woman, if you restore it as we have said concerning the thigh bone; and these fractures are not seen except by the one who puts his study and his work into it, and reads my book. For the fracture signifies in more ways the right way of restoration: then do so.</start_of_turn>
In the groin, when it is broken, take a goose beak and put it in the groin; then wrap it round with cloths, and leave it for two days or until it is healed.
Of sudden with wound
In case of sudden fracture with wound, even if it is great, as with the bones of the thigh or shoulder or similar, that it be immediately set in order, if what we have said is true concerning these symptoms.</start_of_turn>
And if the wound is clean, if the vitriol has been delayed, if you have nothing else, then resume the reduction in this way at the same hour, or at the least as soon as possible, for if it is delayed, it will not be cured.</start_of_turn
And if there is swelling of the wound, if the fracture is not reduced until the swelling has gone down, do not touch either the third or the fourth part, for you will cause further harm.</start_of_turn
If the bone breaks suddenly, it is found outside the socket as if it had been discovered, then you must hold your hands lightly at the point of the break.
If the limb extension does not appear to you in order to make them equal at your hands, if you have this instrument of iron which is about twelve or thirteen inches long, and the size is according to the quantity of the wound; and for this reason it is necessary at the mire that it grasps three or four inches, according to what is necessary in the wound of the fracture; and whether round or square, that it does not press too much on the limb at your work, and whether it is before or behind, and large in front, thus:
It is called "palainche" because it is necessary to place the curved limb over the apparent head of the bone; and once it is in place, it should be equal on both sides so that one meets the other. And if the fracture is slight and the instrument does not hold the bone well, if you press on the head of the bone, as long as the instrument has possession of it.
And if you cannot restore the bone, as we have said, if you are forced to apply an instrument that can cover this, such as a hook or saw, to your need; then remove that which remains embedded in the bone by scraping and removing the surrounding marrow.
When the bone is restored, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, the swelling that has occurred will not be in its natural position. If you do nothing, it will swell further; then moisten it with black vinegar and keep it covered; do not put any cerote or other dressing on the wound, as this will cause putrefaction and corruption; then administer stars [medicinal herbs] when the bone has been restored, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover the dressing thoroughly, according to the size of the wound, and take care that the wound is not strained with the fracture; for many times this has been done foolishly, and has caused death or damage on many occasions; or at least it has rendered the fracture more painful and prolonged than others.
If the wound is small or large, and you doubt that anything serious is wrong, as we have said, and you find pain in the limb; if you do not wish to put on stars [medicinal herbs], cover it thoroughly; but instead of stars, use firm bandages and tie them securely. And when you see afterwards that the swelling is diminishing, although there is still some pain, if you put on more stars than before, and if there is any ointment for wounds, such as ointment of tetrapharmacon and the like.
And it must be that you bind the limb three times a day, in the morning and in the evening, until it is healed and sound.
And it must be that the limb is kept in its place as much as possible, so that it can heal easily
If it is displaced again, and cannot be rejoined in its place, with slight fractures that there are small pieces of bone, because it must be thought that you wish to close the wound, and reunite all these fragments of bone that cause this pain.
If an abscess comes to the bone, or another way of corruption, if you must cure it, as it is said in this chapter above. And when the bone is broken, and is open on the limb, as the bone of the thigh or the shoulder, and other great bones, if you do not treat it, for many times it will come to death, but leave it until it has healed; for it will surely disappear by itself after twenty or thirty days, and then cure the wound if you wish; or leave it alone.
From the beard that comes out of the beard hair.
From the beard that comes out of the beard hair, we often see after the swelling of the wound, especially when it is near the joint, and it is helpful to see the figure of the limb; and by chance it cannot do its natural work
Therefore take care that you are aware: if you administer astringent medicines, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocoll, acacia, and similar others, that you take none of these things, or all together, and mix them with a stifling wine or with plenty of egg or with buttermilk; and put them on the wound, and strain it well, and do not remove it from the hand for days; and then dislocate it, and repeat this until the nodes are bony; or you strain on a well-made piece of sponge; for the property of sponge is that it will harden all the swellings under the limb; and if the node has already hardened as much as a stone, and it is necessary to break it, if the swelling above is great, and to make the apparent superfluity disappear; or do not remove it from any wound, as long as it is bony, and cure it when it is healed
When the bone is restored and the limb is weakened and limp, if there is any discomfort: sometimes this is because it was too tightly bound and was not properly loosed; or because there are too many bands, and it cannot regain its natural position; or because of many wounds; or because of too great a movement, not even in its hour; or because there is much blood in the body, if it is weak.
And the cure is to make the patient relax, and to make the limb firm, until the swelling is multiplied in him; and give him baths, and make him cheerful and comfortable; then put a poultice on the limb, so that the poultice attracts the great nourishment, and the wound often bleeds profusely, until the nourishment returns to the limb; and restore it to its natural position.
The limb is twisted after the blessing.
When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the bone is broken open, and the limb is deformed, although it does not lose its natural work: if one does not believe the fools who say that the limb must be broken anew, and many have done this in our land; this work is blamed, and great evils result, and by chance the patient; although if the nodulations and the torture are fresh, if you command that they be washed away with warm water, or with soft herbs be cooked, like leaves of chamomile, and roots, and meadowsweet, and similar things; and you make an application of a softening plaster, like good beeswax done, and you take the nourishment of chamomile, and confit with fat of gelly or oil of poppy seed, and apply the plaster again; or you take greasy figs, and grind them with dung of the colon, and similar medicines that appease the swelling.
And never is the bone loosened by continuous rubbing with wet hands. And either bring movement to the limb every hour.
If the dislocation is swollen and hardened, like a stone, and needs to be held by iron, if it is covered up to the bone, make an incision slightly deeper; and put padding and a bandage on the wound.
If the dislocation is swollen and hardened, like a stone, and needs to be held by iron, if it is covered up to the bone, make an incision slightly deeper; and put padding and a bandage on the wound.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation occurs without any apparent cause, if it is now necessary to restore its proper position.
When it is delayed, if the limb is swollen, and by chance it is reset, there are often points on the limb; for this reason one must not move it while it is swollen: many times this causes spasms and other pains.</start_of_turn>
However, when this has happened, if you make the patient comfortable, then leave him, until the swelling has subsided; then raise the limb high and with oil, and then gently restore it, and cure each limb as it comes into its place.</start_of_turn
And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations from the shoulder to the foot.</start_of_turn>
Des mandibules.
The jaws. For the jaws are loosened and the dislocation of both is frequent: either because they are fixed to the bone of their roots, and softened a little; or because they are loosened entirely, and hang towards the chin, and tear the saliva from the mouth that it cannot hold it, cannot close its mouth, and engulfs its tongue with the word.
When the dislocation is small, if it returns by itself several times.
And if it is complete and accompanied, if you must, restrain it immediately, and do not delay;
And in such manner that the minister grasps the head of the sufferer, and holds the gaze fixed downwards from one of his hands at the root of the dislocation of the mandible within the mouth, if the dislocation is three-quarters complete; and the other hand must be thrust out, to make them even; and command the patient to soften his mandibles and move them from all sides.
And the eye must be kept level, until it returns to its place.</start_of_turn>
And if it returns grasped, even if both mandibles are together, if they are swollen with hot water and oil, so that they are kept lightly; do not attempt to force it back, as we have said.</start_of_turn>
And when they are returned even, and the patient’s mouth is closed with a gentle touch, if you put on moist cloths in cerote made of rose oil and wax, then bind them lightly with thread.
And let the patient rest on their back, with their arms resting between two cushions, so that they do not move forward or backward, or to the side, without making an effort to move, but take hold of the meat firmly, until the pain is gone, and bind the jaw bones securely.</start_of_turn>
And then let them gently chew what they see lightly, and do not work too hard to open their mouth to eat or drink, until the jawbone is well bound and healed.</start_of_turn>
If the two jaw bones do not manage to return to their place at once, and are not firmly secured at their roots, if in comes fever and customary sickness, and by chance vomiting of pure bile.
When you see this, know that it is a loss; and many times death follows in eight days.</start_of_turn>
of the forceps.</start_of_turn>
The forceps cannot remove pain from the root of the tooth, and is valueless whenever it is applied with force, and it is well known.</start_of_turn
And if the patient lies recumbent with his back on the ground, extend his arms; then press gently at the shoulder joint, and it will return; then place the bandage and dressing on the shoulder, and hold it in place.
And the head of the shoulder, which is towards the chest, cannot be dislocated; if it does dislocate once, if he lets it go again, if he rests his arm, as we have said; then place the bandage and dressing on the shoulder, and hold it in place, and command the patient to rest until he is healed.
And in the same way, the dislocation of the shoulder is brought back to its place when the limb is freed from its place.
From the dislocation of the shoulder.
The shoulder is dislocated only by two means: firstly, that it comes out at the glenoid part; and secondly, at the head of the humerus; and sometimes at the root, and this is harmful.
Neither the back nor the front of the shoulder dislocates easily; and more often it comes out from below towards the glenoid part, even among those who have a lot of flesh; for among those who have little flesh, the dislocation comes out with force, and returns with force.
And sometimes there happen to be blows or fractures, and it swells the shoulder with a hot abscess, and one must take care that it is not dislocated by this.
It is necessary indeed. As long as you are sure; then commence the treatment.
And it is known that a dislocation is when it is tilted towards the shoulder blade, and it distinguishes between the diseased and healthy shoulder, and you will find between their difference the manifestation; and at the head of the shoulder there is a groove, and the shoulder blade touches the head of the shoulder, just as if it were a nail; and the patient cannot raise their arm to their side, or move in any way
and also, if it is displaced upwards, if it is not hidden inside, because you find it clearly on touching;
And this manner of dislocation is not useless to restore, when it is new, or when the limb is painful.
And the method is that the physician grasps the painful limb high up, then places the thumbs below the armpit, and grasps the joint forcefully high up; and the physician grasps the limb and stretches it high up, because it places it below; if it comes immediately.</start_of_turn>
And if it does not come as we have said above, if it is to be believed that the patient is to be bathed in warm water; and to administer soothing and softening medication, such as decoction of artemisia and fennel and honey in water, and to administer; </start_of_turn
Then either support the patient on his back, and put under the armpit a cushion of linen equal in size, not too soft nor too hard, and put the hand of the patient on the cushion, and keep the shoulder joint firmly, and treat the painful limb;
And another minister holds the patient’s head firmly in place, so that it does not move downwards; that space returns immediately, and if you see that it remains fixed in this way:
and that you make it present, that is to say, one that is greater than the patient; and that you keep your hand on the patient’s side, and hold the shoulder down from the patient’s buttock, and keep the buttock high, so that the patient hangs down from the head. and another minister grasps the patient’s hand downwards towards the belly. And if the patient is too light, if you put anything with him, the dislocation will return immediately.
And thus we also remember in another way: if the head of the shoulder is long and round like a nail driven into the earth, and the bone is neither too thick nor too thin; then it must be gently grasped by the patient, but with a soft drape over it, and the patient must be kept long and still; and the limb must be extended from the other side, and the joint will return to its place without harm.</start_of_turn>
and if all these things do not make it return, if you do this cure: take a nail of about three fingers’ breadth, which has a head to enter into the socket, in this form:  </start_of_turn>
Then lie upon the head of the shoulder, draped with a cloth, that it does not irritate the patient, and put from behind the patient’s back; extend your arms over the shoulder of the long kind, and support the limb on the shoulder, and the arm at the wrist, then put the arm over an inch of the scapula, and extend the hands forward, or leave the forearm hanging down from the other side: the shoulder joint is now restored.
And when it is restored, in whatever way, if you put from behind the patient’s back a thumb of wool even, then put the dressing loosely of powder of wheat, with incense and alum of egg, upon the whole shoulder and around, then strain from behind the base of the thumb immediately, and turn the limb upon the dressing, and embrace the hand at its collar, and let the hands hang down alongside.</start_of_turn>
And it is necessary that he move little, until the limb is comfortable, because it will heal better; and then move more after five or six days, and turn; and if it is firm and is not softened, if it is healed.</start_of_turn>
If the dislocation is urgent due to moisture, or for some other reason, if it is necessary to perform cautery, do so twice, if it is placed in front or alongside the cautery.
If you do all this, and the dislocation does not heal after twenty-three days, and the limb still cannot lift the upper arm, then know that the nerves at the head of the shoulder are compressed or stretched or softened; and that the dislocation will never heal in its place.</start_of_turn>
The dislocation that is from front to back, and the bones, or behind, if it is done by impulse, and extension of the arms, and if another bandage is administered; and it is cured as long as it is healthy.</start_of_turn
If after healing the limb grieves and becomes stiff, if the patient uses it repeatedly, many times, until the grief is gone and returns to its first state.
If after healing the limb grieves and becomes stiff, if the patient uses it repeatedly, many times, until the grief is gone and returns to its first state.
If after healing the limb grieves and becomes stiff, if the patient uses it repeatedly, many times, until the grief is gone and returns to its first state. If after healing the limb grieves and becomes stiff, if the patient uses it repeatedly, many times, until the grief is gone and returns to its first state
And you must ensure that you reset it immediately, even if it comes loose again after you have set it; for if it comes loose again while it is healing, it will cause further pain. And by chance it will not be possible to restore it at all, even if it is at the back; in such a case it is better to leave it as it is rather than to cause further dislocation, which is more painful and can also lead to death.
And if it can be restored, when it is possible to restore it, extend your hand with both hands; spread your arms and hands as wide as the ruler allows, from armpit to wrist, front and back, and stabilize the joint with your thumbs together or at the root of the bone until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, if it returns when you double your hand over your hand, and grasp from the root of the bone that is loosened.
And if it does not return to its place, administer great extension; and if two ministers extend the arm and hold it by two ministers, if it does not move during extension; then turn the arm from the shoulder joint, and cover it with a double-layered drape that is long and wide.
When you see that the arm has been dislocated from its socket, if it has not been oiled with any oil to soften the joint, then immediately restore the dislocation, until it returns to its place
When it is in its place, put on dry bandages with eggshells, and strain the arm, and keep the arm bent towards the painful side, and leave it for a while, then remove it.
And if the joint is firmly in its place, if you see that it does not hold firmly, repeat the manipulation of the limb and the support, and leave it thus for a few days, until it is firmly set; then you can remove the support.
If after the joint has been repositioned, there is pain, and it moves, bathe and massage it well, and press until the pain is gone; or put a poultice of mutton fat on the joint, then leave it in place for a day and a night, and then remove the poultice and make the limb move again. When it sweats, wipe the joint gently, then put the poultice back on, and then move or bathe; and do this several times until it is healed; and if you see that it returns to its place, put on a wet cloth soaked in urine and bind it up; if it returns to its normal position.
The dislocation of the hand
The dislocation of the hand is loosened, and its return is laborious, more than other joints in general; it must be immediately repositioned to its place, even if it is loosened, or if there is bleeding or swelling
And it must be that you place the painful hand on a table, and extend the limb, and look at it so that it is even, until it puts its palm on the surface of the joint, and holds it until it returns.
However, you must look to see if it is well in place; then put the painful side of the hand on a table when extending and repositioning it If the dislocation is at the back of the hand, place the patient's hand face down on the table, and hold their other hand on the appearance of the joint. If it returns to its place, it is well.
If not, if the strain of the muscles is relaxed after the incisions, let them remain in their natural position and slowly return to their starting point.</start_of_turn>
And if it cannot endure it, and you do not put it back in place after a few days, the dislocation will persist.</start_of_turn
and do not harm the patient in any way until the hands are relaxed, and do not attempt to extract anything: for if the nerves are cut or the vessels; except in cases where it is necessary to extract by cautery, which is of little value.
When the hand is at rest, if you place the thumb as we have said, then strain and hold it for five days, then release and leave it be.
If it does not move well and there is no pain, if there is warm liquid [fluid], and you rub it until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
... until the dislocation of the shoulder of the hand.</start_of_turn>
Never are the fingers of the hand dislocated at the front or at the back or the belly.
Therefore it must be known, and the dislocation must be held in your pouches until it returns to its place; then support the head of the shoulder, and guide it towards the part where it is joined.
Therefore it must be known, and the dislocation must be held in your pouches until it returns to its place; then support the head of the shoulder, and guide it towards the part where it is joined. And do not bind it, as we have said, and do not move it, and rejoin it; do this often, until it is almost healed.
And do the same thing if it is dislocated at the wrist, and do as you have done before, until it is healed; and do the same thing if it is dislocated from another part.
From the loosening of the shoulder bone from the back.
When the shoulder bone of the back or the neck is loosened, or there are several loosenings, if no remedy is found, for the patient dies quickly.</start_of_turn>
And the sign is that the blood spurting out backwards is unable to be retained, and often makes the limb limp, or the thigh or arm or foot limp.</start_of_turn
And often the shoulder dislocates in three parts; that which dislocates at the back is called "gilbosite."
The wound is cured if the swelling arises in childhood: if no remedy or healing follows.
That which comes from wounds or percussion or other similar things, they say was formerly cured by great words, but it brings no great benefit;
but I have abridged it according to my intention, and I have formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the swelling that comes before, there is no remedy or healing of any kind;
And thus, as it happens suddenly in this cost, and one cannot cure the fire but what comes from behind, as I have said.
And thus, as it happens suddenly in this cost, and one cannot cure the fire but what comes from behind, as I have said. And let the patient be stretched out on his face in one league equal, and have restraint from him, that he does not move;
then hold the head of the shoulder in the earth firmly, and the other has a piece, and tie a loop around the patient’s ankles, and another has haunches, and has knees, and has ankles;
and two assistants know the ropes, one at the head and the other has a piece, among the four cushions;
And let them be well closed, as we have said, and look that he rests his palms on the spine, until it returns.
And if it does not return by this cure, take a thumb and two fingers of length, and clamp them at the waist, and let the patient lie on his side, and hold the head of the thumb at the waist, then put the middle of the thumb on the spine; put his eyes on the other head of the thumb, and press well, until it returns to its place; and if you see, if it is at the wrist that is turning at the hand.
And take three thumbs at the patient’s shoulder of a great arm, and put between each thumb, some gauze and some silk, a palm of space of length;
And each cushion has one hole, or the nail runs through, and let the cushions be firmly fixed in the earth, if they do not move; and between each two cushions there is one cushion returning, so that the thread returns, and there are in two returns two small cushions of a palm’s length, to bring back the nail.
Then let the loop which is between the nails at the nailhead towards the head, and the other loop towards the pieces at the other nail, and the cushions hold their nail steady, and the master puts the thorn even as we have said.
And when it is even, put on a dry dressing with abundance of eggs, and then press, and then support with a tablet of two palms’ length, that the marrow of the bone and the part of the spinal cord be broken, and then bind with a loop, as we have said, and use the patient’s natural support, as long as he is sane;
And if nothing comes to pass at the end of the treatment, if it is necessary to administer soothing and calming medicines, with the exception that we have mentioned before; and never give a dose of lead.
And never let the appearance of a swelling on the back of the shoulder be mistaken for a dislocation; for it is the bone that breaks, from which we must not presume: for in this case death may come about.
dislocations of the hip joint.
The joints of the hip and the shoulder only dislocate; it does not happen with other joints; and the hip joint is damaged in three parts: front and back, and top and bottom; the more it is damaged from front to back, and the more it is damaged from top to bottom.
And thus is known of a dislocation when, after uniting the affected limb with the sinew, the patient’s knee becomes longer and more painful than before; and he cannot double his knee over a fire. And it is known that a dislocation is often caused by excessive swelling of the abscess, for the head of the humerus comes loose from its socket.</start_of_turn>
And the sign of such an accident is that it is contrary to the preceding ones.</start_of_turn>
And the sign of this is that the limb is well placed in accordance with its completeness; however, do not double the knee excessively, for if you see that it is painful, do not attempt it at once, and retain your urine, and swell the limb, and when he walks, let it pass over the heel.
And the sign of that one who has behind him, if he cannot expand his knee, cannot double, and is the leg more short than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the thigh is displaced from its socket.
If this semblance of dislocation persists, if it is an old dislocation and does not spontaneously regress, and there is no remedy; I do not know that there is any other remedy except for presumption.
And in this case where the dislocation is fresh, and there are three ways of dislocation, if you are hasty in returning the joint, and stretching it inwards and outwards, and moving it to the right and left; by chance it will return, and there will be no need for any other remedy.
If it does not return in this manner, if you must, appear with force, and hold the limb firmly with two hands, or with one hand as you please; If another minister extends his hand below in part as he holds his hands below his buttocks, then he should bind it with a thread above the hip; and another holds the head of the limb.</start_of_turn>
He extends upwards and downwards all at once, until the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains suspended.</start_of_turn>
This method of extension is common in three instances, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is well.</start_of_turn>
If not, if it is possible, to put the cure in its semblance. When the dislocation is outside the shoulder, if it is possible, to place the patient over his chest, then put the limb over the root of the scapula, and the limb that is below the angle, then extend the limb upwards towards the angle, and towards the forcele.
Then grasp another assistant by the arms, and embrace the great limb of the painful scapula, and extend it towards the outside: if it returns to its place now; and this method of dislocation is easier than the others.</start_of_turn>
And if you do not succeed in holding it in this manner as we have said, if it is possible, to bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong thread above the two toes, and above the two knees, and let the affected limb be extended two fingers more than the others.</start_of_turn
Then either suspend the arm above the head, or rest it on the ground at arm's length; then instruct the minister to grasp the shoulder-blade, and let another minister hang alongside the patient, who graspes the shoulder-blade, for now the joint returns naturally.
When the dislocation has been overcome, if the patient still suffers, as we have said in the case of dislocation with moisture, and if the limb is still stiff on the affected side, and on the heel also;
Then put on two cushions, one at the shoulder and the other at the heel, and grasp one cushion between the shoulder-blades alongside the patient so that it forms a circle; And he spread moist towels around him, so that he did not see the patient, then he stretched out his hands and held the dislocation in his hand.
If it comes back, that is good. But if not, put on the table and press on it as we have said in the swelling, and keep the patient on the cost side.</start_of_turn>
And when the dislocation is before, if you must, stretch out the affected limb as much as possible, as I have said; and put the eyes on the painful part; then press with the other hand, and extend downwards towards the groin.</start_of_turn
And if the dislocation is urgent, if it is not possible to extend the patient, do not lift up from the earth, but rather that he remain as if he had fallen from a height; as we have said previously about the elbows which have been dislocated. Or be it on his face, and the limb is stretched as we have said before, and one must press upon the joint at the table;
And will be at that point when the patient extends his leg, and they will be even; then join the buttocks, put on the support, and strain with a bandage, so that the elbow does not move;
And if it rests for two or three days, then loosen it and place the support there; and if you see that they are even, if strained as before, leave it. For two days; then loosen it and make it move gently until the limb is comfortable.
And if it rests for two or three days, then loosen it and place the support there; and if you see that they are even, if strained as before, leave it. For two days; then loosen it and make it move gently until the limb is comfortable.
The shoulder joint is dislocated in two ways: forward and backward; and do not strain it forward.
And the sign is that if you instruct the patient to bend their limb at the knee, and it does not reach their buttock, discharge the urine that is retained.
And restore them all if you make the patient sit upright, and extend their limb if they can, and put your hand on their face, and put their heel on your knees;
Then take their heel into your palms, and pull between your thumbs, then bend their hip bones inwards; and another minister extends their heel as long as the hip joint returns to its place, and the sign is that they have properly bent their limb at their knee.
And place the bandage on it, and make the limb rest on the buttock, and bind them together firmly for two or three days, then take it off. And do not worry about the patient any longer, as long as the limb is comfortable.
And if the limb is not at all [dislocated], if an extension is administered strongly, as we have said in the treatment of the hernia, until it is healed.
Until it is healed.
Never is the dislocation fully suspected or fully relieved, always exists and often breaks free.
And the sign is that the limb is escaping, and attempts beforehand in the part where it is loosened:
When the dislocation is slight, and can be easily extended with the hands, it must be gently released from its suspension when only slightly pulled.
And when it is loosened all at once, if you wish, make the patient sit upright, and hold him, that is, support him firmly by the limb under the ankle;
then take hold of the limb at your right hand, and then at the left hand. Once, twice. Then extend the limb upwards, and keep it well stretched out;
and do this twice as we have said, pulling and stretching the limb; if it returns, that is good; if not, repeat the procedure, for it will return.
If it cannot return to its place, if you make the patient sit on his backside on the ground, and put one foot firmly on the ground between his thighs, and put a blanket over him, so that he does not move the patient.
Then hold the limb firmly with one hand, and another assistant should extend the limb at his hands or by the collar of the garment that is on his neck; Then extend the limbs of the assistants equally, and hold them either between the patient’s thighs to hold the patient when we extend him.
Then he puts the eye equal to the dislocation at his hands, and another minister holds the limb steady at the shoulder, and the dislocation will return immediately.
And when it comes to a halt, if he puts on the dressing and stamps on it, and pulls on the limb, and ties the knot at the ankle, and guards the nerves that are above the heel, so that they are not too tight;
Then he leaves it for one or two days, and if the swelling subsides, he unties the knot at the third joint or at the fourth, and asks the patient to walk for three days. and if he goes before this finish, it is not my sure that he does not damage it again.
If it comes after incision, if you must know, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
If it comes after incision, if you must know, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
And if the dislocation is in no other place than at the back of the limb, if you must know, that you must make the patient sit up straight on a bed or table, and put your hand on what is open of these joints, and then press your hand forward until it returns;
And when they are even, and nothing is open, if you put on the plant of rue over a table at a quarter past nine, then the swelling forms, and you leave it for two days, and then you take it off; and you rest it until it is healed.
And when they are even, and nothing is open, if you put on the plant of rue over a table at a quarter past nine, then the swelling forms, and you leave it for two days, and then you take it off; and you rest it until it is healed.
And when they are even, and nothing is open, if you put on the plant of rue over a table at a quarter past nine, then the swelling forms, and you leave it for two days, and then you take it off; and you rest it until it is healed.
If you are not humble in your cure, and if you are not skilled in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and timely, do not dare;
If you are not humble in your cure, and if you are not skilled in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and timely, do not dare; use calming measures at the outset and leave the patient in the hands of God, if you do not see hope of salvation.</start_of_turn> And when you see hope, if you now reset the limb, even if the abscess remains;
When the limb is at rest, if necessary, administer calming things around the wound, and cure the wound if possible, with dried sponges.
When the dislocation breaks bones and soft tissue, if the bones are loose, do as in ordinary ailments;.</start_of_turn>
Beware of entering into fear, as I have said, for this is harmful to you both physically and spiritually, as it brings God’s wrath upon you and endangers your body and soul. Amen.</start_of_turn>
