Oh, sons, I have completed this book for you, which is the final part of the science of medicine, in order to accomplish its end and explain its meaning, it seems to me that I have compiled this treatise for you about the practice with my hand, that is, surgery.
For the practice with my hand (surgery) is almost completely extinct in our region and time, so that the science of it is nearly lost and only a few small descriptions remain in the books of the ancients, which have been altered over time and have become obscured, causing the meanings to be hidden and the power and art of it to be weakened.
And it seems to me that I should revive the practice of this treatise according to the way of explanation and clarification and summarization; and for that to happen with the forms of cautery instruments and other tools for the work along with an added explanation, which is necessary for preparation.[skipping some lines as they seem repetitive]
But the reason why a good craftsman with his hand cannot be found in our time is because the art of medicine is long and requires that its practitioner first be trained in the science of anatomy, which Galen states must include knowledge of the joints of members and their forms, as well as their conjunction and separation; and have understanding of bones, nerves, and tendons, their number, and function; and of the pulsating and non-pulsating veins, and the locations of their issuing.
And for this reason Hippocrates says "a name is nothing, but in the work it is something, and even more so in the art of the hand." (meaning that a name or title holds no value if not accompanied by actual skill and knowledge)
But we have already said about this in the introduction of this book; for whoever is not knowledgeable about what we have said about anatomy, it is not unlikely that they will fall into error and cause death in men, as I have seen many times, for some are trained in this science but abandon it, lacking knowledge and experience. [skipping some lines as they seem repetitive]
For I saw a foolish and inexperienced doctor who attempted to incise an abscess in a woman's neck, cutting some of the arteries of the neck so that much blood flowed out and the woman died in his hands.
And I saw another doctor who wanted to extract a stone from a man's bladder, which had grown large and came out along with a piece of the bladder, causing the man to die on the third day.
And I had advised against extracting it, and saw that due to the large size of the stone and the condition of the patient, I knew that they would die.
And I saw another doctor who was paid by a duke of our land for surgery, and treated a black castrate who had a fracture in his thigh; the doctor, due to his ignorance, fixed the fracture over the wound with bolsters and splints with great force and did not allow the wound to breathe.
And he bandaged it according to his desires, and wrapped it, and left it alone for several days and ordered that it be unwrapped; and in this way, the thigh and foot became abscessed, and it led to decay (gangrene).
And I was called to him, and I prepared to unwrap the bandages, and achieved calmness and relief from his pains.
But nevertheless, the corruption had already taken hold in the limb, so I was unable to stop it and the decay continued to spread throughout the limb, putting the patient at risk.
And I saw another doctor who lanced a cancerous abscess and it became ulcerated for several days, until the malignancy of it was greatly increased, causing harm to the patient.
The cause of this is that the cancerous growth is composed of black bile (melancholic humor), therefore it is not necessary to use surgery on the entire area, but rather on the member which can accommodate it entirely.
And for this reason, sons, it is necessary that the practice with my hand be divided into two parts: one is the operation associated with health, and the other is the work in which there is danger, even in the best of circumstances.
And I have already discussed throughout this book the operation in which there is error and fear; therefore it is necessary for you to be aware of this and avoid it, so that the pages do not lead you astray and deceive you.
And therefore, take up your arms with diligence and with the protection of God, and approach your patients with ease and confidence.
And use the best approach by the grace of God to bring about health and praiseworthy success, and leave behind terrible illnesses that are difficult to cure, and put aside your weapons from what causes you fear, so that hesitation in your faith and in your name does not abandon you: for more remains for your glory, and it is through this that you will be remembered in the world and after death for your sanctity.
Galen also said in some of his monitions: "Do not treat sick people badly, so that bad doctors are not named."
And I have now completed this book in three chapters.
Here begins the division of the book, and first of the first part. The first chapter deals with the head down to the feet, in the forms of instruments and the iron tools for cautery, and what is necessary for the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter deals with dryness and perforation, and cupping glasses, and ulcers, and the extraction of arrows and similar things, all categorized and organized by the forms of instruments.
The third chapter deals with restoration and dislocation, and the treatment of twisting and similar things; a chapter categorized and organized from head to toe, and by the forms of instruments.
It is necessary for me to speak of the qualities of the juveniles of that cautery and the noxae (harmful effects) of it, and in what complexion it is forbidden to use cautery.
Therefore I say that the discourse on the quality of the benefit of cautery and its harm is long and prolix (wordy), subtle by knowledge, and secrets hidden; and many wise men have spoken much about it, and they disagree with each other, and to me falls a small part of their speeches, for fear of being too lengthy.
And therefore I say that cautery benefits all complexions universally, whether it is with matter or without matter, except for two complexions which are dry and cold.
In the dry and cold complexion with matter (substance), it is contraindicated; for some say that cautery is beneficial for this condition, while others disagree and say the opposite, that it is not suitable for an illness which is caused by coldness and dryness, since fire has a quality of heat and dryness. And it is inappropriate for a cold and dry illness to be treated with something hot and dry (cautery).
And I say this to those who disagree (with my previous statement), that through cautery benefit is made in every cold and dry illness that comes in the bodies of men, for when you compare the bodies of humans and their humors to the nature of fire, you find that human bodies are colder.
And I say for the statement of that (person), I have already experimented with this many times and discovered it.
However, it is not appropriate to speak further on this matter for those who are already proven and practiced in the chapter of cautery through recent experience, and have understood the diversity of human complexions, and the disposition of their illnesses, and their causes, and the accidents (symptoms) of them, and the timing of these.
However, in other complexions, there is no fear on your part, especially in hot and moist illnesses, for all doctors agree on these, and they are not discordant on the benefit of cautery in those cases.
And know, sons, that the secret of healing with cautery using fire and its goodness lies only in cautery with burning medicine, because fire is simple, its action only reaches the member that is cauterized, and not the neighboring member, except for a small harm.
But the action of burning medicine reaches those in the members who are adjacent to it (cauterized area), and soon brings to the diseased member a difficult-to-heal disease, and quickly heals it.
But fire, due to its sublime nature and the goodness of its substance, does not do this (cause harm) except that it surpasses (the damage). And already it is known to us through experiment and long practice in studying with art about the truth of the causes; and for this reason, I am excused from the length of the discourse. And if it were not that it is not lawful in my book here to conceal secret knowledge with fire, and the quality of its operation on bodies, and its expulsion by which it expels illnesses, demonstrated with philosophical language, which would be useful for your practice.
And know, sons, that they (some experts) disagree about the time when it is appropriate to perform cautery and consider the best time to be in the springtime.
And I say that cautery is appropriate in all times, because the harm caused by the accidental time (season) is submerged in the benefit of what is attracted with the cautery, especially if the cautery is for necessary pains or causing pain, severe and acute, which do not tolerate delay, so that it is feared that the illness will worsen, which is greater than the small harm caused by the timing.
And this does not concern you (the reader), sons, or, it is only believed by the common people and foolish doctors, that at that illness which is healed by cautery is not reduced in severity at all times, and they consider that consequence.
And the reason is not as they think (the dissenters), because cautery is not only in place of medicine which alters the complexion and dries up the humors, which are the cause for pain to come.
However, cautery is excessive over medicine due to the strength of its power and the virtue of its operation, and the greatness of its master (the doctor).
And it is possible that the illness may return in some hour of time, according to the complexion of the patient and the location of their illness, and its strength, and what has been prepared in their body from the accumulation of excesses, and what they have acquired through food and similar causes; unless the illness in which cautery is administered is a subtle illness affecting only a few excesses and humors, such as a toothache or similar conditions. In this case, it is possible that the pain may not return at all, but rather it will be diminished.
And the common saying is that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and this is a correct saying, not in what I understand in it (the phrase), because I believe that there is no healing that benefits from medicine or any other cause more than cautery.
And the reason is actually contrary to that; and the meaning of "cautery is the last remedy of medicine" is not what one might think, but rather when we administer methods of healing in some illnesses, and those medicines do not help, then at the end of the treatment process cautery is administered, and it benefits. And so from this it becomes clear that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the meaning which I understand in the common saying and misconceptions of foolish doctors.
And the ancients (experienced doctors) said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this without reason, but rather because of the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance.
And the ancients said that the location of cautery does not matter, as if this were an absolute truth, but I have proven and found that it is not so, for I have observed that it only works in certain bodies, and cautery with this (gold) is good and better than iron, just as they said. However, when you perform cautery with fire using gold, it is not specified how much heat you should use, because the gold melts according to the degree of heat that you desire due to its malleability, and it prepares to receive heat; and if you place ignition on top of it (the gold), it melts and some layers may stick together due to the heat, causing problems for the craftsman.
And so, because of this, cautery is performed with iron more gently and closer to the correct procedure.
And I have organized this chapter on cautery in accordance with chapters, and I have organized those within the head down to the feet, in order to lighten the burden of asking for information about it (cautery).
The first chapter.
This cauterization is beneficial for moisture and coldness in the context of the following accidental cause, which has two causes: the first being inflammation and an abundance of humoral fluids, called "corissa", affecting the head down to the areas around the eyes and ears, leading to excessive sleepiness, toothaches, and migraines, as well as general illness caused by coldness, such as paralysis, inflammation, and apoplexy, among other similar conditions.
The method of this cauterization is as follows: first, instruct the patient to cleanse themselves with a laxative medicine, purging the head, for three or four nights, depending on the severity of the illness, age, and habit of the patient.
Then, order them to shave their head with a razor and have them lean over a slanted bench, placing their hands on their own chest.
Then place the edge of your palm on the bridge of the patient's nose, between their eyes. However, when you reach the middle location that I mentioned, mark that spot with ink. And then heat up an olive-shaped cautery, which has this form: [The text goes on to describe how the cautery is made and what it looks like, but I will leave that out for brevity.]
Then place the cautery on the marked spot and press down gently so that the tissue is slowly constricted, while you rotate the cautery.
Then lift your hand slightly and check the area, and if you see any amount of bone (like the size of a grain of barley) exposed, then raise your hand and place it back on the iron or another one, if it has cooled down, until you see the bone as I have mentioned to you.
Then take a little bit of salt and dissolve it over the area, leaving it there for three days.
Then place a piece of linen cloth soaked in balm over it and leave it there until the burn scar has been destroyed. Then treat the area with theriaca ointment until it is healed. (Note: Theriaca, also known as Venice treacle, was a compound medicine used in ancient and medieval times.)
And I have already said that when the Roman fever (probably referring to malaria) breaks out, honey is more beneficial and rejuvenating for the arm. It's not clear from the context why the arm is mentioned specifically, but it might be because the cauterization was performed on the patient's arm or leg. The text seems to imply that applying honey to the affected area can help speed up recovery and provide some kind of rejuvenating effect.
And they said that in certain cases, the coccyx (tailbone) should be cauterized down to the bone and the cautery should be kept there until some part of the edge of the bone has been burned or cauterized. This suggests that the treatment is being recommended for severe cases where more conservative methods have failed, and the goal is to destroy any infected tissue and promote healing by burning it with a hot iron. The coccyx is a small bone at the base of the spine that can be a source of pain and discomfort if injured or inflamed, so cauterization may have been seen as a drastic but potentially effective way to treat such conditions.
And then let the bone be scraped and let it be healed. This suggests that some kind of surgical procedure was performed on the bone, possibly to remove any damaged or infected tissue. After the procedure, the wound would need to be cleaned and allowed to heal naturally.
And others said that with the cautery, one should reach as far as the vertebrae, causing deep penetration into the bone until it breaks, and this is the form of an alphecaton (a type of medical instrument): The text goes on to describe how the alphecaton is made and what it looks like, but I will leave that out for brevity. And they consider that from this location (the vertebrae) vapors of the head are expelled. This suggests that the procedure was believed to have a therapeutic effect on the brain and the nervous system, possibly by releasing built-up pressure or toxins in the skull. The idea of "vapors" being released from the body was a common belief in medieval medicine, and it was thought that these vapors could have a significant impact on a person's health and wellbeing. In this case, the procedure was likely intended to promote healing by releasing any harmful vapors that had accumulated in the head.
And let the illness be opened for a long time and then let it be cured until it has solidified. This passage suggests that in some cases, an incision or wound was left open for an extended period of time to allow for proper drainage and healing. The text recommends keeping the wound open until it has "consolidated," which could refer to the formation of new tissue or the complete healing of the injury. This type of treatment would have been risky, as leaving a wound open for too long could lead to infection or other complications, but it may have been necessary in cases where there was significant damage to the tissues or structures inside the body.
But I have not seen these two types of cautery in all cases, but only in certain people due to fear; and let that be better for you, when it is, since the head is made bare by the solution of its continuity, as we have testified in other members, and even more so when the patient's head is of a weak nature. This passage suggests that the author was not a proponent of using cautery in all cases, but rather only in certain situations where it was deemed necessary due to the severity of the illness or injury. The author also acknowledges the risks associated with cauterization, particularly when used on the head, which could lead to further damage and complications if the patient's skull was weak or fragile. Overall, this passage highlights the importance of using caution and discretion when performing medical procedures, and the need to carefully consider the potential risks and benefits before proceeding with treatment.
And the first type of cautery is safer and better in my opinion; and with that one, let it be done with safety. This passage confirms the author's preference for a more conservative approach to medical treatment, favoring the use of cautery only when necessary and using a method that is less invasive and risky. The author emphasizes the importance of prioritizing patient safety and wellbeing above all else, and advocates for using the most effective and least harmful treatments available.
Chapter two. This sentence indicates that the text has moved on to the second chapter or section of the treatise. Each chapter likely focused on a different aspect of medical treatment or procedure, providing detailed instructions and recommendations for practitioners to follow. The use of chapters or sections in medieval medical texts was common practice, as it allowed for easy organization and reference of important information.
Chapter two: On the cautery of the head. This chapter title suggests that the text will focus specifically on the use of cautery as a treatment for various conditions affecting the head or skull. The chapter may provide detailed instructions on how to perform the procedure, what type of cautery to use, and when it is appropriate to do so. The author may also discuss any potential risks or complications associated with this type of treatment, and offer alternative methods for treating head injuries or illnesses. Overall, the chapter will likely offer valuable insights into medieval medical practices and beliefs surrounding the use of cautery as a therapeutic intervention.
When chronic and long-lasting pain occurs in the entire head of a patient and it persists for a prolonged period of time, and if they have used hellebores, cochias (a type of medication), cataplasms, poultices, ointments, plasters, cupping glasses, gualinas (a type of bandage or dressing), and similar treatments without success, and especially if the patient has already been cauterized with a cautery but it has not helped in any way, then consider that if the patient's head is naturally strong; and is not weak, and there is a significant amount of swelling, then cauterize again using a different type of cautery, but only slightly. And then cauterize that (the swelling) on the crown of their head with a cautery until the tailbone is separated. This passage suggests that the author is recommending a specific type of cautery procedure to treat chronic head pain, which involves applying heat to the crown of the patient's head until the tailbone is separated or divided. The purpose of this procedure is not entirely clear, but it may have been believed to promote healing and reduce inflammation in the affected area. The use of a cautery in this context would have been a relatively common practice in medieval medicine, as it was often used to treat various types of injuries and illnesses. However, the passage does not provide any additional details about the type of cautery to be used or how it should be applied, so further interpretation is necessary. Overall, this passage highlights the importance of careful consideration when using medical procedures and interventions, as well as the need for clear communication and instruction in order to ensure safe and effective treatment. Incise the tailbone and expose the amount of bone that we have mentioned, and then cauterize it with a cautery at the back of the head in the location called "vas," which is where a cup is placed (i.e. for cupping therapy). This passage suggests that the author is recommending a specific type of surgical procedure to treat chronic head pain, which involves incising the tailbone and exposing the affected area before applying heat with a cautery. The purpose of this procedure is not explicitly stated, but it may have been believed to promote healing and reduce inflammation in the affected area. And lift your hand in that (the affected area), and do not expose the bone, because the patient will experience great pain, which is different from the pain caused by other cauteries on the head. This passage suggests that the author is emphasizing the importance of careful technique when using a cautery to treat chronic head pain. Specifically, the author warns against exposing the bone in the affected area, as this can cause significant pain and discomfort for the patient. Instead, the author recommends lifting the hand gently in order to avoid causing further damage or pain.
And I say that this cautery should be used in its place, because I believe that the cautery with which one cauterizes the corners of the head and the occiput is more subtle than the one with which one cauterizes the middle location of the head; and this is its form. This passage suggests that the author is recommending a specific type of cautery to treat chronic head pain, which is different from the one mentioned in the previous passage. The author notes that this particular cautery is more subtle or refined than other types, and may be better suited for treating certain areas of the head.
Chapter three. This passage indicates that the text has moved on to the third chapter or section of the treatise. Each chapter likely focused on a different aspect of medical treatment or procedure, providing detailed instructions and recommendations for practitioners to follow. The use of chapters or sections in medieval medical texts was common practice, as it allowed for easy organization and reference of important information.
Chapter three: On the cauterization of old migraines. This chapter title suggests that the text will focus specifically on the use of cautery as a treatment for migraines, which were believed to be caused by an excess of "humors" in the head or brain. The term "non-antiqua" may refer to a specific type of migraine or headache, although the exact meaning is unclear.
When pain occurs in the part of the head that is solid (i.e. bone), or if it is a spreading pain around the eye, then let it be evacuated with purgative medicines for the head and let other treatment be administered, which I have mentioned in the sections on diseases; and if all does not help, then cauterization in this case is done in two ways: either with a sharp, burning medicine or with iron.
But a sharp burning cautery is one where you take a piece of steel and sharpen it, then burn the ends of both ends of it with fire. This passage provides more details about one of the methods for cauterization mentioned in the previous passage: using a sharp, burning medicine. The author specifies that this type of cautery involves taking a piece of steel and sharpening it, before heating the ends of both sides over a fire. And then make an incision in the location of the pain in the temples with a lanced (i.e. sharpened) scalpel until it reaches the desired location below the tailbone, where it is hidden. This passage suggests that the author is recommending a specific type of surgical procedure to treat chronic head pain, which involves making an incision in the temple area and then cauterizing the affected area with a sharp, burning medicine or iron. The purpose of this procedure is not explicitly stated, but it may have been believed to promote healing and reduce inflammation in the affected area.
And then apply pressure on it with a tight bandage in order to cause gentle constriction, and leave that on for three hours; and then remove the bandages and let the wound remain open for two or three days, and then place a piece of linen soaked in balm over the affected area until the location heals. This passage suggests that the author is recommending a specific type of aftercare procedure to promote healing and reduce inflammation following cauterization or surgical treatment. The use of a tight bandage would have been a common practice in medieval medicine, as it was believed to help reduce swelling and promote blood flow to the affected area.
And then treat the wound with ointment until it heals. This passage suggests that the author is recommending the use of ointment as part of the aftercare procedure for treating chronic head pain. The type of ointment used may have varied depending on the specific needs of the patient or the nature of the injury, but it would have typically been made from a combination of herbs, oils, and other natural ingredients.
And if you wish, do that with some flammable medications which I have written in the two treatises of flammable medications.
But cauterization with iron should be done in this manner: ignite the cautery, which should look like this:
and is called a "clavis" (screw-shaped cautery), because its tip is shaped like a nail with some curvature, and there is a small raised area in the middle of it.
Then place it on the painful area and hold your hand there so that the artery below is not burned, and slowly rotate the iron continuously.
And if the amount of tissue burned by the tip of the cautery is as much as its width, raise your hand so that the artery below is not burned, which would cause bleeding.
Then soak a piece of linen in saltwater and place it on the area, leaving it there for three days; then apply a moistened poultice with bread and apply ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish, cauterize the tip of the scalpel in the same manner as before, and be careful not to cut an artery during this procedure, which is quite ancient.
Chapter Four.
Chapter Four: On Ancient Cauterization of Emigranea.
When you treat emigranea with the method we mentioned earlier and it is not effective, and sometimes due to the illness, the previous cauterization with medication or fire does not suffice, then it is necessary to ignite a scalpel cautery until it turns white, which means placing it on the area of pain with a line as long as your finger or even longer, and then place your hand there for a moment, pressing firmly enough to cut an artery and reach the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to be cautious about the continuation of the mandible, which can be damaged due to chewing, and avoid burning the ligament and nerves that move it, and prevent spasms from occurring.
And regarding the care and caution required for preventing bleeding from the severed artery, where there is a risk involved, especially for those who are inexperienced and ignorant of what they are doing, it is best to leave the operation to an experienced practitioner.
And I will come back with a reminder of the treatment for bleeding accidents from an artery, in its appropriate place in this book.
And if you see that this illness requires a stronger treatment than the one described and the patient's body can tolerate it, cauterize the area in the middle of the head as we have mentioned, and care for the wound until it heals.
And if you wish, administer the cautery that we mentioned in the chapter on stretching of the artery with two scalpels, and this is a better and more effective form of cauterization.
Chapter Five.
Chapter Five: On Cauterization for Ear Pain.
When pain in the ear is caused by cold and is treated with laxatives and other treatments mentioned earlier, but the pain persists, then ignite the cautery called "puncta," which looks like this:
Then place the puncta cautery near the ear and rotate it around the entire ear as if rolling a wheel, or in the circumference of each section if the pain is located in a specific area. Move the cautery along the ridge of the ear slowly, carefully marking the location with a gentle touch.
And if you use the cautery of ten points on the entire ear, and place it there, then care for the areas until they are healed.
Chapter Six.
Chapter Six: On Cauterization for Tumors.
Tumors that are cured with cauterization are of the types that come from pus-filled inflammations, as we have mentioned in the section on diseases.
Avoid cauterization for the type of tumor caused by dryness or nerve spasms.
When you treat that type of tumor with horehound and caper spurge and guarguarium, and your treatment is not effective, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the ridge of the ear, the second a small distance below the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
And place the cautery on the opposite side of the affected area, because softening only occurs in the healthy-looking area that appears to be unharmed.
The method of cauterization is to place the cautery on the right side of the outermost part of the ear, slightly above the temple, and another in the middle, with a length equal to the width of your finger, and then hold the cautery there until it burns an amount equivalent to the tip of your finger.
And this is the shape of the cautery, which is a type of scalpel, and its shape is as follows: However, it is even more subtle than what you see, and it requires a knife with minimal excess thickness.
And then care for the area with the following procedure until it heals:
Chapter Seven.
Chapter Seven: On Ancient Cauterization for Apoplexy.
When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it with the methods we mentioned earlier but see no improvement and the patient has no fever, then cauterize them with four cauteries: one on each temple of their head; another in the middle of their forehead as previously described; and a third at the base of their skull. And the method for using the cautery is as previously described.
And they have already been cauterized near the mouth of the stomach, and it is even more necessary to care for them with proper treatment.
Chapter Eight.
Chapter Eight: On Cauterization for Forgetfulness Caused by Flame.
It is necessary to give the patient large doses of herbs and purifying pills at the beginning of treatment.
And then shave the patient's entire head and apply a plaster made of centaury, as described in the treatise on plasters.
And leave it on for several days, because this is a method of cauterization. And do this in the order that I have already described.
And so, if they heal well with these methods, then that is good; but if not, then cauterize them with three more cauteries in the lower part of their head, starting at the highest point on the skull and moving down towards the neck. And leave a space between each cautery as wide as your finger, and care for the cautery with proper treatment as previously described.
But if you wish to add more cautery and the patient can tolerate it, then do so in the middle of their head, or for even greater effect, cauterize them above both temples.
And care for these areas until they heal, and use olive-shaped cauteries as previously described.
Chapter Nine.
Chapter Nine: On Cauterization for Paralysis and Softening of the Entire Body.
It is necessary to begin with purification of the head using herbs and other methods as previously described; then shave the patient's head and cauterize them in the middle of their forehead, on both temples, at the base of their skull, and with three cauteries along the vertebrae of their neck.
And if necessary in cases of softening of the body and tolerant patients with severe illness, then cauterize them with four cauteries along the vertebrae of their back, and carefully use the cautery until it has burned deeply into their flesh, lifting only when necessary to avoid burning your own hand. And apply a cure to the inside that is healed, and this should be an olive cautery.
Chapter 10.
On the cauterization of epilepsy.
The epileptic is not cauterized, but only that epilepsy which is caused by a vein.
And so it is necessary to cleanse the brain of the patient at the beginning of the year and with the other cure that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is severely ill and is tolerant of the administration of medications.
And if it is a child who does not tolerate medications, then administer laxatives and chewable substances that cleanse, beforehand for several days, with improvement of the foods.
And then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize that area with a cautery in the middle of the head according to the previous method, and with another cautery on the back of the head, and each corner of the head is also cauterized. And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize that with cauteries as I have said, having a paralyzing and softening effect on the body on the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
And let it be an olive cautery as previously mentioned.
But if the patient is a child, then use a subtle cautery in this way.
Chapter 11.
Chapter 11: On the Cauterization of Melancholy
When the causes of melancholy are corrupt humidity and thick flame, then cauterize that area with the cauteries that we mentioned earlier, while having a paralyzing effect.
And if the cause of melancholy is an excess that tends toward melancholy, and the patient's body is humid, then give them to drink something that cleanses the brain according to what has been said previously in the division.
And then shave the patient's head, and then make a decent turtledove from them over the circle, and then place that in the middle of the head.
And the patient should be sixty years old and be able to move about freely.
And then apply a liniment; and it is more worthy to use the fat of old sheep. And heat that over the fire, tempered by measurement, which the patient will suffer when it is put on them. And then apply that to the middle of their head, in the circle, and let them lie down so that it may be absorbed.
And do this with the patient once a week, along with the other good regimen until they are healed; or if you wish, cauterize that with small points according to its size, but have your hand holding a cautery like this: this is the type of cautery which moistens the brain with evenness.
And apply that piece of linen soaked in bread or wheat flour.
Chapter 12.
Chapter 12: Cauterization for Water Descending into the Joint
When you notice the onset of water in the joint by the signs I have mentioned in the description, then begin [the treatment] and give the patient a drink that will cleanse their head, and keep them away from all moisture.
And have them sweat in a bath for several days.
Then order the patient to shave their head and cauterize it in the middle of the head with a pointed cautery; and also cauterize both temples if water is beginning to accumulate in both joints, or on one side if it's only in one joint.
Cut all the veins and arteries that are located below the collarbone with a cautery, and let the cauteries be in that area at the same level as the temples.
And be careful not to cause bleeding when cauterizing; and if you see any signs of bleeding, stop it with some medicine that is available to you.
And I will bring wisdom in the extraction of arteries and the removal of those, and caution regarding bleeding.
And sometimes it is necessary to cauterize the area below the two skull bones with two specifically produced cauteries.
Chapter 13.
Chapter 13: Cauterization for Old Tears
When old tears in the eyes persist and are caused by veins and arteries located near the visible part of the head, and it has been verified that this is due to excessive humors, then cauterize the area with a cautery as described in the chapter on water descending into joints. Specifically, use a cautery at the middle of the head, two cauteries at the temples, and two cauteries below the skull bones. And if necessary, also cauterize the area along the entire side of the eye socket at the outer edge of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter 14.
Chapter 14: Cauterization for Foul-Smelling Nasal Discharge
When you treat the patient with the medication I mentioned earlier and it is not effective, then prepare and administer to the patient crushed ivy leaves for three nights, and shave their head before cauterizing them with a medium-sized olive-shaped cautery. And also cauterize the area with a nail-shaped cautery, using two cauteries just below the hairline on both eyebrows.
And be careful not to cut the artery while performing the procedure.
And this is the shape of the nail-shaped cautery.
Chapter 15.
Chapter 15: Cautery for Softening Eye Lids of the Eyes
When an eye lid is softened due to illness or moisture, then cauterize the eyelid with a crescent-shaped cautery. And this is its shape:
And if necessary, cauterize the area just above the eyebrows with two small cauteries on both sides, and let them be elongated towards the temples. And let the length of each cautery correspond to the width of the eyebrow.
And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but only so that the outer third of the eyelid is affected.
Chapter 16.
Chapter 16: Cautery for the Eye Lid when Hair Grows Inward and Swells the Eyes
When the eyelashes grow inward and poke the eye, cauterization is required in two ways: either by using fire or by using a burning medicine.
If using a cautery of fire, order the patient to read their eyelashes as if they were reading those that are being cleaned, until they are extended and thinned out; and if it becomes necessary, press on them during their growth to prevent their emergence. Then, strengthen the eyes with a bandage using one wrap around the head to ensure no harm is done while the eyelashes grow back.
Once they have grown and thinned out, then place the patient's head in your lap, and gently place a sign on their eyelids using a seal made from a mermaid's leaf, with the beginning of the sign near the eyelashes.
And apply a bandage soaked in egg white or a paste made from poultry droppings on the eye.
And apply the cautery, the shape of which is as follows:
And cauterize over the mark you have made, gradually, in small stages, until the surface of the skin is burned and appears similar to a myrtle leaf, completely visible and unblemished.
And a sign of healing from this treatment is that you will see the eye lid contracted and the eyelashes raised above the puncture of the eye.
And then raise your hand and leave it there for three days, and place over it a bandage with bread to heal the scar. And take care of it with ointment until it is healed.
But if the eyelashes return for any reason and the eye lid is softened again, then perform the cautery once more as you did before.
But if the eyelashes are located on the underside of the eye lid, then cauterize that area until it is raised to its natural position and thinned out so that the eyelashes do not poke the eye.
But the cautery using a burning medicine that I command you to do is for the patient to read their eyelashes until they are extended and thinned out, and let it be made from paper or cloth in the shape of a myrtle leaf.
And take some known soap and crushed chamomile flowers, one ounce each. I would translate the provided line as: "Do that, and quickly mix those causes together, and do it with haste so that they are not cooled down; then spread that (mixture) on a chart made in this way like the shape of a myrtle leaf, and place it over the wound with both (sides); and place below the wound a piece of linen cloth dipped in albumen of egg white, and the patient's head should be in the direction of the east."
"And place the (myrtle leaf) on top of the medicine and press it gently so that it doesn't go in too deep, allowing the patient to feel the bite of the medicine, for its bite is like fire."
"And when you perceive that the patient feels the bite, then stop applying the medicine and remove it with your hand; once the bite ceases, leave the medicine in place and wash the wound with water. Then consider whether the eyelid has risen as it should after being washed, due to constriction by fire or incision. If so, then it is well. But if not, return to the area where the medicine did not penetrate, do not degrade your operation and constrict the wound until it heals."
"Then place a bandage over the wound until the pus from the abscess has been drained, and then cure it with a suitable ointment or other remedy until it is healed."
"And it is necessary for you, in your operation, to exercise vigilant diligence that no residue of the medicine falls into the wound. And if after several days, the eyelid becomes soft and some hairs penetrate into the wound, then reapply the medicine to the area where the eyelid has become soft, just as you did at the beginning, and furthermore, envelop it until it is healed."
"And this is the shape of myrtle leaf."
"And know that the wounds of men are diverse in size and smallness, and therefore the constriction should be made accordingly."
"And let not the way of righteousness be hidden from him who studies this art."
"Chapter 17."
"On the cauterization of a fistula that is in the lacrimal duct of the eye."
"When you cure a fistula with what we have said in the sections on diseases and do not combine your treatment, then it is necessary that you cauterize it in this manner: command the patient to place his head towards yours, and let the patient's head be held by some minister between your hands in such a way that he is neither harmed nor agitated by moving his head."
"Then place a piece of linen cloth dipped in egg white or muslin over the patient's eye."
"Then heat up the cautery which has this shape:"
"Which should be concave, like the shape of a reed or a vulture's quill, at one end where the cautery is made."
"And if you wish, let it be penetrating at the other end." "And if you want it, let there be a handle like a probe."
"However, the one that is concave is better for this work."
"Then press the fistula if it is open, and draw out its pus and dry it up." "And if it is not open, then you must open it and extract the hardened material from it."
"Then place the heated cautery over it and hold it there with your hand, but keep your hand a little way from the cautery of the eye to the part near the nose, so that your hand does not get burned or the patient becomes disturbed. And then apply the cautery to the edges of the wound, breaking up any clotted material."
And so if at the beginning of your cauterization, you manage to enter the bone, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery one or two times, if necessary; and leave it like that for three days, and place a wet compress with drying ointment on it until it heals.
But if it has been passed 11 days and it is not healed, then apply a strong and corrosive medicine on it until the bone is exposed and scraped according to what is appropriate in its chapter.
And there is another method of cauterization for a fistula, which was mentioned earlier: understand the location of the fistula and open it up, then place (the cautery) in that opening with great care, its shape being like this: and make it the size of one ounce of melted lead; and hold your hand over it with a cloth so as not to harm the patient from the heat of the melted lead; and it is necessary to apply it on the skin of the patient, covered in albumen of egg or water, for the lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it with miraculous healing.
And if the fistula is healed with the cautery and treatment as we have mentioned, that is good; but if not, then it is necessary to administer a tracheotomy and lead the fistula into the nose according to what will come in its proper place.
Chapter 18
On the cauterization of wounds on the feet.
Many times, cuts and tears occur in the lips, especially in children's lips.
And so when you treat those cuts and tears with what we have said in the previous sections and it does not improve, then use fire to cauterize them with a small knife according to this method that is taught:
And let its cavity be according to the fineness of the knife (blade).
Then carefully place the point of the cautery in those cuts and tears until it reaches the root (base) of them.
Then treat it with wax until it is healed.
Chapter 19
On the cauterization of a fistula in the mouth.
When an abscess appears in the root of the uvula or on the palate or between teeth and it develops into a fistula, and you treat it but it does not improve, then it is necessary to cauterize the fistula according to its size with fire and place the burning iron in the hole (opening) of the fistula, holding your hand until the hot iron reaches the base of it; and do this one or two times; then treat it with the treatment we have mentioned until it heals.
And so if the abscess is cut off and healed, that is good; but if not, then it is necessary to reveal the location and clean out the rotten bone according to what will be mentioned in its chapter.
Chapter 20
On the cauterization of teeth and softening of gums.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth become rotten, and you treat them with medicines without success, then place the patient's head on your lap, and use the cautery in the form that will come next, quickly placing its point over the tooth and inserting it into the opening of the tooth with great care until the patient can no longer bear the heat.
Then quickly remove your hand, and repeat the cautery several times as needed.
Then have the patient fill their mouth with salty water and keep it there for an hour, then spit it out, for the rotten tooth is solidified and the softened gum is strengthened, and the moisture that causes corruption is dried up.
Chapter 21
On the cauterization of tooth pain
When tooth pain is caused by coldness or there is a crack or worm in it and treatment with medicine does not bring relief, then cauterize the tooth using one of two methods: cauterization with cow dung or cauterization with fire.
Cauterization with cow dung is done by taking some dung from a cow and shaping it on the tip of an iron, then wrapping it in cloth and placing it in boiling water until it is heated, and quickly place it over the painful tooth until it cools down.
Then repeat this several times until the heat of the cautery reaches the root of the teeth.
And if you wish, submerge wool or cloth in the cow dung and place it over the painful tooth and hold the hot iron until it reaches the base of the concavity of the tooth.
However, cauterization with fire requires you to use an iron or copper point and it should be of a certain thickness, and the intensity of the heat should not reach the mouth of the patient.
Then heat the iron cautery in the shape that will come next and place it over the tooth, holding your hand until the cautery cools down; do this several times until the pain is relieved within that day or the following day.
And it is necessary to have the patient fill their mouth with good dung and hold it there for an hour, then spit it out; this is the shape of the cautery.
And cauterize with whatever you wish at its end, as much as is possible for you.
And this is the shape of the cannula:
Chapter 22
On the cauterization of umbilical hernia
When umbilical hernia is caused by cold and moist humors and does not respond to gentle digestion through medicines and you wish to perform gentle digestion on it, then heat the concave cautery in this shape that has two sharp ends so that smoke comes out of one end while heating the other, place the hot cautery over the abscess once or more if needed until it reaches the base.
And if the abscess is small, then apply cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it for three days and place a compress soaked in bounded borax on the burnt area until it dries out what the fire has burned.
Then cure it with ointment, dressings and cloth while it heals.
Chapter 23.
On the cauterization of laryngitis and constriction of the throat.
When humidity comes to the lung canal and especially when it is accompanied by congestion, then it is necessary that the patient be evacuated at first with laxative medicines, and then cauterize the veins in the area of the throat where they are swollen.
And make sure that you do not reach the windpipe with the cautery or burn the patient's spine, but only slightly.
And cauterize that area again with another cautery on the joint of the neck in the last vertebra of the patient's spine. And let the cautery of the previous shape be used for this procedure.
Then cure it with what has been previously mentioned until it heals.
Chapter 24.
On the cauterization of lung disease and coughing.
When cough and lung disease are caused by cold humors, and the patient does not have a fever or consumption, but rather an old condition, then cauterize that area with two cauteries on the collarbone in the affected areas of the lungs and boils; and another cautery between the nipples in the middle of the chest; and let the cauteries be shaped as before.
And if desired, let the cauterization be punctate with the cautery that is called "puncta", the shape of which was previously described in the treatment for ear pain.
And make holes in those; and then cure it with what was previously mentioned until it heals.
And let the cauteries have three branches, for cauterization is done with that: with one blow, you can make three cauterizations in this shape.
Chapter 25.
On the cauterization of titillicus, which is the head of a tumor.
When the head of the tumor is dislocated due to slippery humidity and does not return to its normal position when it should, then you must first reduce the dislocation, and then have the patient lie on their back or side; and then raise the neck which is located in the rear part of the tumor towards the upper parts with the fingers of your left hand if the joint is dislocated to the rear.
And then heat the cautery with two heads, and this is its shape.
And then cauterize the spine until it penetrates into the other side, and this will create a shape of cauterization with four heads.
And sometimes it is necessary to adjust according to this count and for that reason there are eight cauteries.
Then place a porous cushion with salt on the cautery and have the patient rest in peace and quiet so that the member is not harmed for some time until it heals.
And if the dislocation is in the upper parts and is not corrected quickly, then cauterize over the muscle with a pointed cautery or multiple punctate cauteries, for the joint will be strengthened, the humidity will be dried out, and the patient will be healed.
Chapter 26.
On the cauterization of the stomach.
When there is cold and excessive humidity in the stomach which has spread throughout its contents and multiplied, and if you continue with the usual treatments without success, then have the patient lie on their back, extend their arms and legs, and cauterize the area with three cauteries: one below the navel by a finger's width using a pointed cautery, and two more cauteries below each side of the ribcage, creating a triangular shape; make sure to leave space between them so that they do not touch and form pus.
And if the depth of the cautery is two-thirds the thickness of a spine.
And let the shape of the cautery be as shown in this addition. If desired, use a large cautery in the middle of the stomach with this shape, and let it be circular as shown in this shape.
And let the stomach be cauterized with punctate cautery for those who are afraid of it: and know that you should place the cautery points on the stomach according to the desired size, and then use a pointed cautery at those points. Afterwards, cure it using the previously mentioned treatment until it heals.
Chapter 27.
On the cauterization of a cold liver.
When there is pain in the liver due to cold or humidity or excessive flatulence which has caused it to deviate from its normal condition through superfluous egression, and if the usual treatments are unsuccessful, then have the patient lie on their back with their hips elevated, and cauterize three points on the liver below the hypochondriac region according to this shape and quantity, so that it aligns with the position of a man lying down.
And let the space between each cautery be the width of a finger, and let the cauteries be as long as a straight body.
And do not press too hard with the cautery.
And if the amount of cautery needed is equal to the width of a spine and cannot be accommodated; and if the patient is standing on their feet; and if not standing, then let them sit with their legs extended, and raise their arms.
And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a scalpel, if you have the skill and prudence in the art.
And be careful not to overdo it in the cauterization, ensuring that the width of the entire spine is cauterized so that the entire body is affected and reaches the intestines, as the spine is delicate here; and know this.
Chapter 28.
On the perforation of liver abscesses with a cautery.
When an abscess or tumor develops in the liver and you want to determine if it is located in the liver tissue or its membrane, then if it is located in the liver tissue, the patient will experience heaviness and dull pain without worsening.
And if it is located in the membrane of the liver, then there will be severe and frequent pain which often exhausts doctors trying to cure it.
Therefore the patient must lie on their back and you should touch the location of the abscess with your fingers. Then heat the cautery which is shaped like a needle, as previously described in the previous page. And then use that needle-shaped cautery to burn along the entire length of the spine until it reaches the diaphragm, continuing until pus forms.
And then cure it with the same treatment used for other abscesses until it heals.
And it is not necessary to use this type of cautery unless the practitioner has extensive experience in medical studies and has recognized many diseases through it; but for this operation, some experimentation should be attempted with caution. However, it is better if you leave it to those who are more skilled.
Chapter 29.
On the cauterization of pleurisy.
The ancients used to cauterize pleurisy by making incisions in the ribs according to this method: take a dry, pointed rib bone that is about as thick as your finger and of sufficient length.
Then immerse that bone in oil and heat it over a fire until it becomes a cautery. And then use this cautery to make incisions in the following locations: one incision between the continuation of the collarbone and neck; two small incisions, slightly declining towards the area below the chin, under the beard; two more incisions, slightly declining between the fifth rib and spine, at the back; another incision in the middle of the navel; another on the stomach; three incisions at the back, one incision between the shoulder blades; and two small incisions under each side of the hips, after the cautery between the shoulder blades.
And it is not necessary to burn your hand with the cautery, but rather hold it near the skin.
And ancient men used a type of cautery that resembles a ray and applies it to the skin, placing it in the location between the ribs until it reaches the abscess and pushes out the collected pus, just as we mentioned in the abscess of the liver.
But in this perforation with cautery, there is no fear, because one dies immediately if it happens in the location of a fistula that does not heal.
Chapter 30.
On the cauterization of the spleen.
When you treat the illness of the spleen with what we have said about the treatment in the division and do not change your treatment, then cauterization should be done in three ways, all of which are correct: one is to make three or four punctures according to the length of the spleen, similar to the shape of the liver cauteries, whose figure has been mentioned before.
And let the width between each cautery be the size of a finger or a little more, and the manner of cauterization should be the same as we mentioned in the liver cauteries.
And do not burn your hand with the cautery; and let the patient be lying on their back.
And there is another way to cauterize, which is to heat the cautery with two turns, as we mentioned in the chapter on muscle dislocation, and raise the right rib cage that lies over the place where the spleen is located when the patient lies on their left side.
And let your lifting (of the rib cage) be according to the length of the body so that punctures can be made according to the width of the body.
And then insert the two turns (of the cautery), just heating it, in that place where you have penetrated the rib cage from the other side.
And then extract the cautery; and thus four punctures are made.
And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three turns.
And take care to cure the cautery that has not shed pus for many days, because this cause is more favorable than the previous ones in the healing process.
Chapter 31.
Chapter 31: On Cauterization for Hydropsy (Dropsy)
Cautery should not be used in cases of hydropsy, but rather in certain types of abscesses specifically.
When treating hydropsy with the methods of treatment we have mentioned in the division and you do not change your treatment, then it is appropriate to cauterize in the following way: four punctures around the abscess, one on the stomach, another on the liver, another on the spleen, two between the vertebrae of the back, one on the right side of the chest, and another on the stomach. And the depth of the cautery should be proportional to the thickness of the ribs.
And let the cautery remain open so that it sheds pus for a long time.
And do not evacuate the patient from treatment after cauterization, because it is necessary to add two intentions (i.e., therapeutic methods) to aid in the healing process.
The shape of the cautery used to cauterize the abdomen should be like a nail, according to its previously described form, and the one used to cauterize the back should be olive-shaped, as was previously described in its form.
Chapter 32.
Chapter 32: On Cauterization for the Feet and Thighs
When the feet are affected by abscesses in hydropsy and are filled with yellow water, it is necessary to cauterize the feet on the back of the foot between the auricular (i.e., near the ankle) and anular (i.e., near the heel) bones, holding the cautery with your hand without twisting it; and then raise your hand while not completely returning it, as the yellow water will be released.
The cautery should be shaped as follows: And then make two cauteries on each thigh, and in each thigh, make a cautery with the tip of the knife-shaped cautery. And let the cauteries be according to the length of the thigh, with one below the knee and the other below the middle part of the thigh; and on each thigh, two cauteries.
And leave the wound open without treatment for a long time so that some water drains from it.
And treat it with the causes we mentioned earlier.
Chapter 33
Chapter 33: On Cauterization for Abdominal Diseases
When the abdomen is weakened and damp due to an imbalance of the digestive and retentive faculties, which are located in the stomach and intestines, it can be treated with the following methods: If the patient is able to tolerate a strong cautery that promotes heat, then use a large cautery on their stomach as described earlier in the chapter on cauterization of the stomach, along with a circular cautery and four fine punctures around the abscess. Additionally, use a fine nail-shaped cautery and one or two cauteries over the liver (i.e., hepatic region) to promote heat and drying.
And if sometimes the dampness is excessive and the patient can tolerate it, then use the cautery on the navel and intestines, and gently place two cauteries over the stomach and near the inguinal regions (i.e., groin area). This treatment will perfectly aid in healing without causing harm.
Chapter 34
Chapter 34: On Cauterization for Chronic Hemorrhoids
When chronic hemorrhoids are caused by thick and damp humors or corrupted fluids, and they have been treated with the methods we mentioned earlier but still persist, then use three cauteries over the pus below the small triangular spine of the lower back, and use one cautery above the navel (i.e., umbilicus) that is shaped like a small triangular point.
And if you suspect that the stomach is weakened and the food is not being digested properly, and the skin appears inflamed or abscessed, then use a large cautery over the stomach as described earlier; and use one cautery over the liver (i.e., hepatic region) and another cautery over the spleen, both shaped like nails, to promote heat and drying. Leave the cauteries in place for some time to allow them to drain any excess fluids, and continue treating the patient until they are fully recovered.
Chapter 35
On the cauterization of abscesses near the removal of pus.
When you lance an abscess, then apply the cautery which is similar to a spear. Then introduce the flame of the cautery into the lanced abscess and advance your finger inward until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
And do this once or twice, for if there are many abscesses, then cauterize each of them as we have described, and treat those with ointments until they heal.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on a significant area, it is more beneficial in healing.
Chapter 36
On the cauterization of fistulas that are formed in the nature below the parts of the body.
When nature does not obey the operation that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by this, heal with cautery.
Therefore, when one sees a fistula in the nature below that is old and has corrupt pus and moisture within, it is better to treat it with subtle incisions and cautiously probe its depth using the previously mentioned method.
Then apply the cautery which is similar to a spear. And then introduce the cautery, which has been lit, into this fistula, according to the depth that was probed by the instrument.
And move the cautery over it until the corrupt parts are burned one or two or three times, depending on how much is necessary.
And be careful not to burn nerves or veins, and if the fistula leads to the bladder or intestines, then avoid those areas; do this only when the fistula is in a fleshy area and you think it is not penetrating deep.
And treat the area until it heals.
And if the wound is sealed and the pus-filled matter has been drained from it and remains in that state for a long time, then know that it is fully healed.
And if the pus-filled matter is not drained from it, then know that it is penetrating or infected with corrupt bone, or this occurs due to one of those causes which will be mentioned in their place.
Chapter 37
On the cauterization of tumors.
When tumors become painful due to inflammation or swelling and as a result, the patient is in distress, then it is necessary to cauterize each one of them with a pointed cautery that leaves a scar, so that it will not be reactivated again.
And quickly cauterize with a light touch and leave a small mark, for three linear cauteries will form, which will be more beneficial in healing.
Chapter 38:
On the cauterization of the bladder.
When weakness and softening occurs in the bladder due to inflammation and moisture, resulting in the patient being unable to retain urine, then cauterize that area below the bladder where the pubic hair begins, with a cautery on each side of it.
And let the length of each cautery correspond to the size of the bladder; and cauterize that area below the spine with a cautery or two if necessary.
And let the cautery be pointed as described before.
It seems there is a mistake in the chapter number, it should be:
On the cauterization of the rectum.
When inflammation and moisture occur in the rectum, resulting in difficulty with insertion and menstrual bleeding being corrupt and delayed, and pain occurs upon their arrival, then it is necessary to cauterize that area with three circular cauteries around the navel as previously described; and also cauterize the area below the spine or use two if necessary, and let the cautery be pointed.
It seems there is a mistake in the chapter number, it should be:
Of cauterization in the case of dislocation of the ankle.
When moist abscesses have infiltrated the area of the ankle, and this has caused it to become dislocated from its place, a sign of this is that one thigh appears longer than the other when compared with each other. And the location of the dislocation is found by where the swelling is.[](https://llmmyy.com/)
Then it is necessary to cauterize the patient on the ankle with a circular cautery, as you will have marked in the circumference of the affected area, so that the affected area falls in the middle of the circle.
And let the form of the cautery be as described in the cauterization of the stomach. (This suggests that the text refers to a specific type or shape of cautery instrument, previously described in another section of the treatise.)
And if this cautery is not available to you, then use three large olive-shaped cauteries instead. (This suggests that the text recommends using a different type or shape of cautery instrument when the one previously mentioned is not available.)
And make the cautery according to the thickness of the entire muscle tendon, and take care that it heals properly. (This suggests that the text recommends adjusting the size or depth of the cautery based on the specific injury being treated.)
Chapter 41. (The numbering system used in this treatise is not clear, but it appears to be using Roman numerals for chapters. Therefore, this would be the title of chapter 41.)
Of cauterization in the case of sciatic vein. (This suggests that the text is describing a medical procedure to treat an injury or condition related to the sciatic vein, which runs from the lower back down to the leg.)
When pain occurs in the ankle area and is caused by moisture and cold, then the patient is treated with what we have said before, and that is to use a warm compress or poultice, but if this does not work, then it is necessary to drain the patient of thick humors using foul-smelling pills or artificial pills, and then cauterize the area. (This suggests that the text recommends a multi-step treatment approach for ankle pain, starting with more conservative treatments like warm compresses and moving on to more invasive procedures like cauterization if those do not provide relief.)
And the method of cauterization in this case is done in two ways: either with burning medicines or with fire. (This suggests that there are different techniques for cauterization, and that the text will go on to describe these methods in more detail.)
The first method is done in two ways, of which one is to cauterize the area around the ankle with three triangular cauteries, as shown in this diagram, and to do so with sufficient depth. (This suggests that the text includes a diagram or illustration that shows the specific shape and placement of the cautery instruments to be used.)[/ And let the spaces between each cautery be the width of a finger, and let the olive-shaped or large cauteries be used. (This suggests that the text provides specific measurements or guidelines for how far apart to place the cautery instruments.)
But sometimes it may be necessary to make some of the cauteries on the middle of the ankle, in which case there will be four cauteries. (This suggests that the text acknowledges that different cases may require variations on the basic technique.)
And if you prefer, you can cauterize with the circle that was described in the section on treating dislocations of the ankle, provided that it encircles and burns the entire thickness of the muscle tendon. (This suggests that the text is referring to a specific type or shape of cautery instrument, previously described in another section of the treatise.)
And this is the method of cauterization for sciatica when pain is localized to the ankle and does not extend further into the thigh. (This suggests that the text is describing a specific type of sciatic pain, and providing guidelines for how to treat it with cauterization.)
But if the pain extends into the thigh, then you should cauterize with two cauteries on the thigh at the location where the patient complains of pain, and one cautery on the shin a little above the middle of it. (This suggests that the text is providing different guidelines for how to treat sciatic pain depending on its location and severity.) [
And if the cauteries are knife-shaped, then let the depth of the cautery correspond to the thickness of the muscle tendon. (This suggests that the text provides guidelines for how to adjust the technique depending on the type and shape of cautery instrument used.)
And if the patient complains that the pain extends to the lower leg or feet, then you should cauterize with three or four points or more if necessary in the location where the patient indicates pain. (This suggests that the text is providing guidelines for how to treat sciatic pain that radiates down the leg and into the foot.)
And if the patient complains of pain below the knee and towards the thigh, then you should cauterize with a knife-shaped cautery. (This suggests that the text is providing guidelines for how to treat sciatic pain in different locations along the leg.)
And in all cases of cauterization, be careful not to burn too deeply with the cautery and damage nerves or large blood vessels, as this can cause further harm or complications for the patient. (This suggests that the text acknowledges potential risks associated with cauterization, and provides guidelines for avoiding these risks.)
And I have seen some who have cauterized on the shin and burned too deeply during the procedure, causing the leg to swell with inflammation all the way up to the thigh, and in some cases resulting in a perforated and infected foot. (This suggests that the text includes personal observations or anecdotes based on the author's own experience as a medical practitioner.) And this can lead to severe abdominal pain and even death. (This suggests that the text recognizes that cauterization is not without risks, and emphasizes the importance of using proper technique and avoiding over-cauterization.)
And if the pain occurs in two locations simultaneously, then you should cauterize each location using this method. (This suggests that the text provides guidelines for how to treat multiple areas of pain at once.)
And wise men have said that in the cauterization of ankle pain, this is the method: make a circle of iron with a circumference the size of a palm, and let the diameter be the size of a date seed or slightly smaller. (This suggests that the text includes recommendations from other medical authorities on the use of specific types and sizes of cautery instruments.) [
And inside this circle there should be another third of the same size, and let the spaces between these circles be the width of a nut. These circles should be open on both sides, and their length should be one or two nuts long, with the edges of the iron appropriately prepared for use in these circles. This is the shape of it: (This suggests that the text includes specific guidelines for how to prepare and use cautery instruments, including measurements and shapes.)
And when it has been heated in the fire until it glows red and throws sparks, then place it on the affected area of the ankle, with the patient lying on their side. (This suggests that the text includes detailed instructions for how to use cautery instruments during medical procedures.) And then cauterize with three circular cauteries in one movement. (This suggests that the text recommends using multiple cauteries at once to treat a single injury or condition.) [
And then leave it for three days, and apply an ointment to the wound after that and keep it open for several days. Then treat it with a plaster until it heals completely. (This suggests that the text provides guidelines for how to care for a patient's injury or condition after cauterization has been performed.)
And Albucasis says: "O sons, we have little experience with this type of cautery due to its terrifying appearance, and because few people have the skill and knowledge required to use it effectively." (This suggests that the text includes quotes or references from medical authorities such as Albucasis, a prominent Islamic physician known for his contributions to surgical techniques.)
But of all the cauteries that exist, those who can endure it will find relief with this one, and it will be effective for treating their condition. (This suggests that the text emphasizes the importance of using proper technique and caution when performing cauterization, but also acknowledges its potential benefits for patients.)
But a cautery with adherent medicines is one in which you make two circles with holes for the insertion of the iron handle, like this: let the length of each side be the size of two nuts or more. (This suggests that the text provides instructions for creating a specific type of cautery instrument using metal and other materials.) [
And let the spaces between each circle be the width of a finger, and let them be open on both sides, and fit together as follows: (This suggests that the text includes specific guidelines for how to create and use cautery instruments, including measurements and shapes.) [
And then place the cautery on the affected area of the ankle, with the patient lying on their side, and apply pressure to the area with your hand. Pour warm water between the two circles, gradually increasing the heat, and hold it there for the duration of one hour, allowing the patient to endure the biting and sticking sensation that comes from the cautery (which feels similar to burning) until the pain subsides. (This suggests that the text includes detailed instructions for how to perform cauterization during medical procedures.)
And then raise your hand with the instrument and clean away all the warm water from the entire area of the ankle with clean water. (This suggests that the text includes guidelines for how to clean and care for a patient's injury or condition after cauterization has been performed.)
And then leave it for three days and apply an ointment to the wound until the blackness of the cautery has faded, and leave it alone for several more days, allowing the pus to drain away, which is a sign that the healing process has begun. This is the final step in treatment. (This suggests that the text provides guidelines for how to care for a patient's injury or condition after cauterization has been performed.) [
And then treat it with ointment until it heals completely. (This suggests that the text includes guidelines for how to care for a patient's injury or condition after cauterization has been performed, emphasizing the importance of ongoing treatment and monitoring.)
And if the pain extends into the thigh or leg, create a similar device that can contain water, as is done with the ankle. (This suggests that the text provides guidelines for how to treat sciatic pain in different locations along the leg, using devices containing warm water to apply heat and relieve inflammation.) [
And this is the method of using warm water, which I have already described in the section on refining medicines. (This suggests that the text includes cross-references to other sections or chapters, indicating that it is part of a larger medical treatise or compilation.) Here is a recipe for alkali and nitric acid, equal parts of each, mixed together and then strained into a new container with a small hole in the bottom, just large enough to allow the mixture to flow out slowly. (This suggests that the text includes specific instructions for how to prepare and use different types of medicines or medical treatments.) [
And then place the container on top of another container that has been filled with warm water. Slowly pour the alkali and nitric acid mixture into this warm water, stirring constantly as you do so. Use your free hand to press down on the mixture, ensuring that it is well-mixed and evenly distributed in the water. After a few minutes, remove the container from the water and let the mixture stand for several hours before using it to treat the affected area. (This suggests that the text includes detailed instructions for how to prepare and use different types of medicines or medical treatments.)
And then pour the remaining water into a new container with fresh nitric acid and alkali, which will now have a much stronger potency. This mixture can be used in many different medical procedures and in cauterization of other parts of the body, as it has the power to heal through fire. (This suggests that the text includes guidelines for how to use specific medicines or treatments in various medical contexts.)
And some of the medicines that are used for cauterization include things like zinc oxide, crushed honey, and soap mixed together. (This suggests that the text includes a list or inventory of different types of medicines or medical treatments, along with guidelines for how to use them in specific contexts.) [
And Galen speaks of a procedure and treatment for joint pain and sciatic nerve pain that he learned from an ancient physician, which he highly praises as being very effective. He says that there is no need for any other treatment, as this one alone has cured many people in the past, and they have been completely healed after just one session, finding relief from their pain quickly and easily through this method. (This suggests that the text includes references to medical authorities such as Galen, who are known for their expertise and contributions to medical knowledge.) [
And let it be made with vertigris, if possible, and if not, then use fresh figs instead, which should be crushed together with a small amount of powdered glass, and then applied to the ankle (or thigh or leg) where there is pain, and bound in place. (This suggests that the text includes specific instructions for how to prepare and apply different types of medicines or treatments.) [
And let it (the cushion) be placed for a duration of three hours or for as long as the patient can tolerate the pressure.
Then immerse that part in a bath, and when the body has become warm, place it on the ground, as this will stop the pain and promote healing.
And know that it is not necessary for anyone to use cautery with these medicines, except in cases of evacuation of the body (i.e., purging).[Answer 4:
But Hippocrates says that when the stretched vein is cauterized at the time of a goat's horn incision, it will greatly benefit the patient. And the cautery should be applied in the following manner: take some wool and soak it in old oil, then place it between the toes and between the heel and the ankle.
Then take a dry goat's horn and heat it over a fire until it becomes charcoal. Place this charcoal on the wool and leave it there until it has been fully absorbed. (Note: The text suggests that the heated goat's horn will turn into charcoal, but this is not accurate as a horn does not transform into charcoal when burned.) Then repeat this process, and do not stop until you feel the sensation of the bite (i.e., the heat) reach the ankle, and the pain will subside.
And this method of cautery is called "cautery of cows." (Note: It is unclear why it is called this, as the text does not mention cows in the previous sentences.)
Chapter 42. (This is a heading indicating the start of a new chapter or section in the text.)
"On the Cautery Treatment for Toothache." (Note: The word "dos" in this context means "tooth" in Old French, and the chapter discusses the use of cautery to treat tooth pain.)
Sometimes toothache can be caused by various factors such as decay or trauma, excessive eruption, or other similar causes, and also due to the infusion of damp and cold matter.
And cautery is only indicated in this particular case, which is caused by the effusion of damp matter. (Note: The text suggests that cautery should be used only for this specific type of toothache, which is caused by the infusion of cold and damp matter.)
Therefore, in order to evacuate the patient of this damp matter, make three pills that are similar to it, and place them on the tooth where the pain is, making an incision with a cautery tool in each line. The depth of the incision should be determined by the tolerance of the patient and the strength of the cautery tool. (Note: The text suggests using a cautery tool to make three incisions on the affected tooth, and adjusting the depth of the incisions based on the patient's pain tolerance and the strength of the cautery tool.)
And then perform cauterization using a pointed cautery tool. (Note: The text suggests that a pointed cautery tool should be used to make the incisions on the affected tooth, rather than a flat or rounded tool.)
And if you wish, you can perform cauterization using three or four pointed cautery tools in this manner:
Chapter 43 (This is a heading indicating the start of a new chapter or section in the text.)
"On the Cautery Treatment for the Beginning of Glandular Swelling." (Note: The term "gilbositat" is used to refer to a swelling or inflammation in Old French, and this chapter discusses the use of cautery as a treatment for early-stage glandular swelling.)
This disease often affects young children, and the sign of its onset in children is that they experience pain or stiffness in their neck, especially when looking up or moving their head. (Note: The text suggests that this condition, which causes swelling or inflammation, can affect young children, and one of the early signs of the disease is stiffness or pain in the neck.)
And you will find it (the inflammation) in the lower vertebra of the spine, and in the nodes that are beginning to protrude above the other vertebrae. (Note: The text suggests that the inflammation can be found in the lower part of the spine, specifically in the vertebrae where the swelling is starting to become noticeable.)
And so when you see this (the swelling) and wish to prevent it from getting worse, then cauterize the area with a circular cautery tool in this manner: so that the cautery covers the entire surface of the affected vertebra. (Note: The text suggests that the circular cautery tool should be used to cover the entire surface of the affected vertebra, ensuring complete cauterization of the area.)
And if you wish, you can also use a pointed cautery tool to make two or three incisions along the circumference of the vertebra. (Note: The text suggests that in addition to using a circular cautery tool, one can also use a pointed cautery tool to make multiple incisions along the circumference of the affected vertebra, further ensuring complete cauterization.) And let the points be close together. (Note: The text suggests that when using a pointed cautery tool to make multiple incisions along the circumference of the affected vertebra, the incisions should be close together to ensure thorough cauterization of the area.)
Then care for the area until it has healed completely using the methods we have described. (Note: The text suggests that after performing the cauterization, one should continue to care for the affected area, following the previously described methods, until it has fully healed.)
But be careful not to use cautery in cases of glandular swelling that is caused by nerve spasms. (Note: The text suggests that caution should be taken when using cautery, and it should not be used in cases where the swelling or inflammation is caused by a nerve spasm.)
Chapter 44 (This is a heading indicating the start of a new chapter or section in the text.)
"On the Cautery Treatment for Gout and Joint Pain." (Note: The term "podagra" is used to refer to gout, a type of arthritis that causes severe pain in the joints, particularly the big toe. This chapter discusses the use of cautery as a treatment for gout and other forms of joint pain.)
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that have infiltrated each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. (Note: The text suggests that joint pain can be caused by cold humors that have penetrated the body, and when this happens specifically in the feet, it is referred to as "podragua" or gout.)
And therefore, when gout caused by cold humors has been cured through the method of treatment and the pain is not recurring, then use cautery to prevent its return. (Note: The text suggests that when gout caused by cold humors has been successfully treated using the described methods, one can use cautery as a preventative measure to avoid future occurrences.) [Answer 16:
And it is that you perform cautery at the site of evacuation around the circumference of the joint in the foot with many cautery tools. (Note: The text suggests that when using cautery to prevent the return of gout, one should use multiple cautery tools to create many incisions around the affected joint in the foot.)
And let it be an olive-shaped cautery tool with this shape:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery tool. (Note: The text suggests that when treating joint pain or gout in the feet, one can use a pointed cautery tool to create incisions as needed.) And if the pain rises into the toes or other joints, and this often happens, then cauterize each painful area with three or four incisions around it using the olive-shaped cautery tool. (Note: The text suggests that when treating joint pain in the feet or other areas, one can use an olive-shaped cautery tool to create multiple incisions around the affected area, ensuring thorough treatment.) [Answer 21:
And if many cautery tools are necessary for you, then cauterize (the area) with them and do not press too hard with the cautery tool beforehand, but only to the extent of the width of a hazelnut. (Note: The text suggests that when using multiple cautery tools to treat joint pain or gout, one should use caution to avoid over-application, and to limit the amount of pressure applied during treatment.)
And if the pain rises into the toe and back, then administer the cautery that we have mentioned in its chapter. (Note: The text suggests that when treating joint pain or gout that has spread to multiple areas, one should follow the previously described methods for cauterization, ensuring thorough treatment of each affected area.)
And if the pain is only in the fingers and is called "suagra," then make incisions around the circumference of the knuckles where they bend, making two lines. (Note: The text suggests that when treating finger pain or arthritis known as "suagra," one can use a pointed cautery tool to create multiple incisions around the knuckles, ensuring thorough treatment.) [Answer 25:
And if pain remains in the fingers, then make incisions around the circumference of each knuckle and on the fingertips. (Note: The text suggests that when treating finger pain or arthritis known as "suagra," one can use a pointed cautery tool to create multiple incisions around the knuckles and fingertips, ensuring thorough treatment.) [Answer 27:
And if the pain rises after several days to the thighs or muscles, then cauterize all around each of them. (Note: The text suggests that when treating joint pain or arthritis that has spread to other areas such as the thighs or muscles, one can use a circular cautery tool to create multiple incisions around the entire circumference of each affected area, ensuring thorough treatment.) [Answer 29:
And if you do not evacuate the patient of good habits and reception of medicines, for if good habits are practiced and excess phlegm is evacuated with this cautery, God willing, it will heal. (Note: The text suggests that successful treatment of joint pain or arthritis using cauterization requires both good habits and appropriate medication.)
Chapter 45 (This is a heading indicating the start of a new chapter or section in the text.)
"On the Cautery Treatment for Fractures." (Note: This chapter discusses the use of cautery as a treatment for fractures, which are breaks or cracks in bones or cartilage.)
When a fracture occurs in the groin and intestines protrude before the hernia at the genitalia, and this begins to happen, it is necessary that you order the patient to rest in their bed on the day of the injury and use mild laxatives so that the wound in their abdomen can heal. (Note: The text suggests that when treating a fracture in the groin area with protruding intestines, one should encourage the patient to rest and take mild laxatives to promote healing.) [Answer 34:
And then place the patient between your hands on their back, and order them to keep their legs closed until the fracture is set or the hernia or intestines have retracted. (Note: The text suggests that when treating a fracture in the groin area with protruding intestines, one should apply gentle pressure to the affected area and encourage the patient to keep their legs closed until the injury has healed.) [Answer 38:
And then return the affected area to its place, and mark it with a sign or symbol using a probe, tracing the outline of the fracture along the bone in the shape of a circle at the upper parts of the body. (Note: The text suggests that when treating a fracture, one should use a probe to trace the outline of the injury on the affected bone, creating a circular mark that can be used as a reference point during the healing process.)
And then ignite the cautery tool, which has this shape:
until it becomes red hot and emits sparks. (Note: The text suggests that when using a cautery tool to treat a fracture, one should ensure that it is red hot and emitting sparks before applying it to the affected area.) And then return the intestines or hernia to their cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent them from protruding again. (Note: The text suggests that when treating a fracture with protruding intestines or hernias, one should first return these organs to their proper location before using a cautery tool to treat the injury.) [Answer 42:
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion underneath them, while another servant is holding their legs still, and another is supporting their chest, all of whom should hold their hands steady. (Note: The text suggests that when treating a fracture in the groin area with protruding intestines, one should ensure that the patient is properly positioned and supported during the treatment process.)
And then place the cautery tool over the mark with your hand holding it steady, and move it along the length of the bone in the middle of the wound; repeat this process if you have not successfully reached the bone on the first attempt. (Note: The text suggests that when using a cautery tool to treat a fracture, one should carefully trace the outline of the injury along the affected bone, repeating the process if necessary to ensure thorough treatment.)
And carefully observe the condition of the intestine during your cauterization, so that you do not burn the intestine and cause the patient to come to harm or suffer grave damage.
And know that when you use the cautery, do not touch the bone, but be careful in your operation.
It is appropriate that the cautery for children be fine and according to their size and age.[modelact:se: I will continue with the next sentence, as requested. Here is the translation:
Then take care of the area of the cautery for three days with a poultice until the scar of the fire has formed.[modelact:se: Here is the translation for the next sentence:
Then take care of those wounds with other ointments until they are healed.
And let the patient lie on their back for forty days, so that the place and wound can be sealed.
It is appropriate to provide nourishment for the patient according to the length of time it takes for their treatment, which will help heal their stomach and prevent the intestines from coming out during recovery.
Then, when they wish to get up after forty days, administer light and appropriate food for them and keep this up for another forty days.
And let them reduce their work and consumption of food and drink, as well as loud voices, for when they follow this regimen completely, they will be healed.
And I say that the treatment for ruptures in other parts of the stomach is as follows, and this should be done without interruption: cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size, and let what comes out of the intestines be like one third of it. Then take care of the area as we have said, and do not apply a dressing that is too tight.
And I have already mentioned that the first treatment for a rupture is to cauterize it with a triangular cautery of this shape, as indicated by the diagram.
And it is recommended to draw a line along the length of the side of the rupture that is higher up, and another line above it; then place your hand with a pointed cautery, but the first cauterization is lighter and better.
Chapter 46.
Here is a possible translation for "De cauterizacio de torcio" (On the Cauterization of Twisting):
Here is a possible translation for "Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt" (When pain arises in some members due to striking or injury and this pain persists for a long time and does not respond to treatment with medications, then it is appropriate to cauterize with a pointed cautery):
Here is a possible translation for "E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu" (And let the cautery be applied to each member according to its size and smallness, strength and weakness, location of twisting, and pain):
Here is a possible translation for "Donc sis sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro quel malaute sia sanat" (Therefore, if it is healed by the first cauterization, that is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery; for these types of pains are usually punctured from one member to the next nearest member. Therefore, it is necessary to continue with the cautery until the patient is healed):
Here is a possible translation for "Capitol .xlvii." (Chapter 47):
Here is a possible translation for "De cauterizacio de lepra" (On the Cauterization of Leprosy):
Here is a possible translation for "Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia" (Lepers are sometimes helped greatly by cautery, especially if the type of leprosy is caused by putrefaction of phlegm and black bile):
Here is a possible translation for "E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz" (And so when you wish to cauterize that [leprosy], consider whether it is widespread or not, and treat it as we have said in the division. Do not spare or withhold treatment, but fear that corruption may spread throughout the patient's body and complexion. Therefore, cauterize it on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, another lower down above the eyebrows, two over the temples, and one behind, on the neck or shoulder):
Here is a possible translation for "E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit" (And finally, place your hand with the cautery a little on it until a slight impression is made on the bone, and let the scabs be removed from it, so that the expiration of thick vapors may be relieved from it; and cauterize over the spleen as needed):
Here is a possible translation for "E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas" (And if leprosy has spread over the patient and is apparent, then you must cauterize it with these cauteries that we have mentioned on the head; and a cautery on the tip of the nose, two cauteries on the two fingers, two cauteries on two vertebrae of the neck, six cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, one large cautery on the vertebrae near the hip, one on the rib, and two on the hips, two on the knees, and one on each knee, and two on the elbows and one on each elbow, and two on the shoulders, and two on the sinews of their feet; and cauterize it over all the joints of the fingers and toes, and on each heel of their feet, and on the knuckles of their hands):
Here is a possible translation for "E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels" (And be careful not to burn the nerves which are above the heel):
Here is a possible translation for "E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am altre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge" (And sometimes it is cauterized with one cautery on the bone of the chin and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver):
Here is a possible translation for "E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt" (And know that the more cauteries you apply, the more beneficial and effective it is; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, as they do with their sores, because their body is already stupefied):
Here is a possible translation for "E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz" (And it is necessary that the cauteries be large or small according to the members and joints, as is indicated by the types of instruments):
Here is a possible translation for "E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am lautra curacio entro que sia sanat" (And then care for the cautery with flour of iris mixed with honey and the other treatment until it is healed):
Chapter 48.
On the Cauterization of Stupor.
When a limb is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and poultices but has not healed, then you should cauterize the affected limb with cauteries according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
And let your cautery enter slightly into the tip of the spine. Then heal that area with a soothing ointment until it is healed.
And sometimes numbness is cauterized in certain areas of the hands, feet, and spine; as well as around eye sockets where there are growths on the nerves that cause numbness in a member, and the numbness diminishes as a result.
But do not assume this based on my words alone, but rather consult someone knowledgeable in the anatomy of limbs and the course of nerves throughout the body's movements.
Chapter 49.
On the Cauterization of Scars, also known as Morphea.
When a scar is old and resistant to various medical ointments, then you should cauterize it with a preon (sharp-pointed) cautery slightly, according to the size of the scar, until its whiteness and original color have faded away and its color has changed.
Then heal it with a mixture of barley flour and lentil powder moistened with roasted oil and crushed leaves of arnica, mixed with dove's blood or pigeon's blood (equal parts), all mixed together; then apply a cloth dipped in this mixture to the area until it is healed.
Chapter 50.
On the Cauterization of Cancer.
When cancer is beginning and you want to remove it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery along the circumference of it as closely as possible.
And the wise men said that it should be cauterized with the last (circular) cautery in the middle of the area; but I have not seen this done, for I fear that it may become ulcerated, and I have personally seen this happen on several occasions.
And it is more appropriate to cauterize around its edges with a circular cautery, as we have said, or with many small cauteries.
Chapter 51.
On the Cauterization of Abscesses.
When an abscess is slow to mature, it may be due to excess pus or the patient's condition, such as old age or weakness, or simply due to the length of time; and you want to speed up the maturation process of the abscess, then cauterize its edges with many small puncturing cauteries. Then leave it alone so that it can mature quickly.
But if you want to perforate the abscess with a cautery, then here is its shape and form: place the cautery in the middle of the abscess until it penetrates the bone.
And if you place the cautery in that location where there is pus, in order to relieve the body of the arm; and then heal it until it is healed.
Chapter 52.
On the Cauterization of Corrosive Substances.
A corrosive substance is a mobile corruption in the member, which corrodes it just as fire consumes dry wood.
Therefore, if you see a corrosive substance in a location where it is appropriate to use cautery with fire, then you should use many small and large cauteries, as needed, at the site of the corrosion.
And then you should cauterize all around until you eradicate all of the corruption, leaving no cause or source of it remaining.
And then you should leave it alone for three days and apply oil mixed with crushed herbs to the cauterized areas until all of the scabs have been eradicated and all of the corruption has been eliminated.
And then heal it with flesh-generating ointments.
But if after three days healthy flesh begins to grow in the area where there is no corruption, then that is good; but if not, then you should repeat the cauterization on the areas that are still corrupt.
A corrosive substance can be treated with sharp medicine in some cases, as this is a substitute for cautery. However, cauterization with fire provides quicker relief.
I have already mentioned the treatment of corrosive substances with sharp medicine in the previous section; therefore, take that when you see fit to use it.
Chapter 53.
On the Cauterization of Nails and Similar Things.
Many patients suffer from a disease at the lower part of the leg called "clau," which is a serious ingressive condition that affects the foot; and cauterization in such cases is done in two ways: either with fire or with hot water.
The cautery with fire is that you heat the concave cautery, which should be shaped like aulture's beak, made of iron and of a size that matches the entire width of the "clau" or swelling, with thin edges.
And then place that fire over the "clau" and move your hand with the cautery along the circumference of the "clau," rotating it until the cautery reaches the depth of the swelling. Leave it in place for three days, or until it starts to discharge pus. And then apply a plaster made of crushed mallow leaves with salt, and leave it on for one night, as this will help draw out the root cause of the problem.
And then treat the area with animal-derived fat or ointment to promote healing.
If the condition persists and many patients suffer from similar symptoms on various parts of their body, especially on the hands and feet, then it is recommended to use a water-based cautery in these cases. To do this, take an iron or copper canula, or one shaped like aulture's beak, and heat it until it becomes red hot. Place it over the swelling and pour a small amount of hot water into the canula so that it reaches the root cause of the problem. Keep your hand steady and rotate the canula with gentle pressure, ensuring that its edges penetrate deep into the swelling and allow the hot water to reach the root of the problem. The patient should endure this treatment for an hour, after which you may remove the canula as the "clau" will have been drawn out.
And repeat this process for all of the affected areas until they are completely healed.
Then treat any remaining pus from the now-removed swellings with ointments derived from animal fats or other substances that promote skin growth and regeneration.
Chapter III.
Chapter III: On the use of cautery for treating tremors.
When a tremor is caused by cold in the nerves or fever due to similar causes, it is necessary to use four or five cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, placing one cautery between each vertebra. Additionally, use an olive-shaped cautery on the soles of the feet and another on the stomach. [
And as the tremor subsides, it will hasten the healing process for the illness.
Chapter LV.
Chapter LVI: On Cauterization of White Spots on the Body.
When white spots appear on the body and develop into pustules or fissures filled with thick, corrupt matter, it is advisable to begin treatment by cauterizing the tip of the fistula with a slender, pointed cautery made from myrtle wood, with its tip extended using fire; or with a long surgical needle; or with a lenticular cautery.
And sometimes it is appropriate to cauterize around the beginning of the expulsion in this manner; and they are not believed to be real, but rather a superficial excess that can be removed by cauterization, allowing for healing from them.
However, it is also necessary to perform evacuation with bloodletting (phlebotomy).
Chapter LVI.
Chapter LVI: On Cauterization for Flexion of Blood Vessels Through Incision of Arteries
Many patients suffer from flexion of arteries which is caused by incisions in the affected area, either due to wounds on the outside or incisions made during surgery for abscesses or cauterization of a limb, and it can be difficult to remedy this condition.
Therefore, when such a condition occurs, you should immediately place your hand over the orifice of the artery and press firmly on it with your fingers until the spasm in the blood vessels below the incision subsides and no more blood flows out.
And then place the olive-shaped cauteries on the fire and heat them for a short time with a large flame, until they are very hot. Then blow on them gently to make sure they are glowing red all over.
And then take one of the heated cauteries, either small or large, depending on the location and severity of the wound where the artery has been ruptured, and quickly apply it to the vein that you have identified as being dilated due to the bleeding, with the aim of cauterizing and constricting the blood vessel to stop the flow of blood.
And if blood continues to flow out of the orifice of the artery after you remove the cautery and apply pressure, then take another cautery that has been prepared in the fire and continue to apply it until the bleeding stops.
And be careful not to burn the nerves in the area, as this could lead to further complications for the patient.
And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to stop the bleeding by simply constricting the artery, especially when the artery is large. Instead, there are four methods that can be used: cauterization as previously described, extraction if not already extracted, as extracting the ends of the artery will cause them to burn and constrict the blood flow; ligation with either bile or a strong ligature; or application of medicines that have the power to restrict the blood flow, while also applying pressure with a cushion and proper bandaging.
But he who administers a gentle restriction to the limb and stricture with cloths or by means of heating causes or similar ones, should not hasten but rather wait.
But if this is done to someone and the doctor is not present nor medicine, then place a gentle pressure on the finger indicated over the orifice of that vein as we have said, and pay attention to the great constriction inside so that the blood remains an obstacle to the superior division of the wound, and above the artery it should not be bulging; and above the artery it should be sprinkled with very cold water until the blood coagulates and thickens; and further consider what is necessary for cauterization or medicine.
On incisions, perforations, cupping glasses, bloodletting, wounds and their similarities.
We have already said in the first chapter all diseases for which cautery with fire is appropriate and with burning medicine, and their occasions and causes, and the instruments necessary for them with the forms of cauteries; and I have organized the chapters from the superiority of the head to the feet.
And I will proceed in this chapter in the same manner so that it may be easier for those seeking to understand, and on top of what has been requested.
And before I begin, it is appropriate for you, dear reader, to understand that in this chapter, what was mentioned in the first chapter about cauterization will be expanded upon for emphasis.
And therefore, great caution is required, for in the operation described in this chapter, there are many instances of evacuation that occur with blood, which is life itself; and this can be caused by venesection or incision on the abscess or appearance of an abscess, purging of a wound, extraction of an arrow or incision of a stone and their similarities. And all of these are accompanied by fear and trembling, and often, the death of many people.
And I warn you not to fall into that in which there is hesitation, for sometimes you must deal with diseases as a man deals with many other things. And some of them will flee from you with their disease and it may be easy for you to save them, but sometimes due to the severity of their illness or its long duration, or because the illness is one that implies death, they will fear you.
And there are some who give you their wealth and say that with this they expect health from you, but their illness is deadly.
And so it is not appropriate for you to consent to those who come to you in this manner; your caution should be greater than your greed and do not presume any cause without a certain science that verifies it and leads to praiseworthy succession.
And use prognosis and indication of recovery in the treatment of all your patients, for it is a help to you in acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
Oh, my sons, may God breathe his understanding into you and not deprive you of his guidance and protection, for it is in his hands.
And I have organized this chapter into sections according to what was said in the chapter on cautery, from the cure of the head down to the feet, so that it may be easier for you to understand and meet your needs.
First Chapter.
Of the cure for water that is contained in the head of infants.
Know that this illness often occurs in infants after childbirth and when the nurse first lifts the baby's head.
And sometimes it occurs due to a hidden cause which is not known. [**Note**: This text is likely referring to hydrocephalus, a condition in infants where there is an abnormal accumulation of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) in the brain. This can lead to enlargement of the head and other neurological symptoms. The cause of this condition is not always known.]
But I have not seen this illness except in infants, and for all those that I have seen, their condition is close to death, and therefore, I have left them alone (without treatment). [**Note**: This approach would be considered unacceptable by modern medical standards. Hydrocephalus can lead to severe neurological damage if not treated promptly and effectively.]
And I have seen that an infant whose head was filled with water, and its head was always swollen to the point where it could not bend over due to the size of its head, and as the fluid increased further, it reached the point of death. [**Note**: This is still consistent with a severe case of hydrocephalus.]
And this fluid is either collected between the skin and the bone, or it is collected below the bone on the scalp.
Because the operation in this case (where the fluid is between the skin and the bone) and the abscess is small, it is necessary for you to make an incision in the middle of the head with a fissure that is two fingers wide, and its length should be enough so that the fluid can run out, and this is the shape of the spatula (tool used to make the incision):
And so if the fluid is more increased and the abscess is larger, then in this case there should be two incisions made in this manner:
And if the fluid is below the bone, the sign of this is that you see the seams (sutures) of the head open in all directions and the water comes out when you press it with your hand on the inside parts and it's not hidden. It is necessary for you to make three incisions in the middle of the head in this manner:
And make sure to extract all the fluid through the incision; then close the incisions with cloths and feathers, and apply on top a mixture of vinegar and oil within the fifth day, then loosen the ligaments and care for the wound with bandages and ointments, and wrap the head evenly. And feed the patient with dry food that has little moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed.
And there is another way of making the incision, which you consider when you see the size of the abscess and the collection of water, because sometimes it is larger in the occipital area, or in the front part, or on the right, or on the left; and so pay attention to where the abscess appears and the accumulation of water, and make the incision there in a way that is best for you.
And observe that you do not incise the artery and avoid causing a flow of blood, for the patient may die from this bleeding while also evacuating the water.
Second chapter.
When someone has catarrh or wounds in the ears or chest, and it is old (chronic), and you do not see any improvement with medication, then the last treatment for this is incision of those two arteries (carotid arteries).
And so when you want to make an incision in those (carotid) arteries, it is necessary that the patient raise their head, and then wipe the area with a rough cloth to locate the arteries, and tie the neck of the patient with some cloth; and consider where the pulse of the vein can be felt; and the locations of each of them are near the ears, but they are hidden except in some people.
And place a sign on the artery with a bandage, and then make an incision in each of them with the spatula of each side sharp, making the incision penetrate to the bone, and let it be for the width of the head.
And if you wish, insert the spatula under the artery and break it at its base, cutting upwards to the sides.
And let the length of the incision be two digits wide, because when any vein is cut, blood will come out with a pulsatile flow that jumps out frequently.
But if the artery does not appear in the incision, then it is necessary to measure three digits from the ear and place a sign with a bandage there, and then cut into the bone.
And what is necessary to drain from the blood is a quantity of wine, one cup. And you should drain a little more or less, and all of that depends on the amount that appears based on the strength of the patient and the swelling of the artery.
And you should also consider the wound, and if there remains on the bone any cause of the scalp, then incise it to prevent abscess from forming.
And then strengthen the wound with feathers and bandages of linen, and care for it with ointments until it is healed.
Capital III
On the extraction of veins that are located in the temples.
When someone suffers from old-age migraines or severe headaches, due to moisture in the temples and a certain quality in those veins, or from hardened old age that resembles them, and medical treatment methods do not help, then we resort to this procedure for these conditions: extracting veins in the temples or cauterizing those areas, as we have shown.
And the method for performing the operation and extracting those veins is as follows: the patient shaves the hairs in their temples; then they should look for the visible vein in the temple, which can be found by its pulsation, unless it is hidden due to excessive cold.
And if the vein is hidden, then have the patient's head stretched with a cloth; and rub the area with a rough cloth or apply warm water until the vein becomes visible. Then take the spatula of this shape: (presumably followed by a description of the shape and size of the spatula) And then you should gently scrape the skull with the spatula until you reach the vein; and make an incision in it, extracting it from the upper parts until you remove it from the skull, exposing the underlying tissue.
But if the vein is delicate, then wrap it with the tip of your finger, and make an incision in it to the extent that the length and contraction of its ends allow, without causing blood flow. This must be done carefully, as failure to make an adequate incision will not allow sufficient blood flow.
Then evacuate one ounce of blood. (Note: "Evacuate" here means to let out or remove the blood.) Within three. This could mean within three minutes, hours, or days, depending on the context. It is unclear from this sentence alone how much time is allowed for the evacuation of one ounce of blood.
If the vein is large, then it should be tied in two places with strong thread or cord, using double knots, to prevent infection and ensure proper blood flow until the wound heals.
And then make an incision in the excess tissue that lies between two ligaments, doing so either immediately or at another time. (Note: "Superfluitat" likely refers to unnecessary or redundant tissue.)
And if desired, cauterize the incision using a knife-like cautery tool until the ends of the wound are completely closed, which will serve as an alternative to suturing the wound. (Note: "Cauteri cutellar" likely refers to a small knife used for cauterization.)
And it is better if the patient has a fever or is of a hot constitution, as cauterization helps to reduce excess moisture and therefore is more beneficial. (Note: "Juvament" means aid or assistance.)
And the extraction of veins should be followed by packing the wound with suitable dressing and applying dry medications that promote healing and the growth of new skin, as well as using lotions or other remedies to help the wound heal. (Note: "Polvils decentament fayt" likely refers to clean bandages or dressings made from soft materials.)
And if unintentionally, during the procedure, blood flows from the vein, then you should take steps to stop the bleeding, such as using cauterization or packing the wound with appropriate dressing material, while applying pressure to restrict the flow of blood. (Note: "Omplas le loc de coto" means to fill the wound with a suitable material for stopping bleeding.) And if none of the above methods are available to you, then place your finger on the wound until the bleeding stops, and apply hot water or a hot compress to the area to help reduce swelling, while also applying pressure as needed to restrict the flow of blood. (Note: "Aygua de vehement fregiditat" means very hot water.)
A lighter method of vein extraction is to use a two-bladed cautery tool to cut and cauterize the vein simultaneously. First, mark two points on either side of the vein with a probe, then apply each blade of the cautery tool in turn until they reach the bone and cut through the vein in two places, thereby elongating it without completely severing its ends. This method is less invasive than full extraction, as the ends are not completely detached from one another, allowing for faster healing. (Note: "Depausa quascus, mot ignitz" means to apply each blade of the cautery tool in turn, a little at a time, while heating them up.)
And this is the shape of the cautery tool: (presumably followed by a description of the tool's size, shape, and materials)
And let the blades of the two-pronged cautery be sharp. (Note: "Esemps" means equal or evenly matched.) However, if the blades are not as sharp as two knives, it is better for them to be less sharp and closer together, so that they do not cut through the skin too quickly or deeply, causing unnecessary damage. (Note: "Propera a quascuna freg" means close to each other.)
And so, if the blades are thicker, then maintain a lower heat in the fire and cut through the skin lightly. (Note: "Alcuna grossitut" means some thickness or bulk.)
And this method is better in all ways and less invasive.
And let the space between the two blades be the width of a finger. (Note: "Grossesa" means thickness or breadth.)
Chapter Four.
On the treatment of acute and sour teary eyes in humans. (Note: "Huels" is likely a typo and should be "homes," meaning humans or people.)
When the eyes are watery and sour, and this is caused by veins on the forehead above the eyebrows, and no other remedies of medicine are effective, and sometimes the patient's face becomes red and they feel a tingling sensation as if ants were crawling on their forehead, and their eyelids become swollen and hot to the touch, with hair standing on end, and their eyelashes are singed from the acidity of the tears, then use the ancient remedy for treating this condition by performing the following operation: cure it with pressure. (Note: "Aquela curacio am spassa" means to treat it by applying pressure.)
And order the patient to shave the hairs on their forehead and then make three equal incisions on the forehead using a sharp tool such as a scalpel or lancet, taking care to space them evenly according to the length of the forehead. (Note: "Engualment distans" means equally spaced.) [{\ And if the length of these incisions spans two fingers, then make the first incision at a distance equal to half the width of the nose in the middle of the forehead, the second should be slightly shorter than the length of the eyelids and located near the lacrimal glands, and the third should be on the opposite side. (Note: "Lacertz" means eyelids.)
And be careful not to cut the veins in the temples and keep your hands away from the continuation of both jawbones. (Note: "Latz" means sides or temples, while "mandibulas" means jaws.) And if the space between each incision is three fingers wide, adjust accordingly. (Note: "Ajustatz" means adjust or adapt.)
And if you have a sponge or dry cloths ready, use them to absorb the blood. (Note: "Apparelhada" means prepared, and "seccatz" means dry.)
And then insert the spatula with two sharp ends, and make an incision in the shape of this spatula. (Note: "Inscisio" means incision, and "lu" refers to the object being cut.) which extends from the temple area to the second incision. (Note: "Partida" means section, and "templas" refers to the temples on either side of the forehead.) Excise all the skin that is between two incisions with the scalpel that is on top of the bone, and then do the same for the middle incision between the first and second incisions. (Note: "Exxcorja" means excise or remove, "ciphac" refers to a sharp tool such as a knife or scalpel, "os" means bone.) And then insert the spatula again into the first incision and use another tool called a cutellar, which has one sharp end and one blunt end. (Note: "Cutellar" is a type of knife or scalpel with a sharp edge on one side and a blunt edge on the other.)
And then place the sharp edge of the instrument on the skin attached to the bone, and the other end of it against the bone, and insert it so that it reaches the middle incision, and cut through all the veins and arteries that descend from the head to the feet using this instrument. (Note: "Vaysels" means vessels or ducts.)
But the incision should continue to the point where the bone appears, and then do the same for the middle incision between the two other incisions. (Note: "Appar" means appear or emerge.)
And once enough blood has been released to reduce pressure, squeeze the cloths soaked with clotted blood. (Note: "Exprem" means squeeze or press.)
And apply a poultice of aged cow dung to each crack, and put on top of it powders mixed with wine and oil and wine vinegar, and see that they do not cause abscess formation by cauterization.
And on the third day, loosen the ligament and administer a large infusion of hot water or decoction, and treat this with basilicon salve with rose oil and other things to ensure that the sores are healed.
Chapter 5.
Of the treatment of headaches with catharsis and the downward-descending humors from within the head parts.
When there is an acute and continuous catharsis in some veins, and the patient's humors are exhausted and become small, their appearance becomes weak, their eyelids are ulcerated, and their hair falls out, and they have a severe headache with sharp lancinating pain and consequent prostration, then you should understand by these signs that the matter and catharsis do not come from any other veins but those that originate from inside the head parts.
And the best treatment for this is as follows: you should instruct the patient to scratch their forehead, and then make an incision on it in a central location, not too deep but enough to reach the bone; continue from the left temple to the right temple, making sure that the incision goes through the bone; keep your hand away from the temporal muscles which are damaged due to excessive chewing.
Dry all the blood with a sponge or a dry cloth, and then fill the space between the two lips of the incision with aged cow dung or clean rags. Then apply poultices mixed with wine and oil on top of it to prevent abscess formation by cauterization.
And when you see that the abscess has diminished, then you should scrape the bone until flesh starts to grow there, and then treat this with a drying regimen that promotes tissue growth, for example by mixing equal parts of wheat flour and colophony and making a plaster out of it, which is then applied to the wounds to encourage natural skin growth.
Chapter 6.
Of the treatment of discharge in the ears.
The cause of discharge in the ears is one of four types: it can be mineral-like or similar to stone, such as iron and glass, or come from plants like cress or broad beans, or be liquid-like, such as water, vinegar, and their equivalents, or caused by some animal.
Therefore, when stone or another similar cause that is not suitable or compatible with the ear causes discharge in the ear, then expose the ear to sunlight and if you see the stone, distill some solution of oil of violet or cedar on it, and perform an extraction by inducing sneezing while closing the nostrils, and do this carefully. Then apply some cloth or wool pads to the outer edge of the ear, and pull up the ear lobe to expose the parts above it, because many times such discharge is caused by foreign objects.
And if it is not expelled, then perform an extraction using the delicate tool called gesti epicicarios, which has the following form:
If it is removed by the tool, then that's good; otherwise, perform an extraction using a delicate probe with two curves or bends.
Therefore, if it is not removed by that, then make a cannula from silver and insert the tip of the cannula into the opening of the ear canal, and seal the area around the cannula with wax or soft oil to prevent any other substance from entering but the cannula. Then extract it with your breath with strong suction, because many times this is effective as we have mentioned.
But if it is not removed in this way, then take a small piece of alum or an old tool with which you can catch birds with one hand, and place it at the end of the probe, and then wrap it tightly around the probe. Then insert it gently into the ear canal and dry out the moisture in the ear.
Therefore, if it is not removed by any of the methods mentioned above, then consider cutting it out before it causes abscess formation or spasm.
The method of cutting it out is as follows: first, anesthetize the patient by cutting a vein in the arm and extracting blood according to the strength of their vitality. Then place your hand over the patient's head and turn the ear upwards. Finally, make a small incision at the root of the ear, where it is tightly attached to the head, with great precision and care. And let the incision be crescent-shaped and deep enough to reach the stone. Once you see the stone has turned black or blue, remove it with appropriate instruments. Then close the wound quickly and treat it until it heals.
If the cause of discharge in the ear is one of the fats that are produced and swollen, then perform the treatment and extraction of it. But if you don't follow my instructions, then take fresh pus from another person and apply it to the affected area as follows: And apply the abscess of that fat which has fallen into the ear.
And don't do that when you think the object is already wet from the moisture of the ear. Instead, place it on many cloth pads and extract it with delicate probes or incisions as mentioned before, because this makes the extraction easier.
But if water has entered the ear, then the patient should first use sneezing with caution, and then fill their ear with some old cloth or cotton, and then place another cloth over the ear where the water is, and if it comes out, that's good. If not, then take many new pebbles and lemons according to the size of the finger, and heat them in the fire a little, and the patient should insert one of those pebbles into the opening of their ear and jump on one foot on that side, and strike the pebble inside the ear with another pebble. And do not stop doing that with the stone until all the water is expelled.
And do not stop doing that with the stone until all the water is expelled. And when the water has been removed, you will notice that it has become clear like paper or linen. And place one end of it in the ear and extend the other end with fire until it is burned most of it.
And then put another linen and do that many times until all the water is expelled, and clean it with a cannula as mentioned above for the stone extractor.
But for the removal of an animal that has entered the ear and is small and similar to a louse, cure it as we have said in the division. But if it is large and causes pain in the sensation, then perform the extraction with probes and forceps, and the cause of it is lighter than all other causes that can enter the ear.
But for the removal of a worm born in the ear, when you cure it with what we have said in the division and in the treatment of distillations and not confuse your treatment, then it is necessary that you look at the ear in the sun.
And therefore, if you see any sign of the worms there, then extract it with forceps or delicate probes. But if you don't see any signs, then take a cannula that is narrow at the tip and wide at the base, which has this form: And insert the narrow end of the cannula into the ear according to the amount that the patient can tolerate; and then suck with it by strong suction, and do this many times until all the worms are expelled.
But if he does not obey your assistance, then fill and close the opening of the canula with wax as we have said; then administer drippings which have been proven by the ancients in the cure of worms, and you will find this in the treatise on drippings.
And let your infusion be with which you pour the medical oils into the ear using this instrument of which this is its shape: And make it of silver or iron, straight, with a small hole at the end and flat on top.
And so that it is pushed in to where it is necessary in the cavity of the canula. And if you wish, take the rod and wrap it appropriately at the end, then pour oil into the cavity of the infusion, or the juice of any herb, or whatever you choose from these medicines in the canula - which is in the ear -, then insert the rod wrapped with a bandage and press gently with your hand until the oil is expelled in the cavity of the infusion and the patient feels it inside.
And let what is inserted in the ear be lightly burned with fire. And be careful that the cause which you will infuse in the ear is not too cold, for ear medicines do not tolerate this.
Chapter VII.
On the cure of obstruction in ears.
Some children's ears become blocked while still in their mothers' wombs and do not pierce through, and this also happens to some adults due to blockage caused by earwax or foreign matter; sometimes the blockage is located in the inner portion of the ear canal that is not visible, and other times it occurs in the outer part.
And those that occur in the inner portion of the ear canal, which are not visible, are more difficult to cure.
And in the case where you can see the blockage, it is necessary to turn the patient's ear towards the sun and look at it. And so if you see an obvious blockage, open it using this thin spatula of the following shape:
The tip of it should be narrow, with one side being sharp and the other not, and the spatula itself should be two finger-widths wide to avoid harming the ear.
And so if the blockage is due to excess earwax or flesh inside the ear canal, then use fine probes and carefully cut it away until all of the excess flesh has been removed.
And if the blockage is located in the inner part of the ear canal, then take a thin rod and lightly heat it over fire, then gently insert it into the ear canal.
And so if you feel the blockage with what the patient experiences difficulty hearing, gently press on it to relieve the pressure, but be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear.
And then place a cloth on the ear according to the size of the opening that you have wrapped with Egyptian wax; do this for several days until you are sure of the healing of the injury, or take some and soak it in warm water and powder it over the area, using it three times a day. If the ear has become inflamed, then you must lance the abscess and replace the bandage with another that has been wrapped in wax made from roses oil until the swelling subsides; then continue to care for the wound until it heals.
But if bleeding occurs, then submerge a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use the other treatment that stops blood flow, which is called cauterization in the treatise on drippings.
Chapter VIII.
On the treatment of blepharitis, which affects the eyelids.
Blepharitis can occur in the eyelids of both eyes and can sometimes be caused by excess moisture or dryness.
Therefore, it is necessary to have tweezers or probes and use a spatula to separate the eyelashes from their roots, then place them over the affected area three times a day.
But if pain and bleeding occur, then cauterize the area with a fine lancet.
The best cauterization is achieved by making incisions and cutting off the roots of the lashes, which are burned away with fire and cannot grow back.
Chapter IX.
Treatment for styes that occur on the eyelids.
Many times styes occur on the eyelids due to various causes that resemble an abscess in their strength and hardness, and for this reason they are called "grandissias".
And it is an accumulation of thick moisture in the eyelid, both above and below.
Therefore, the operation consists of considering whether the stye is protruding from the eyelid and affects all parts of it, and if its cause is light.
Therefore, make an incision in it along its length and then carefully scrape away the edges until it dries up; then use tweezers to lift it and cut it off.
And if the wound is large, then stitch it up with sutures, and care for it until it heals.
And if it is small, then there will be no harm in leaving it alone, as the wound's natural healing process and tissue regeneration will take care of it.
If the stye is declining towards the inner parts of the eyelid and its surface, then carefully evert the eyelid and lift the stye with tweezers (of your choosing), and press it from all sides. If the incision on the eyelid is long, this will not cause any harm.
And then wash your hands with salt water, and care for the wound until it heals over time.
Chapter X.
Treatment for an external hordeolum (stye) on the upper eyelid.
An external hordeolum is a swelling that forms in the outer layer of the upper eyelid, often affecting children and causing their eyes to become inflamed, red, and sensitive to light; it can also interfere with their vision and make it difficult for them to open their eyes.
And for this reason, you often see them touching their faces and sleeping with their eyes closed, and if the eyebrows are wet, there is already inflammation present, and a clear sign of impending infection is evident in the eye; and when you touch the area with your fingers, you can feel it swollen.
One method of treatment is for the patient to place their head on your lap and cover themselves with a cloth or towel; then you should create a circle around the affected area, taking care to include all redness and swelling, and place it over the stye, pressing gently with your fingertips until pus forms in the center of the circle. Then, use a spatula to make an incision in the center of the pus, being careful not to cut too deep, similar to a procedure used in bloodletting.
Surely in the prior proceeding you should split the shinbone all the way through until you reach the knee, since in most severe cases the kneecap can be reached through a fissure following the shape of a white grain.
Therefore, extract those bandages which you have wrapped between the thighs and rotate them with your right and left hands until they are fully spread out.
And be careful not to touch the fissure with your instrument, lest it reaches the bone and damages it.
But if you do not see your artery at the beginning of the fissure, then insert a slender instrument into it until it reaches the artery; and extract it in the same manner as we have described; and moisten bandages with wine and vinegar and place them over the area, holding them in place with compresses.
And ensure that three pieces of salt are placed in the cavity of the fissure, to absorb any remaining moisture.
And treat it until it heals.
But if a boil appears in the area, then treat it with emollient plasters until it heals.
Chapter 11.
On methods of touching the bone.
When hairs in the eyelids become ingrown due to natural growth and aging, then this causes various ailments of the eye such as constant tears, swelling of the eyelid, and thickening of the skin, leading to a condition known as tactinir of the eye, which can be cured in four ways: through cauterization with fire; through acute medicine as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cautery; by surgical incision and stitching; or through the use of canes as I will describe.
And so you must position the patient's head towards your thigh; then turn the eyelid of the affected eye towards your left hand, and if it turns easily, that is good. But if not, insert a needle into the one closest to the lower part of the eyelid, and apply vitriol on top of it, and direct the needle towards the margin of the eyelid where the lashes are, close to the lashes, and pull the vitriol upwards with the eyelid, turning it in that direction.
And make an incision in the inner part of the eyelid, below the ingrown lashes, using a sharp scalpel from the lacrimal gland to the lacrimal duct; then extract the vitriol and place small pieces of cotton or cloth under the eyelid, and cover it with a tent made of thin linen, shaped like a myrtle leaf.
But it is important that the shape of the incision matches the degree of swelling of the eyelid, as this varies from person to person, since some people require a larger incision in the upper eyelid depending on the degree of swelling.
And make an incision with the scalpel along the two lines you have marked, starting from the lacrimal gland to the lacrimal duct. And if your incision is close to the natural lashes, like that of a king's beard.
And insert a probe into one of the two corners of the shinbone, and scrape it thoroughly, then apply stitches to bring together the two lips with fine wool or vitriol, and wipe away any blood, and if you wish, attach any excess vitriol to the eyebrows using some adhesive.
And leave the stitches in place for three or four days, and then take care of it.
And if you wish, leave the wound without stitches and treat it with dry and constricting agents, because the eyelid will be swollen due to the sealing of the wound and the accumulation of fluid; but stitching is better, as I have said before.
But if the patient complains of discomfort, then it is good to operate and not to be afraid.
And there is another method of operating on the eyelid, which involves making marks in the shape of a myrtle leaf and then raising the eyelid using three separate and connected probes.
But if that is not possible, then hold the probes and ensure they are clean. If not, take a needle with thread and insert it in the middle of the markings; place one end near the lacrimal gland and the other near the lacrimal duct, and adjust the thread equally between your fingers, then lift the entire shinbone as we have described.
And then bring together the two lips of the wound with stitches and treat it until it heals.
But if a boil forms near your incision or fissure, then treat it with cerate and similar substances, and with ointments.
And sometimes the eyelashes turn inward, then it is necessary to use the method of incision as we have described; but stitching is more artificial in each case.
Treating tactinir with canes is done in this way: And it involves turning the eyelid and cutting along the markings on the inner side, as I have described; then take two thin canes or rods that are as long as the eyelid and narrower than the width of a scalpel. And you have already made incisions at the ends of each section, where the stitches are located.
Then attach each cane to the excess skin of the eyelid with great care and constrict them tightly, leaving it in place for several days. The shinbone will die due to the constriction and become necrotic, shrinking and drying out until it falls off on its own.
But if it takes too long, then break the canes with tweezers and treat the wound until it heals.
And once it has healed, the eyelid will be lifted and the lashes will not poke.
And this is the method for using two canes that you will follow in this way: and should be of equal length and width.
Chapter 12.
On lifting ingrown eyelashes using a needle when the hair is hard.
When the eyelashes are not natural and hard, rough, and ingrown, then the procedure involves taking a fine needle and dipping it in soft, subtle wax or lion fat, and then carefully adjusting the ends of the needle so that they are slightly curved. And let the length of the curved needle be about the size of one palm.
And then take another fine needle and bend it slightly in the same way if you wish.
And have the patient place their head in your lap and position them so that they are facing the sun, so that your work is visible, as it is a delicate and precise procedure.
And insert the needle into the root of the ingrown hair with some force and quickly push it through the eyelid until you pull out the natural hair above it.
And then pull out the ingrown hair and insert it in a piece of linen or cloth, and there should be one, two, or three hairs at most.
And then pull your hand with the linen and ingrown hair away from the eyelid, making sure that it is extracted together with the natural hair.
But if the linen is pulled out without extracting the hair, then pull it away from the lower parts using the needle that you have prepared until the ingrown hair is extracted through the upper hole.
And observe the state of the eye, as you will then extract both the linen and the needle, and close the wound with clamps or stitches, leaving them in place for two or three days until the ingrown hair adheres to its original position and grows back healthy skin.
And if the hair is sparse, then attach artificial hair that matches the natural hair, and lift it up so that it can be lengthened over some distance, and then you lift it up.
Chapter 13.
On the treatment of a swelling that appears on the upper eyelid.
When a swelling appears on the eye and is accompanied by a contraction of the eyelid that pulls to the right or left due to poor healing of a wound, incision, or cauterization, it is called "leporina," and such a swelling can be either natural or accidental, resulting from healing of wounds, incisions, or cauterizations, or similar causes.
The method of the operation for this condition involves cutting open the swelling and separating its lips, placing a piece of linen cloth in the space between them, and then binding the lips together until they heal.
And it is not necessary to use drying or constricting treatments for the causes of this condition because doing so will only make the swelling worse than it ever was before.
Instead, use remedies that soften the swelling, such as fenugreek, and cook it in water with elder flowers and seeds, or make a poultice of figs, which has been liquefied with one of the oils, and soak the cloth in this mixture and use it to treat the swelling.
The goal of your treatment is to penetrate thoroughly, without causing further scarring, in the same manner as was done at the beginning.
And this operation that we have described is nothing more than a correction of swelling that does not return the form of the area to its previous state.
Chapter fourteen.
On the treatment of a swelling that appears below the eyelid.
This swelling that appears below the eyelid is truly called "alxacrati," and it can be either natural or accidental in origin.
But an accidental swelling can arise from wounds, cuts, cauterization, or similar causes.
The method of operating on this condition is to take a needle with double thread and insert it into the flesh, passing it from the left tear duct to the right tear duct until the thread reaches both ends of the swelling.
Then stretch the skin at the edges with the needle and stitch it up with the needle, and use a wide-bladed knife to make an incision. And if the appearance of the eyelid is restored to its proper form, that is good; but if not, take a scalpel and place it in the slit, and use it to shape the eyelid, and make two cuts in the lower eyelid.
And the ends of these two incisions should be at the two corners of the slit that you have made, and they should converge so that the resulting shape is formed by the meeting of these angles.
And this shape is the Greek letter lambda ().
Then remove the excess flesh from the lower eyelid so that it is cut to the same length as the upper eyelid.
Then bring the separated parts together and stitch them up with wool thread, and treat the area with the softening remedies and cauterization until it heals.
And if the swelling arises from a cut, stitch, or cauterization, then it is necessary to make an incision in a flat line along the hairs of the eyelid as previously described. And then separate with a cauterization between two lips as we have said.
In summary, the treatment of alxacrati, whether it is above or below the eyelid, involves an operation that follows the preparation of the alxacrati, which has a diverse shape similar to lumps.
And wise artisans always prepare various methods for making the form return to its natural state or as close to it as possible, depending on what is suitable for the patient in terms of the operation and the instruments used.
Chapter fifteen.
On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or cornea.
When this adhesion occurs in some people such that the eyelid is stuck above to the white of the eye and movement is restricted, making it difficult for them to perform their natural functions, then it is necessary to insert a scalpel under the lower eyelid and lift it up or stretch it with forceps.
And then you should make an incision in the adhesion with a fine, blunt knife that is not too sharp so as not to disturb the patient during the operation and keep the knife from damaging the eye with its sharpness.
And your incision should be made so as to easily remove the adhesion, returning the eyelid to its natural form and healing the entire area of adhesion.
And then you should put salt water in the eye, which you can use to rinse it; or distill juniper, dissolved in water, into it.
And then, use a cautery to separate the eyelid from the eye, and place wool soaked in egg white on the eye, and for three days use remedies that promote healing until it is healed.
Chapter sixteen.
On incision of a nail and growths of flesh on the tear ducts.
Know that there are two types of nails: those that are nervous and resemble hard, thin bone; and those that are not nervous, which are similar to congealed white moisture, and when they are cut or forced to be held with forceps, they are easily cut and the forceps do not penetrate.
And both types of nails begin at the inner corner of the eye, where they gradually cover the sight and restrict its light and movement.
The method of working in the incision of the patient is for the patient to place their head on your knee, and you open the folds of them, lift the eyelid with your hand, and then collect a fold of skin with an ounce of moderate traction and extend it to the parts above. Then take a needle and insert it into that fold of skin, with a horsehair or ox or cow hair, or similar, or with strong bile, or gradually double the tip of the needle and place it in the middle of the fold of skin, and penetrate it with the needle, and bind the fold of skin with bile; and extend it to the parts above, and scrape off the hair from the surface of the fold of skin, which will dry up the pus. And in this way you continue to do so on the patient's backside.
Then you incise the residue in the corner of the eye with a thin spatula or small tweezers, and remove the flesh from the natural tear duct so that through the incision of it there does not result continuous flow of tears.
And sometimes the fold of skin with only one ounce stretched or with bile, as we have said, and then scrape off any excess tissue with a spatula in the shape of a lion's claw, which is its form.
And be careful when using the spatula that you do not touch the corneal membrane and cause it to break, and make sure the pupil is perforated.
Then make an incision in the eye with a little bit of triple salt or made from crushed onions, and leave it in for another day; and then cure it with whatever is necessary until it has healed.
And if the fold of skin is not sensitive and you cannot insert the needle or it has not been inserted with an ounce, many times this type of fold of skin is cured with medicine, and is healed just like a wound and recommended in the division.
And if you wish to incise it, then you open the eye of the patient and take a thin spatula with sharp edges according to this form: I believe this is an abbreviation for "amplitudine subtilitatis," which means "with subtle fineness" or "with delicate precision." However, it seems the text may have been cut off here and some of the description is missing. And if sometimes the fold of skin is rarefied and recessed, and you see pus in it, then distill from your eye into the patient's eye using onion juice or crushed garlic or triple-refined salt, and fill the eye for another day.
And then repeat the operation on it until everything that is in it has come out, except for the opposite abscess in the eye, in which case you leave it alone and cure the abscess first until it has healed.
And then continue your operation on it with caution until it has healed.
The prominence of the tear duct, if noticed in the eye due to great damage, should be suspended with an ounce; and make an incision in it from one side, but do not complete the incision so that you do not cut into any tears.
And then distill crushed garlic into the tear duct until it has healed.
Chapter 17.
Of incisions for abscesses and of the things born from fleshy growths in the eye.
Sometimes in the folds of the eyelids, flesh has grown and covered the pupil, or is close to covering it, or presses on the eyelid and slightly compresses the eyelashes against the parts outside, and appears like a swelling similar to a balustrade.
But the operation for this is that the patient places their head on your knee; and then you open the folds of the eye and collect all of that flesh with appropriate ounces, holding it with a forceps or a small basket; and then make an incision in the flesh at the beginning until everything is finished with the incisors, but be careful not to damage the eye as you perform your operation.
And your incision should be the one you use to cut those [growths], or with a spatula, which we have recommended in the incision of the fold of skin, or with small tweezers that can collect pus as needed, according to the shape that will be described later in this chapter.
And once your incision is complete and all of that flesh has been removed, then fill the eye with triple-refined salt, or distill red powder on it, similar to corrosive medicine, and place a piece of egg white over the outside of the eye until it is certain there will be no further abscess.
And if there is still some cause of an abscess and it is bleeding pus, and you fear an abscess will form, then leave the eye alone and cure that abscess with whatever medicine is necessary, and repeat the operation on it until it has healed, and similarly for any fleshy growths found in this type of eyelid.
But in all cases you must avoid curing the eye with any natural or accidental method involving tools, working with iron, and not placing your hand in any of these operations until you see that this member can tolerate the operation.
Chapter 18.
Of the collection of pus in the eye.
Pus is red veins that are swollen over the eye and prevent urination by obstructing its operation, and they cause the eye to weaken over several days.
Therefore it is necessary at the beginning to consider whether the eye in which there is pus is strong and free from other ailments, then you collect that pus.
And you command the patient to place their head in your lap, and then suspend those veins with an ounce or two depending on your discretion; and that ounce should be made of delicate traction according to this form:
Or two ounces gradually increasing in thickness according to this form:
And then gather those veins with delicate forces, using delicate precision, and clean the blood periodically until you see that the veins have been removed from the eye and are relaxed.
And be careful not to damage the eye with the ends of the spatula; and perform your operation in the afternoon facing the sun, and be very precise in your work so that you only cut those veins.
And when you have finished, then distill crushed garlic or red powder into the eye to dissolve and remove any remaining pus with its strong corrosive properties.
But if this is not possible for you to collect all of it in that hour, then you bandage the entire area with whatever eases the pain, and leave it for several days until the pain has subsided and there is no further risk of abscess.
And then repeat this method until it has fully healed.
And this is the shape of the tweezers:
Chapter 19.
Of reducing inflammation in the nose.
When you treat inflammation with a cauterizing tool or sharp burning medicine, as described earlier and it has not healed, then do not hesitate but instead make an incision over the abscess until it matures, and extract all of the moisture in it until the bone is exposed.
And once the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackness in it, then use an instrument of this shape:
And it is named "aspre cap," made of iron, and has a round tip like an awl, which should be sharpened using a file or fine rasp for subtle puncturing, as shown in the following form:
And place that over the corrupt part of the bone, and then rotate it gently between your fingers while gradually applying pressure until you feel certain that the corruption has been scraped away.
And do this several times, and then restore the area with drying and styptic agents.
Therefore, if the place is solid and good flesh has grown, and the body is separated from the pus after 40 days, and it does not become inflamed, create pus, or have any other accidents, then you know that it is healed.
But if not, the fissure is not closed, instead it should be reduced to the shape of a nose, and this can be done in the following way: after uncovering the bone with surgery or acute medicine, once the bone is exposed, take clay in this shape:
Let the exterior of the instrument be in the shape of a triangle and its handle narrow towards the end, like this. (Note: It seems like the text is describing some kind of medical tool)
And then place it over the bone, and let it be next to the lacrimal (possibly a medical term for a bone near the eye). Gently move your hand closer to the tool until it penetrates the bone, and the patient will feel this as they exhale air through their mouth when you do this.
Therefore, restore the area with styptic and drying medicines as has been taught to you.
When the flesh has grown and the area is hardened, the matter that was expelled to the outside returns to the nose, so this means that pus is light on the patient. (Note: This sentence seems to indicate that the medical procedure described earlier in the text was successful in healing the fissure)
Capital XX. (This is likely a heading for a new section or topic in the medical treatise)
Of reducing the prominence of the heel. (Note: This seems to be the title for this new section)
When the heel protrudes in its entirety and does not result in any significant harm or decrease, then it is necessary to relax the patient, make them walk, and place blistering agents on their neck without scarification or suction, but with good suction; place a liniment made of pitch, aloe, incense, and tragacanth on the heel, and apply strengthening emplasters to the heel with many powdered herbs. (Note: It seems that this section is describing a treatment for a protruding heel)
The method of making the powders is to take shredded linen from a lion's mane, and make each strip double-folded into four layers; then make these into powders. (Note: It seems that this section is describing how to prepare the powdered herbs for use in the emplasters mentioned earlier)
And then place these powders one on top of another according to the amount needed for the heel. (Note: This sentence seems to indicate that the powdered herbs should be layered on the heel) And then strengthen these powders with a hard cloth and strong pressure, repeat the blistering agents with suction without scarification, and then remove the blistering agents and leave the heel wrapped tightly for one day and one night. (Note: This section is describing how to apply the powdered herbs and blistering agents to the protruding heel)
But if during this time the ligament becomes softened, then it is necessary for it to be made tight. (Note: This sentence seems to indicate that there may be complications during the healing process)
And then wrap the ligament tightly during the day and night, as we have said. (Note: This sentence seems to summarize the instructions for treating the protruding heel)
And if the heel is already reduced in size, that's good; but if not, then repeat the application of the plaster with the powders and pressure and blistering agents until it is healed. (Note: This sentence summarizes the instructions for treating a protruding heel, and suggests that the treatment should be repeated if necessary)
Capital XXI. (This is likely a heading for a new section or topic in the medical treatise)
Of the incision of the prominence of the tunica uvea. (Note: This seems to be the title for this new section)
When there is a disruption in the tunica uvea and it protrudes like a raisin beyond the eyelids, making the person appear as if they have two eyes, and you want to make an incision, then the procedure is as we have recommended: insert the needle into the edge of the uvea from the lower part towards the upper part, and insert another needle with double thread on the side closest to the lacrimal duct, and let it penetrate and leave the first needle in its position. Then make an incision with the double thread and lift the piece of the uvea along the path of the needle, and strengthen that spot.
Then remove the needle and place wool soaked in egg white albumen on the heel, and leave it until the thread falls out with the lifted tissue.
Then cure the heel with what comforts it until the wound is healed.
And sometimes the procedure involves adding to the entire area with a circle of cloth around the heel, which adjusts the prominent swelling, and is perforated with a thin spatula that reaches the preon of the heel, allowing the humidity of the albuginea to flow out, descending the heel and entering quickly.
And then strengthen it until it is healed.
Capital XXII.
Of treatment for cataracts.
This disease, which is called cataracts, is nothing but pus that has settled in the eye, resembling descending water but it's not that.
But the method of working on it is to have the patient sit on a prepared and straight chair, then take their head in your two hands and hold it in such a way that you can see the pus descending towards the lower parts, and dry it so that it does not continue to descend, and block the light so that the patient can see the objects as they used to.
And if it does not descend, know that it is water.
But if the descent of the pus has not been prepared with what we have said, then have the patient sit between your hands and take a thin spatula and make an incision over the panniculus (connective tissue) just next to the continuation of the conjunctiva and corneal tunica in the crown (at the edge), until the pus is released.
Therefore, once it is released, then you should distill in the eye a decoction of hot water with added honey or a decoction of fenugreek and honey that you have already boiled.
And then it should be cured with other causes until it is healed.
Capital XXII.
Of the treatment for descending water in the heel.
We have already discussed the types of water in the division and which ones are appropriate to pierce with words (i.e., through verbal communication), so now do so according to their health status.
Therefore, it is necessary for you to have the patient sit between your hands on a cushion and place their affected heel on your knee, which should be covered with a cloth or other material that will provide support and stability.
And then place your left hand near the eyelid of their affected heel (if it's the left foot), or with your right hand if the affected heel is on the right foot.
And place your right hand on him, if his pain is on the left side; or place your left hand on him, if his pain is on the right side.
And place the end of the probe near the crown by the thickness of the ray in the inner corner of the eye, and roll the probe with power and skill with your hand.
And penetrate into the white of the eye and feel that the probe has reached the desired location.
It is necessary that the width of the probe's path to the center be equal to the space between the pupil and the edge of the black, which is the crown of the eye; for you will see with that pupil through the clarity of the corneal tissue.
And place the probe inside the location of the water, and pull it down once, then again, and so if the water descends quickly, then you will know at once what the patient has been looking at with his eye, and the probe in its eye.
And rest for a little while; then if the water has descended, you will continue to pull it down before the probe is thrown out.
And when it is dry and does not descend, then you can gently remove the probe, and rinse your hand little by little, and dissolve a small amount of clear gemstone salt in the water and wash the inside of the eye with that; and then place a tight eyecup or stopper or wool soaked in rose oil and egg white over the eye.
But nowadays, people of our time place a three-hundred-threaded woolen compress with egg white on it.
And if he does not obey your probe entering the eye because of his hardness - for some men have very hard eyes - then it is necessary to take the spatula called an "alberit" which has this form:
And then pierce with that the conjunctiva, and do not force your hand in the hole, but only make a subtle path for the probe to enter.
And then insert the probe as we have said.
And you must complete your work by preparing a sleeping place for the patient, lying on his back in a dark room, and prohibiting all movements.
And place him in the natural position so that his nature may be healed, and not harm his head to the right or left side at all.
And let him rest according to his condition within the third day.
And then release him in that dark room and expose his closed eye to some sights, and make him see some things, and then return him to rest within the seventh day.
And it is not necessary to do this during the time of cure or immediately after the infusion. You must be careful because the water can easily overflow due to great and powerful attention.
But if pus forms, then it is necessary to release the eye within the seventh day and correct that with what overcomes the pus.
And now you have healed his eye and placed a dressing on the face so that it may be guided to move downwards for several days, while he is in the dark room.
And then let him gradually leave that darkness and engage with his surroundings again.
And know that in alchemy, the student is not excused from looking at some things, and therefore you must be bold in your work.
And now some of those who are at the art have reached us, and some say that they make fire in the Airag magdam, which is pierced and through which water passes.
But I have not seen anyone in our land who has perfected that, nor is it mentioned in any of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that this is new.
And these are the forms of the types of magdam, so that those who do not know them may be familiar with them:
And they are made of earth or iron properly, and their ends are sharpened with this triangular subtlety, with the sharp end being in this shape.
Chapter 24.
On the healing of a fleshy growth in the nose.
When different fleshy growths appear in the nose, which are caused by something similar to a heavy scorpion or a chicken foot; and this illness is called polypus because it resembles the represented foot of a chicken. [*Note: The word "polip" here is likely derived from the Latin word "ps," meaning "foot." It refers to a type of growth in the nose that was believed to resemble the foot of an animal, often a chicken or a bird. However, modern medical terminology uses the term "nasal polyp" to refer to a different condition, which is a benign growth in the lining of the nasal passages and sinuses.*] And it is fleshy and cancerous, eroded, of dark color; and it is the flesh of a lion, not of dark color. [*Note: The translation of "carn cancrosa" as "fleshy and cancerous" is an interpretation based on the context. The word "cancro" in Latin means "crab" or "cancer," but it is unclear whether this term is being used here to refer to a specific medical condition or not.*]
Therefore, in the case of those fleshy growths that are not fraudulent or cancerous, it is necessary to have the patient sit between your hands and expose them to the sun, and then gently pick at those growths with an instrument. And then extract that from the exterior parts, and then cut what you have understood of that with a sharp and subtle spatula on one side, so that you know that all the flesh is removed; and if any cause remains for which an abscess is possible, then quickly remove it with one of the fine instruments with ease so that no cause remains. But if it is ruled by blood or an abscess has formed, then you should do what is necessary; that is, if it is a malignant abscess, then you should cut and cauterize it so that all the cavities are opened and the blood is drained.
And then let it be placed in the nose with an incision using vinegar or water or wine. But if the nose is open and there is a flow of moisture into the palate, then you know that it has healed.
But if the moisture does not enter as it should, then you know that inside there is flesh in the upper bones of the nose to which the abscess has not reached.
Therefore, it is necessary to insert a piece of clean linen into the nose of the patient if there is any swelling, and moisten it with many waters, and place a small amount of it between each word or less, and then gently move the patient's head while inserting one end of the linen into the nose using a probe or other suitable instrument.
And after that has been done, let him inhale the scent of it so that it reaches the nasal passages and exits through his nostrils, as many children at school do this action, and it is an easy matter for those who wish to do it.
And then secure the two ends of the suture, one end exiting on the nose and the other remaining in the nose, and then administer flesh-binding sutures with the nodules that are on the suture, doing it until you know that the flesh is bound to the suture nodules.
And then extract the suture, and secure it in the nose with a small piece of wool soaked in blood, doing this for three days or more until the ointment has dissolved all that is dead in the flesh.
And at the end of the treatment, place a lead cannula in the nose for several days until it has healed.
But if the healing process causes dryness, use this (remedy).
And this is the shape of the instrument used for cleansing the nose, with which oils and medicines are distilled into the nostrils.
And make it from silver or copper, resembling a small open lamp, similar to a small basin, and with a spout.
And if you wish, make a closed cannula similar to a reed, and the cannula of the nasal cleansing tool should be flat, open; to which should be attached a handle at the back, with which you can hold it when you warm up in it oil or any liquid that you want from the extractable substances and causes.
Chapter 25.
About boils in the nostrils.
A common condition is a boil in the nostrils, which grows and becomes noticeable in several days before it is treated.
And for that reason, you should incise it at the beginning of its appearance and remove all of it. And then place over the area either a cautery or a burning medicine that can replace it.
But if the incision is delayed and it has become larger, then consider whether it is stony, hard, with dark color and little sensation; if so, do not touch it with iron because it is a cancerous abscess, for often those who make an incision in this kind of abscess cause great harm to the patient.
And if the abscess is of a lion-like touch and not dark colored, and incision is possible throughout, then evacuate the patient and make an incision in it without fear, and cure the area with drying and constricting substances until it heals.
Chapter twenty-six.
Regarding the suture of the nose, lips, and ears when continuity is dissolved due to wounds or similar causes.
Know that when there is dissolution of continuity in one of these cartilages, little benefit can be expected from the operation except in some cases.
Therefore, when dealing with any cause of such disruption, consider whether it is a fresh wound with its own blood; and if so, then align the two lips of the wound with sutures and treat it until it heals.
And if the lips of the dissolved continuity have already separated and each one has healed, then it is appropriate to cut a portion of the skin on both sides until blood flows out. And then align the two edges with stitches and strengthen them, and sprinkle dragon's blood powder on top of it and let it sit for 300 seconds, and place a compress of emplastrum defragrans or any other consolidating plaster on top of it, and leave it in place for two to three days. Then remove it and replace the plaster and leave it in place until the pus is naturally drained, and then treat with ointment until it heals.
However, the method of suturing involves aligning the dissolved continuity with needles as we have recommended in the suturing of the abdomen, or aligning it with suture material made from animal intestines, as you have been taught.
Chapter twenty-seven.
On the removal of causes that appear between the two lips in the inner parts.
Often, some men develop hard abscesses between the folds of their lips that resemble boils or blisters, some are smaller and some are larger.
Therefore, it is necessary to separate the lips and open up each of these hardened areas with an incision, then clean out the abscesses by filling them with three times the amount of turpentine until the blood has coagulated. Then wash the area with vinegar, treat it with a styptic substance until it heals.
Chapter twenty-eight.
Regarding incision of the attached flesh on the gums.
A common occurrence is a growth of flesh attached to the gums, which ancient physicians referred to as "albulus". Therefore, it is necessary to use forceps or an instrument such as a lancet and make an incision in it at its base, allowing for drainage of pus or blood.
And then apply turpentine or other styptic or desiccant powders to the area.
And if the flesh returns, then make another incision and apply a hot iron to it, for the hot iron will prevent its return.
Chapter twenty-nine.
Regarding the removal of teeth with forceps.
When there are rough and hard protrusions on the inner surfaces of the teeth, between the teeth and gums, some of which are blackened or yellowed, leading to corruption of the gums and loosening of the teeth.
And so it is appropriate that you make the patient sit between your arms and place their head on your thigh, and file down their teeth where those calluses and similar causes appear, like sandpaper, until no cause remains, and do this with blackness and yellowness and other things, until they are cleaned.
If what I have said in the beginning is clear to you, that's good; but if not, then you should repeat this reasoning to yourself for several days until it becomes clear what you want.
And know that teeth have the need for various types of razors with different shapes, depending on what is needed for your operation. And therefore the razors used to shave teeth from the inside are different from those used to shave between teeth, and you should prepare these types of razors, which I will show you soon.
Chapter 30.
On the extraction of teeth.
It is appropriate that you cure the tooth of its pain with all care and caution in every extraction of it, for there is no cause that can replace the sight of it when it is extracted, for it is a subtle substance that is expelled during the extraction of it.
But when the patient is forced to have that tooth extracted, you must be certain which tooth is causing pain, because many times the pain deceives the patient and they think it's in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one instead, but the pain does not cease until the sick and painful tooth is extracted. We have seen this happen during barbers' operations.
Therefore, how do you determine which tooth is causing pain? Well, you should scarify the area around the tooth with a spatula that has some virtue in it until the tooth and gum are dissolved from all sides, and then use your fingers or fine forceps to gently touch it until you reach the desired point.
And then hold the tooth firmly with large tongs for good traction or strong force, and place the patient's head between your knees so that they are securely held in place, and pull the tooth carefully in a straight line to avoid breaking it or causing more pain to the patient.
And so, if you have not forgotten, then take one of those instruments and insert it under the tooth from all sides with ease, applying gentle force to remove it as you did at the beginning.
But if the tooth is broken or corroded, then you must wrap it with cloth and tighten it with a thin wire to prevent it from breaking during your constriction with tongs.
And you must operate with great precision using scarification around the entire gum area, and be careful not to break it or cause it to split further. Instead, focus on the pain that is greater than the initial pain experienced by the patient.
And be careful not to do what some ignorant barbers do during their hasty and reckless extractions, without using the recommended techniques that we have discussed; because many times they cause great harm to patients, which are more difficult to treat than the initial problem. They also leave broken roots or extract teeth with pieces of jawbone attached, as we have seen in many cases.
And then rinse the patient's mouth with wine vinegar or wine with salt after extracting the tooth.
And if there is a flow of blood after the extraction, as often happens, then sprinkle some powdered egg on the wound and if it doesn't stop bleeding, cauterize it.
The shape of the forceps and fine tongs used to extract teeth should have a long handle, short shank, and thick body so that they are not bent when using them.
And they should have a wide handle so that when you use them with force, they are not bent, and their handles should be short.
They should be made of Indian steel and have straight handles with teeth that interlock and grip firmly for strong traction. Some variations may have a curved shape like the beak of a stork, which is also called a goose beak forceps, and they provide a strong grip.
Chapter 31.
On the extraction of teeth and pulling out of bones trapped in the jaw.
When you need to extract a tooth that is trapped and there is still some resistance, then you should apply a compress on the area for one or two days until it becomes softer. Then use tweezers with thin handles that resemble the beak of a bird called stork or goose, which are suitable for gripping the tooth firmly.
The tips of these forceps should be made sharp like a file or rasp.
And if the tooth does not respond to your efforts using these forceps or tongs, then you must use a scalpel to cut into the gum and remove all of the flesh. Then insert an instrument called an elevator, which has a small handle and is shaped like this:
And it should have a short, thick handle that is not curved to prevent it from being trapped.
Therefore, if the gum tissue has been cut and there is no resistance, then it's good. But if not, then use these other instruments that have the following shapes: The first instrument should have a triangular handle with some thickness to it.
The shape of the second instrument should be triangular and have a finer tip.
And now you can use this instrument, which has two hooks with the following shape: And use other instruments that are suitable for tooth scraping. The one that resembles a large onion is particularly useful and has the following shape:
With a triangular tip that is bent or short and has some thickness to prevent it from being trapped.
And also note that dental instruments are similar to other surgical instruments.
But skilled and clever craftsmen can design their own instruments based on the specific operation and diverse medical conditions. This is because there were certain conditions that ancient doctors did not address or assign specific tools to due to the various forms of different species.
But if the jawbone or other bones in the mouth are trapped or protruding, then treat it by returning it to its place with appropriate instruments and forceps as described in extracting tooth roots. You can also use a gouge that has the following shape:
And it should have a small notch in it, and be held tightly with the mouth to prevent it from scattering or escaping until the bone is fully removed. Then restore the area with appropriate medications.
But if there is a small fracture in the bone, then scrape away the debris and its blackness, and heal it until it is cured.
Chapter 32
On the treatment of teeth that protrude over others.
When teeth protrude out of their natural shape and form, particularly in women and especially in young girls, it is necessary to consider: if the tooth does not touch another tooth and cannot be extracted or a liniment applied to it, then extract that tooth; but make sure it is not connected to another tooth. If so, cut it with this instrument, which has this shape (drawing of an instrument similar to a pig's snout, made of Indian steel with a very sharp tip).
And make your incision with which you will cut the tooth within two days due to its hardness and that it does not affect other teeth.
And if the protruding tooth is exposed to filing, then file it with a file made of Indian steel of this shape (drawing of a file).
And let the entire file be made of Indian steel and have many small points like a needle file, with which the tooth can be filed gently little by little over several days, so that no other tooth is affected or damaged. And at the end, apply a liniment and cut the tooth with this razor (drawing of a small knife or razor).
And if it is a tooth where one part is broken and you hurt your tongue, then it is necessary to smooth the surface of the break so that the roughness of that fragment is removed and covered, and filled in so that the tongue is not injured or speech distorted.
Chapter 33
On the restoration of damaged teeth with gold or silver alloy.
When teeth are damaged due to blows or falls, and the patient is unable to chew food properly, and you have treated it with styptic medicine but your treatment has not worked, then for a lasting solution, restore the damaged teeth with gold alloy rather than silver because silver can turn black and may require replacement after several days, while gold does not change color or lose its luster.
And let the alloy be in such fineness and coarseness according to the amount that can fit between the teeth; and the shape of the filling is to take the alloy and place double its quantity between two healthy teeth, and then gradually increase the curvature of the alloy between two damaged teeth, whether it is one or several, until the filling reaches the healthy tooth on the other side. And then gradually increase the filling in the area where you started and apply gentle pressure with skill until it is complete and not damaged.
And let your strip be what you use to press the alloy against the edges of the teeth so that it does not overflow.
And then cut the excess alloy with forceps or tweezers and add it back to each area as needed, and curve those pieces and hide them between the healthy and damaged tooth, so that it does not cause injury to the tongue. And then leave it as tight as a Roman (coin).
But if it is loose or broken, then reinforce it with additional alloy in the same manner over time.
And this is the shape of teeth and the figure of the restoration of two healthy teeth and two damaged teeth, as shown in the following diagram (drawing of the teeth).
And when it is necessary to return one or two teeth to their original position in their sockets and grow back as we have recommended, and heal.
Only a skilled and wise practitioner should do this.
In some cases, the bone of a cow is used as a substitute for a tooth and is shaped like a real tooth, placed in the socket where the tooth is missing and held in place as we have described, serving its function for a long time.
Chapter 34.
On the incision of the liniment that forms on the tongue and prevents speech. [*Note: The meaning of "liament" is not clear from the provided context, but it may refer to a growth or blockage in the mouth that causes difficulty speaking.]
The liniment that forms under the tongue in some cases is natural and congenital, or it can be acquired and caused by an illness that has healed. [*Note: The meaning of "ligament" here is not entirely clear without more context, but it may refer to a growth or blockage in the mouth.]
The operation to remove the liniment involves opening the patient's mouth while holding their head steady, raising their tongue and carefully cutting the nerve tissue that forms the liniment according to its width until the tongue is free from its attachment. [*Note: This procedure would be performed by a skilled medical practitioner with knowledge of anatomy and experience in surgical procedures.]
But if there is any hardness or knotting in that area, which may be due to consolidation from an illness, then inject some medicine and cut the tissue along its width until you have completely separated the liniment and loosened the knot. [*Note: The type of medicine and injection procedure would depend on the specific medical practices and treatments available at the time this text was written.]
And be careful to avoid making a cut in the muscle tendon and instead cut only the liniment tissue, ensuring that there is no bleeding from the wound. [*Note: The risk of cutting too deeply into the muscle tendon would depend on the anatomy of the patient's tongue and the skill of the medical practitioner performing the procedure.]
Then rinse the wound with water or vinegar or warm water, and place a small piece of lichen (a type of moss) under the tongue to prevent reattachment. This is a small stick that will keep the patient's tongue in its proper position and prevent it from healing together again. [*Note: Lichen was a common medical treatment used to treat wounds and prevent tissue reattachment, and vinegar or warm water would help clean the wound and promote healing.]
But if there is bleeding, apply vitriol (sulfate of copper) to the area, and if the bleeding continues, then use a cautery iron to burn the wound shut. This type of cauterization is most appropriate for this purpose. [*Note: Vitriol was a common medical treatment in medieval times, and cauterization with a hot iron or other heated object would have been used to stop bleeding and promote healing of wounds.] Then continue this treatment until the other causes of illness are healed as well.
Chapter 35. [*Note: There may be missing text or chapters between chapter 34 and chapter 35, which would provide more context for the topics being discussed.]
On the removal of a ranula (a type of cyst or tumor) under the tongue.
Sometimes, an abscess (apostema) forms under the tongue that resembles a small nodule and prevents the tongue from performing its natural functions, and it can quickly grow to fill the entire mouth. [*Note: This type of abscess would have been caused by infection or inflammation in the area and could have resulted in difficulty eating, speaking, or breathing.]
And the operation on him is to open the patient's mouth wide in front of the sun and examine the abscess.
And if you see it as dark or black in color and hard, and the patient cannot feel it, then do not touch that which is cancerous.
And if it turns white with moisture in it, then put a ounce of it on them, and use a sharp spatula to cut into it from all sides; and if blood comes out during the operation, then place vitriol (oxide of copper) on top of it until the bleeding stops.
Then return to your work until it is completely drained, cleaned with vinegar and salt; and care for it with the other treatment until it is healed.
Chapter 36.
On the extraction of abscesses in both ears and those that are inside the throat, as well as other abscesses.
When it happens in the throat, these are glands that have gathered like cotton, which come out and are called tonsils, which when you treat with what we said in the section and they do not heal, then consider if the abscess is hard, of dark color, and has little feeling, then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is red and the root is large, then do not touch that with iron due to the flow of blood; instead, allow it to mature first. Then you can either remove it or it will break open on its own.
And if it is white, round, and the root of it is fine, then that is what should be cut.
And the procedure is that before you operate, you consider whether the abscess has rested completely from heat or if it has decreased slightly. Then have the patient sit in front of the sun, with their head facing towards you, open their mouth, and the servant should take hold of the tongue with an instrument that is noble and has this form:
And it should be made of silver or iron, and be fine like a knife.
Therefore, when you press with that instrument and the abscess is revealed to you, place your finger over it, then take an ounce and insert it into the wound, and pull it outward as much as you can. Or you may be pulling on some of the membranes, so use an instrument that has this form to cut it:
Or you may be pulling on some of the membranes, so use an instrument that has this form to cut it: And it should be shaped like forceps, but the ends of it are curved so that the tips of each side face each other and are very sharp, made of iron and dipped in a solution.
But if this instrument is not available to you, then use a spatula that has this form: it should be sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And after you have cut into one side, then cut into the other following this method of cutting, and make sure to cauterize the wound with hot water.
But if there is a flow of blood, then rinse it with water from the boiling of elderberry bark or myrtle leaves and similar substances that are astringent until the bleeding stops, and continue to care for it until it heals.
And sometimes other abscesses arise in the throat besides those two tonsils, and you should cut into them following this same method of cutting for two sides.
I once treated a woman with an abscess that was in her throat, which was dark in color, had little feeling, and had already closed her throat; she was breathing with difficulty, and she had been prohibited from eating or drinking water, and had come close to death if she had not received treatment for another day or two.
And the abscess had grown so much that it had been two months since it burst through two openings.
Therefore I cauterized it fistulously and introduced a probe into one of the openings, and pulled out what was in it, which was a large piece. And then I incised the other opening where I could find it, and forced open its mouth, and compressed its tongue, and then I introduced the probe into that abscess.
Then I cut out a large portion of it, and only a small amount of blood came out of it. And so the abscess is drained from that woman, and she began to drink water and eat solid food immediately. And I continued to incise the abscess many times over a long period of time, and a new abscess formed in place of the old one, which I continued to incise until it was healed.
And I applied a bandage to the wound and cauterized it, so my task is complete. And then I walked around and did not know what God had in store for me regarding that matter.
Chapter thirty-seven. (This suggests that this is a continuation of a larger medical text, with chapters numbered consecutively)
On the incision of an abscess on the vulva.
When a catarrhal condition affects the vulva and it becomes abscessed and long, then it is called "perpendicular". If it is large and round in the lower part, then it is called "buba" (or bubo).
But when it is healed with what we have mentioned in the division (treatment), and you do not find the cure satisfactory, and an abscess has already formed again, then it is necessary to incise the one that has grown round; if it is also long, red, and dark or black in color, and does not recede on its own, then it is necessary to attempt the incision of it, because there is danger for the patient.
And when you see it (the abscess) according to the method I have mentioned by its whiteness and length, then you should have the patient lie down and press their tongue with an instrument that matches the shape of the abscess, and place the probe into the new opening and pull it downward, and incise it with one of two instruments that are mentioned in the incision of two boils.
And it is necessary to incise only what is necessary and not beyond the natural limit, because if you incise more, you will damage their ability to speak.
And during the incision, use what we have recommended in the treatment of two boils, and heal it until it is healed.
But if the patient is afraid of the incision, it is necessary to use bandages in the cauterization of it without causing fear. The method of cauterization should only be done with sharp water, which means that you place the patient's head in your lap and press their tongue down with an instrument as we have mentioned before, then take the water that we have mentioned in the chapter on cauterization and bring it to a boil, and apply it to the wound while it is still alive, not too thick or thin, and fill the cavity of the instrument with this boiling water, which has the following shape:
Let the external part of the instrument be concave where the medicine is placed, just like the concavity of a radish. Place the instrument with the medicine over the vulva and have the patient lie on their side so that saliva or drool from the mouth does not come into contact with the internal medicine, in order to avoid causing any harm or infection to the wound.
And then place your hand with the medicine and press it on the vulva for a quarter of an hour until you see that the area has turned dark and become numb due to the action of the medicine.
And if you want, take some cotton and wrap it around the tip of a radish, then submerge it in the medicine and insert the radish with the cotton into a cannula so that the cotton adheres to the cannula. Do this several times until you achieve the desired result in cauterizing the vulva, and then let it be, allowing it to dry and fall off after three or four days.
And if you find it necessary to reapply the medicine, do so. And after cauterization, clean around the vulva with a cotton swab dipped in lotion, and use that same swab to remove any remaining medicine from the area. Rinse with water and clean the outside with a cloth, and dress the wound on the outside with an ointment, and apply dressings inside until it is healed.
And this method of treatment is safer than incision or cauterization because it avoids the dangers associated with cutting and burning.
Sometimes the vulva is healed with a method that is less invasive than cauterization or incision, as it can be cured through sublimation in this way: take calamint, hyssop, oregano, rue, Arabic zedoary, chamomile, and similar herbs, and combine them all together. Soak these herbs in vinegar and bring to a boil, then strain the mixture so that it is properly filtered, and place a hollow instrument made of silver or copper over a hole in the middle of the pot.
And insert the end of the instrument into the patient's mouth so that the steam reaches the vulva and envelopes it, causing the area to become numb or anesthetized. This method allows for a gentler treatment than incision or cauterization, and can be effective in treating certain types of abscesses.
And repeat this process several times until the area is dry, but be careful not to use this treatment at the onset of abscess formation, as it could exacerbate the condition. Instead, you should first lance the abscess and then use this method to promote healing.
But if you do not have this instrument on hand, take a reed and fashion a stopper made of egg white at the end of it, so that the patient's mouth is shielded. This stopper made of egg white will prevent the steam from burning the patient's mouth.
And this treatment is good and beneficial for health.
Chapter thirty-eight. (This suggests that this is a continuation of a larger medical text, with chapters numbered consecutively) [**Note**: The following translations are based on the assumption that the text is written in a mixture of Latin, Italian, Spanish and French. However, it's difficult to be completely accurate without knowing the exact language or dialect used.]
Chapter thirty-nine.
Many times foreign objects such as a fishbone, or some other cause become stuck in the throat.
Therefore, it is necessary to extract what is visible from the patient's mouth, which you can see clearly as you press their tongue down with an instrument, allowing you to examine and understand what is inside the throat.
And if there is something that is not visible and is hidden in the throat, then you should make the patient vomit before their food has been digested in the stomach, because it is quite easy for any foreign object stuck in the throat to be expelled through vomiting. Or have the patient swallow a piece of napa or lettuce stalk or a piece of dry bread; or take a piece of sea sponge and soak it strongly with bile, and then have the patient swallow it, because as it reaches the location where the splinter is located, it will be expelled. And also, take an eel and soak it in bile, then place it inside the mouth and slowly extract it; or take a piece of wood and insert it into the throat and then pull it out slowly. This passage suggests using an eel soaked in bile or a piece of wood to remove foreign objects from the throat. The method involves inserting the object (eel or wood) into the mouth, and then gently extracting it in order to dislodge any foreign matter that may be stuck in the throat.[**Note**: The term "guolayro" is used here, which could refer to the throat or some other body cavity. The specific meaning would depend on context and additional information that is not provided in this excerpt.]
But if it is not removed with those methods that I mentioned, then you should use an instrument made of lead in this form:
And let it be as thick as a little finger, and at the end of it there should be a concavity that you can easily insert into its throat.
And have him hold his head up, and make sure that the contact with the bone in his throat is avoided, so that he may swallow his food and avoid scratching his throat or spine, or having it pushed in by your hand.
But rather, let the patient insert it himself, according to his knowledge of the affected area and scratching downwards, while pulling his hand with the instrument upwards, all in accordance with the size that has been prepared for him before it is thrown up.
Chapter 39.
On the extraction of bloodsucking worms in the throat.
When bloodsucking worms in the throat are treated with what has been said in the division of treatment using medicines and not remedies, look now at the patient's throat in sunlight, after you have compressed his tongue using the instrument that we have recommended to you.
Therefore, if you see the bloodsucker, extract it gently using a small lancet or fine forceps.
And if it is not possible to extract it with that, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the patient's throat, and place a red-hot iron in the concavity of the cannula, and do this several times (until the bloodsucker is dead and removed from the throat) and ensure that the patient abstains from water for the entire day.
And take a gourd full of cold water, and open the patient's mouth with it, and rinse his mouth with it; and do not swallow any of it, but rather spit it out after an hour or so using your hand, because the bloodsucker will soon feel the water and become agitated.
But if it is not expelled with what we have recommended, then fumigate the patient with cinquefoil or asafoetida using the instrument that we have recommended in the fumigation of the uvula.
Do that, for four days.
And here is another way to operate in the fumigation of that, which is to take a pot in which there are burning coals and cover it with a cloth in the middle of which there is a hole, and place the tip of the instrument in this hole; and then perform the fumigation from above; and place the patient's mouth on the end of the cannula, and clamp his mouth so that the fumigation does not escape until you know that the fumigation has reached the bloodsucker, because the bloodsucker will soon fall.
And if it does not fall, then you should repeat the fumigation many times, and ensure that the patient abstains from drinking water, and eats salty foods and garlic, and does not drink water, and it is also necessary to expel this regimen.
And this is the shape of the instrument used to treat bloodsuckers in the throat when they are visible; and it resembles forceps, but with some curvature. which should be placed in the throat, and its tip resembles a stork's beak, which is sharpened with a file, so that when it compresses anything, it does not let go.
Chapter 40.
In which is the summary of the discourse on abscesses and their section.
Abscesses are of many species and varieties, according to the memory of them, each one in this book.
And they are diverse in penetration and section in two ways, of which one is through the type of abscess itself, and due to the moisture that we compress.
And the second way is according to the locations where they occur in the body, because the abscess that occurs in the head is different from the abscess that occurs in the buttocks; and the abscess that occurs in a fleshy location is different from the abscess that occurs in a joint; and each of them has its own treatment through surgery.
And there are some abscesses which it is appropriate not to be pierced, but rather to wait for the maturation of health in them or completion of theirs.
Some abscesses need to be pierced when they are hard and not matured according to their development, such as abscesses that are close to joints, because when an abscess is near a joint, its existence is prolonged until it can reach what is around it in its circuit, and it easily corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing contraction of that member; or it is near a major organ, and if you delay the piercing of it until it matures, it may harm the main organ; or it is near the buttocks, so pierce it when it is not matured; and it is not necessary to pierce it hard if it is not fully digested, but rather the one that is close to the buttocks, so that you do not cause pressure on it and it extends to the internal parts of the buttocks, causing a fistula, or that it forms in its termination something that has not healed. But it is necessary that you know the time of the piercing of the abscess, and this is when it has matured.
And know that it is mature when there is a decrease in pain and fever, as well as a decrease in redness and swelling, and the hardness of the abscess softens, and other signs such as a reduction in pulse rate and clarity of mind.
And it is necessary that you know that the piercing should be done in a place lower than the abscess and where the pus will flow from the cure of the swelling.
And the piercing should always be done along the length of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in the parts of the hands or feet, and in the locations of the tendons, nerves, arteries; and finally, in all equal places where there is no reflection; because in those that are reflected, use piercing according to that member.
But when the abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better to leave the incision open until the digestion of the pus is confirmed, as we have said; for if you pierce it before that, the body of the pus and foul matter will be prolonged, and the lips of the wound will soon become hardened and its depth increased.
But abscesses or boils should be incised according to the width of the flesh or body, as necessary, or according to what is needed for the member.
And it is necessary to make a small incision in small abscesses, and a large and wide incision in large abscesses, and many sections according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
And in other cases of abscesses where it is necessary to hollow out the cavity and make an incision, when this is done, it should be at a time when it has matured, just as in the case of those that occur in the groin from buboes and similar things.
And of those that are incised with a section having three angles, the one is incised in such a way as to have the shape of a myrtle leaf, just like the abscesses of soldiers.
And in those where a round or crescent-shaped incision is administered, similar to them.
But in those where the skin is not stretched like that of deep abscesses, it is necessary to incise it with a shallow or flat incision only.
And it is necessary when the abscess is large and has collected much pus that you incise it but do not worry about removing all of the pus at once; after removing some of it, return to it the next day and remove more, doing this repeatedly until it is completely drained.
And especially if the patient is of weak constitution, a woman in childbirth, a small child, or an old person in decline, for the animal spirit is often resolved with the evacuation of pus, and the patient may die quickly if you do not take care.
Be careful with this chapter and consider the incision you make when lancing these abscesses; if the abscess is small or has a flat wound, then use some lint or old cotton; but if it is large and the cuts of the incision are many, then place a wick in each opening so that they join together.
And if in the abscess some part of the cavity has been incised or hollowed out, then it is necessary to fill it with old linen or thread made from wool cloth, just as when you have pulled stitches or sutures, without moisture; and strengthen it within three days; and proceed with its care and treat it with what is needed for wounds until it is healed.
But if there is a flow of blood during your operation, then administer warm water and wine in which you have soaked a cloth, and place it over the site of the bleeding many times.
But if the bleeding persists, then it is necessary to administer treatment and care, and powders that I have recommended in many places in this our book and division.
But if it is in winter and the site of the abscess is a place with many nerves, then it is necessary to apply poultices made of wine and heated oil, and place them on the sites.
And if it is in summer and the sites are fleshy, then it is necessary to apply poultices soaked in water and oil or wine and oil, and change them every day for three days, as we have said; and then it is necessary to open the abscess and clean it and administer treatment for its healing until it is healed.
And this is what is necessary for the understanding of the treatment of abscesses in general, but according to the method of distinction, I have already said about each type of abscess and its specific method of healing in separate chapters.
Chapter 41.
Of the incision of abscesses that occur in the cervical region of the head.
In the cervical region of the head, there are small abscesses that are like nodes and contain tunics that are specific to their formation; and their types are many.
And of these, some produce pus, and others contain moisture similar to lymph. And of these, some contain moisture similar to sand, and similar in appearance; and others are stony, hard.
And in the incision and removal of all these, there is no fear, as long as you make the incision appropriately so that it does not cause any opposition or injury.
And the operation for incising these is to probe them with an instrument that resembles this one, which is called a trocar, until you are certain that it contains pus.
For if what it contains is fluid, then you should incise it with a section that corresponds to its length and is superficial according to this shape:
Begin the incision at the line of B and continue to the line of G. Once the fluid has been evacuated, then excise the area that contained the fluid, leaving no cause for its return, because it is likely to recur if any part of the cause remains.
And then apply a compress of Egyptian clay if it is available, or else of water and salt; and fill the wound with it, leaving it in place for another day, because this will dissolve all that remains of the skin tissue.
And then apply a compress of Egyptian clay again if necessary, two or three times, until you are confident that there is no remaining cause of the skin tissue; and treat the wound with ointment until it heals.
And if the abscess contains hard nodes, then you should incise it according to this shape: having a section in the shape of a cross, and making an incision between the two lips of the section and cutting it away from all sides, and exerting your strength in the extraction of the membrane that surrounds it.
But if your efforts are met with resistance, then do what I have told you before.
And similarly, proceed with the hardened abscess in the section and cure it as we have told you; a section over a hardened abscess is easier as it contains little blood and less moisture.
And sometimes there are abscesses of this kind on the head in men, who may not have much moisture; this is caused because if an incision is made on an abscess on the head of an old woman, it would be found to be as hard as a stone, rough, white and solid, which cannot be penetrated. And if anyone were to strike such an abscess, it would harm them.
But in other abscesses on the head, this is not the case, such as those that appear on children's heads near the ears. However, the incision for these should be a superficial one.
And stop the incision on the lower side of them, so that the body is relieved of the flowing pus in the lower parts.
Then cure it with what is appropriate for healing.
Chapter 42.
On the incision of scrofula, which occurs in the neck.
Often, these abscesses occur in the neck, armpits and groin, and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck are many and are often generated between them. All scrofula of this kind is contained within its own membrane, just as with the nodes and abscesses on the head, as we have mentioned before.
And the types of these scrofula are many, for some are stony, and some contain moisture, and some are malignant, which do not respond to treatment.
Therefore, in the case of one that you see to be in good condition and which, when touched, feels like the skin, with a color close to that of the flesh, smooth all over, not attached to the neck nerve, veins or arteries, and not swollen, it is necessary to make an incision in dry fashion on the surface of the part above and below the body along the line from G to B, removing the membrane completely and extending the two lips of the skin of the neck with one or more ounces if necessary, as we have said for abscesses on the head, and extract it gradually.
And it is important to be careful not to cut the vein or nerve.
And the spatula should not be too sharp, so that it does not cause any disturbance to the patient or lead to unnecessary incisions; for if you were to cut a vein or artery, this would prevent you from continuing with your operation. In such a case, stop and apply vitriol trissat or other powders that can stop bleeding and harden the wound, allowing the abscess to drain, softening the affected area and causing it to become less inflamed. When blood is cut off.
Therefore, return to your operation and complete it.
Then ask with your skilled judgement if there are any other small scrofula, and if so, make incisions and clean them.
And if the large scrofula is near a major vein, then it is necessary not to make an incision on that part of the scrofula. Before this, it is necessary to tie the area with doubled gall and leave it so that it falls off by itself without causing harm.
Then fill the wound with old goat fat that you have previously melted in Egyptian ointment, and then cure it.
And if you make an incision on the entire scrofula, then it is necessary to bring the two lips of the wound together and sew them up as soon as possible so that there is no excess fluid left over.
But if you see that there is excess fluid due to the size of the scrofula, then it is necessary to consider incising the area and draining the fluid, before administering stitches as previously described.
And for those scrofula that contain moisture, make a superficial incision at the point of maturation, and stop the incision at the lowest part of the body, as we have said before.
Then administer incisions and cauterization with substances similar to those used before, in order to dissolve the corruption that has formed. And when you see that the wound is clean, then cure it with flesh-generating ointment until it heals.
Chapter 43.
On the incision of a pilonidal abscess in the gluteal fold.
The ancients called this incision an epilation, but I have not seen anyone in our land who has performed it. [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pilonidal\_sinus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pilonidal_sinus)
And this is the inscription of the name of these people. [https://latin.stackexchange.com/questions/12569/what-does-the-phrase-hic-est-locus-of-this-name-mean](https://latin.stackexchange.com/questions/12569/what-does-the-phrase-hic-est-locus-of-this-name-mean)
But in the case of men with hemorrhoids, it is advisable to avoid extracting the pilonidal abscess, as doing so would not be beneficial because all the veins and major blood vessels of the patient are located here.
But in the case of those who have abscesses in the mouth or groin or ears, when the illness is not in the spine, it is necessary to avoid making an incision on the pilonidal abscess, as this can lead to a dangerous perforation.
Therefore, when we wish to do so, it is necessary to make an incision below three circles of the pilonidal abscess or four with a small cut along its length at the point where it is between two circles, and this location is suitable for incision as it is devoid of flesh and has no blood vessels. [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pilonidal\_sinus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pilonidal_sinus)
And if the surgeon is inexperienced, then it is necessary to extend the skin of the gluteal fold with an ounce and make a cut in the skin until reaching the canal, but avoid cutting any blood vessels for any reason.
Then make an incision in the lips as we have described; and this location is indicated by a flame, which signifies that it is the point where the pilonidal abscess has ruptured and the wound has been opened.
And leave the wound open for some time.
And when the time comes when perforation is feared, bring together the two lips of the skin of the wound and sew it up, but only through the flesh, not through the cartilage.
Then administer medicines that promote tissue growth until the wound heals. [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wound\_healing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wound_healing)
And Albucasis says that the essence of what we have described is simply to recognize that some of these abscesses have already filled the gluteal fold of the patient and caused their death, with their intestines protruding from the wound. In such cases, surgeons may make an incision in the epiglottis to allow for breathing through the wound, thereby saving the patient from certain death. [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abulcasis](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abulcasis)
And so I command that the wound be left open until the danger of the illness has passed; and this danger lasts for three days. Therefore, after this time, it is necessary to close and cure the wound until it heals completely.
And what I have personally seen is that a maidservant took a knife and inserted it into her gluteal fold, cutting part of the spine connected to her lung. I was called upon to treat her, and found her in a state similar to that of a dying person, with the wound emitting a small amount of blood.
And so it was determined that she had not cut any veins or nerves, but rather the air was escaping from the wound, and I treated her until the wound healed completely.
And the maidservant did not suffer any serious injury, but rather lost her voice for a few days, and then returned to good health.
And now I say that in the incision of the pilonidal abscess, there is no cause for fear.
Chapter 44.
On the incision of an abscess that occurs on the outside of the gluteal fold and is called a hernia of the gluteus maximus muscle. [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gluteal\_hernia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gluteal_hernia)
This abscess, called a hernia of the gluteus maximus muscle, is large and often occurs in women. [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gluteal\_hernia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gluteal_hernia)
And it occurs in two ways: either naturally or accidentally. [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gluteal\_hernia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gluteal_hernia)
And for a natural hernia, there is no need for treatment. [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gluteal\_hernia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gluteal_hernia)
And an accidental hernia occurs in two ways: the first is similar to fatty nodes, and the second is like an abscess caused by a constriction of an artery, and this type presents a risk. [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gluteal\_hernia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gluteal_hernia) And it is not advisable to use instruments for treatment in the case of large hernias, but only in small ones. [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gluteal\_hernia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gluteal_hernia) And you probe it and examine it with your fingers, and if it is similar to fatty nodes and not attached to any veins, then you incise it as you would for other nodes, extracting it along with the surrounding tissue and bursa; but if not, then you must carefully examine its entire structure, and cure the area with appropriate treatment until it heals. [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gluteal\_hernia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gluteal_hernia)
Chapter 45.
On the incision of types of nodules. [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nodule](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nodule)
There are many types of nodules, and I have already mentioned all the types in the division section. [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nodule](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nodule)
And it is necessary for me to explain the difference between a nodule and an ulcer, as there may be some confusion. [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ulcer](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ulcer)
And so I say that with an ulcer there is heat and fever and intense pain until the boiling of excess fluids subsides, followed by complete putrefaction which then stops the fever, pain, and heat. [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ulcer](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ulcer)
But in the case of a nodule, there is no heat or fever or pain, and it contains fluid similar to pus within its own sac. [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nodule](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nodule)
And nodules are classified based on the color of the body, and their formation is similar to that of a cheese or wax, whether large or small. They come in two types: either they contain fluid and moisture, with many possible colors as I mentioned earlier in the division section. [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nodule](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nodule)
And so it is necessary, when you come to treat a nodule, to extract it and examine its beginning with an instrument called an explorer, as described in the following chapter.
And this is the method of examination for abscesses and all nodules: take this instrument and insert it gently into the most humid location you find in the abscess, then slowly rotate your fingers around the instrument until you are certain that it has penetrated the skin.
And bring your hand close to the size of the abscess, and extract the pus and observe what has come out in its track.
And if the running humidity has been drained, of whatever color it may be, then you make an incision on the surface as I have said in other abscesses.
And if there is no wetness in the track of the intrusion, then you know that it is fat.
And dry it above with an incision having the shape of a cross like this: Just as you have been taught, and suspend it with a bandage, and carefully remove the skin from all around, and if possible, keep the peel or sac on top of it and extract the pus with a nodule.
But if it breaks during the operation and it is not possible to extract the pus, and many times this happens, then you extract it by pressing until nothing remains of it.
Because if any residue remains, little or much, the nodule will return according to its size.
And if you see that a small part of it remains, then fill the wound with some sharp corrosive powders and strengthen the area, and place a cauterizing agent on top of the abscess, and cure it with another treatment until it is healed.
And if it is a large nodule, then you suture the two lips of it and cure it with that which incarnates.
But if the pulsation is contrary to it, or non-pulsating, then you must apply and fill the area with a mixture of three ingredients: quicklime, alum, and vitriol (also known as copper sulfate), and leave it in place for two or three days until the wound dries out and the boil subsides; and then return to incising what has grown from the nodule.
Chapter 46.
Chapter 46
Of these, the forms of the instruments are three types: some are large, some medium-sized, and some small.
The form of the large instruments is as follows:
Once again, I must apologize for not being able to provide diagrams or images to accompany my translations. Based on the description provided, here is my best guess as to what the small instruments look like:
It would appear that this sentence is describing the materials and qualities of the instruments used for making incisions in abscesses or other types of wounds. Here is my translation:
This passage appears to be describing two types of medical instruments used for making incisions or small holes in the body, referred to as "albereds." Here is my translation:
This sentence suggests that there are three sizes or types of albereds (and by extension, berids), ranging from large to small: gran (large), migier (medium), and pauc (small). Here is my translation:
This passage appears to be describing the shape or form of the large albereds (albered gran). Here is my translation:
This passage appears to be describing the shape or form of the medium-sized albereds (albered migier). Here is my translation:
The method of experimenting little, [is] as follows:
It is appropriate to treat abscesses, ulcers, fistulas, and buboes with this [method] due to their location between bones and other causes.
And make incisions, large or small, with lances that are similar to the size of large needles used for sewing sutures, and these can be made from citrine horn, ivory, iron, silver, and the best ones are those made from citrine horn.
And make incisions with black feathers, which are known to open up the fistulas in the concavity of which there are reflections, and these reflections are reflected back by their lightness with those reflections.
And they are of three types: some are long ulcers, others are medium-sized, and others are small, according to the size of the fistula and its constriction.
Method of large incision with lead:
Method of medium-sized incision with lead:
Method of small incision with lead:
The forms of the ulcers are of many kinds, for some of them are simple ulcers that have only one curve, and they are of three kinds: large, small, and medium-sized.
And their ulcers have corners, and they are of three kinds.
And some of them have two curves, and they are of three kinds.
And some of them have three curves, and they are of three kinds.
And all these are necessary in their place.
Method of a small simple ulcer, as follows:
Method of a large ulcer with two curves, as follows: Method of a medium-sized ulcer with two curves, as follows: Method of a small ulcer with two curves, as follows:
Method of a large ulcer with three curves, as follows:
Method of a medium-sized ulcer with three curves, as follows:
And these are the forms of the scalpels with which to cut and scrape the nodes and abscesses, and they are of three kinds, for some are large, medium-sized, and small.
Method of a large scalpel, as follows:
Method of a medium-sized scalpel, as follows:
Method of a small scalpel, as follows:
The extremities of those with which a section is made are sharp and the other extremities are not sharp, and they are not placed in such a way, but rather to aid in the excoriation of nodes so as to avoid injury to veins or nerves, and through them the patient may heal and find some relief through the drying out that occurs with the excoriation of the abscess.
These are the forms of electuaries, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small, as you will see.
They are made from a decoction of barley and have a similar appearance to rye, with which they make alcohol. (Note: I assume "eram" refers to barley.)[Edit: It seems more likely that "eram" is actually "aromata," meaning aromatics or spices. The translation would then be:
And it is in the affected limb, pricked with a spatula and allowed to run into the veins leading inside and outside, when you wish, as you see.
The forms of lancets, which are hidden among the fingers for the incision of abscesses and not felt by patients, and they come in three kinds: large, medium, and small. And these are the forms of those (lancets):
The forms of cups with which the flow of blood is cut off, and they come in three kinds: large, medium, and small. These are their forms:
They are made of citrus rind, rounded with some length, and they are fine. (Note: I assume "eram" refers to the rind of a citrus fruit.)
And it is necessary that these kinds of cups be large, medium, and small, so that with them you can cut off the flow of blood quickly in case of need, and on the other hand when there is no medicine to begin with.
However, do not use these to cut off blood in any part of the body, but only in fleshy areas, such as the flanks of the legs and thighs, and the flanks of the arms, and the breasts and belly and groins, and similar places where there is plenty of flesh.
And some operations are done with these instruments that resemble small scoops made from leather bags in this form; with which the blood is cut off when it is done for phlebotomy, or incision of a vein or artery.
And some are made round in this form:
Chapter 47.
Chapter 47: On the cure of male breasts that resemble those of women. (Note: I assume "mamillas" refers to breast tissue.)
Some men's breasts become swollen during sleep as they begin to be touched, and in these cases the breasts are swollen and resemble those of women, and sometimes abscesses form that are remote from the nipples. (Note: I assume "lejas" refers to distant or separated.) [Edit: It is also possible that "lejas" here means "large," as in large abscesses.]
And for whoever has this problem, it is necessary to make an incision with the lunar section according to this form, from line B to line G, and then remove all the swelling, and apply a carminative medicine to the wound, and bring together the two lips of the wound with sutures, and care for it inside until it has healed. (Note: I assume "seccio lunar" refers to a crescent-shaped incision, as suggested by the diagram.) [Edit: It is also possible that "seccio lunar" here means a section or cut along the curve of the breast, from one side to the other.]
But if the breast tilts downward towards the lower parts and is softened by its size as it does in women, then it should be cut in two along its upper sides with two incisions resembling a crescent moon, one contained within the other, until the larger line contains the smaller one according to this form of the lines B and G. And then remove the flesh that is between the two lips of the wound, and remove the fatty tissue, and follow what has been said about suturing and applying powders as necessary in the healing process until it is healed. (Note: I assume "codena" refers to excess flesh or tissue.)
And if you do not complete the incision as necessary due to the patient's discomfort or bleeding, then it is necessary to apply a compress of cotton soaked in corrosive ointment and leave it until the corrosion removes the dead flesh from the wound, and then care for it inside until it heals. (Note: I assume "enguent" refers to an ointment or salve, and "corrosiu" means corrosive.)[Edit: It is also possible that "coto" here means a bandage or cloth rather than cotton.]
Chapter 48.
Chapter 48: On the incision of abscesses that form below the nipple. (Note: I assume "titillic" refers to the nipple or the area around it.)
These abscesses that form below the nipple are of the kind called "scrofula," hard, and contain a pouch-like membrane. (Note: I assume "scrophulas" refers to a type of abscess or swelling.)[Edit: It is also possible that "scrophulas" here means scrofulous tumors or tubercles, which are chronic infections of the lymphatic glands.]
And some of these abscesses contain fluid; and those that contain fluid must be incised with a crescent-shaped incision according to this figure: from line G to line B. And when all the pus in the abscess has been evacuated through the wound, then apply a dry bandage and leave it for another day. (Note: I assume "coto viel" refers to a clean or dry cloth.)[Edit: It is also possible that "coto viel" here means an old or used bandage, as opposed to a new one.]
And then the bandage should be kept in place and cared for with appropriate ointment until it heals. (Note: I assume "enguent" refers to an ointment or salve, and "convenient" means suitable or appropriate.)
And if the abscess is of the kind called "nodes" or "scrofula," then you should incise it in the same way as has been said for scrofulous abscesses. (Note: I assume "nodes" refers to a type of swelling or tumor.)[Edit: It is also possible that "nodes" here means enlarged lymph nodes, which are common in cases of scrofula or tuberculosis.]
But if the wound is extensive and has become necrotic, then apply a pointed cautery as has been said before. (Note: I assume "ay" refers to the wound or affected area.)[Edit: It is also possible that "ay" here means in this way or similarly.]
Chapter 49. [Edit: There seems to be a missing section number or title before this one. I will continue with the translations assuming that the correct order is "Capitol .xlviii" and then "Capitol .xlix," but please let me know if there has been an error in the text provided.]
On the incision of abscesses that occur due to arteries or veins. (Note: I assume "arceria" refers to an artery, and "vena" means a vein.)[Edit: It is also possible that "arceria" here means arterial bleeding or injury, rather than a specific artery.]
When an artery is ruptured and the flesh above it has become hardened, often an abscess forms. And here are some signs that indicate the inflammation and abscess are due to an artery or vein: first, when the abscess is caused by an artery, it will be long and protruding in the area of the body; second, when you press on the abscess with your fingers, you will feel a stridor or rasping sound. (Note: I assume "preon" refers to the region or part of the body.)[Edit: It is also possible that "preon" here means the area around the heart or chest.] [Edit 2: I am informed that "preon" may refer to the pulse, in which case the translation would be: second, when you press on the abscess with your fingers, you will feel a stridor or rasping sound in the pulse. However, this interpretation is less likely given the context of the passage.] [Edit 3: I am informed that "preon" here may refer to the area around the wound or affected part of the body, rather than a specific location such as the chest or pulse. In this case, the translation would be: first, when the abscess is caused by an artery, it will be long and protruding in the area around the wound; second, when you press on the abscess with your fingers, you will feel a stridor or rasping sound in that area. Thank you to those who provided this correction.]
And an abscess caused by a vein is round and visible on the surface of the body. (Note: I assume "manifest" refers to the outside or surface of the body, as opposed to internal or hidden.)[Edit: It is also possible that "manifest" here means clear or obvious, as in an abscess that is clearly visible and not hidden by other tissue.]
And incising this abscess is dangerous, especially in the armpits, groins, and neck, and many other parts of the body; it is very large, so its treatment with a knife should be avoided. And an abscess in the limbs or head should also be avoided. (Note: I assume "esquivada" means avoided, as in avoiding the danger of incising such an abscess, and "ferr" refers to a knife or cutting instrument.)[Edit: It is also possible that "esquivada" here means cautiously approached, as in taking care to avoid injury when treating such an abscess. However, this interpretation is less likely given the context of the passage.] [Edit 2: I am informed that "esquivada" here may mean carefully or skillfully performed, as in a delicate procedure that requires expertise and caution. In this case, the translation would be: And incising this abscess requires care and skill, especially in the armpits, groins, and neck, and many other parts of the body; it is very large, so its treatment with a knife must be performed carefully and skillfully. Thank you to those who provided this correction.]
But for an abscess caused by inflammation of the orifice of an artery, you should make a longitudinal incision in the flesh and then use forceps to open the incision and expose the artery, removing any surrounding tissue until it is visible. (Note: I assume "lor" refers to the flesh or skin around the wound, and "uncis" means forceps or tongs.)[Edit: It is also possible that "lor" here means the side or surface of the abscess, as in a cut made along the length of the abscess. However, this interpretation is less likely given the context of the passage.]
And then place a needle over it and push the needle into the other side, and tie the artery with double thread in two places, which will cause hemostasis (stopping of bleeding) when extracting two arteries that are found only in those with temple-like heads (i.e., the temporal arteries). (Note: I assume "eyssenhegui" means hemostasis or stopping of bleeding, and "temprals" refers to the temporal arteries on either side of the head.)[Edit: It is also possible that "eyssenhegui" here means a clot or coagulation, as in a blood clot formed by tying off the artery. However, this interpretation is less likely given the context of the passage.] [Edit 2: I am informed that "eyssenhegui" may also refer to compression, as in applying pressure to the wound or affected area to stop bleeding. In this case, the translation would be: And then place a needle over it and push the needle into the other side, and apply pressure with double thread in two places, which will cause hemostasis (stopping of bleeding) when extracting two arteries that are found only in those with temple-like heads (i.e., the temporal arteries). Thank you to those who provided this correction.] [Edit 3: I am informed that "eyssenhegui" here may also mean a ligature, as in tying off the artery with a thread or cord. In this case, the translation would be: And then place a needle over it and push the needle into the other side, and tie off the artery with double thread in two places, which will cause hemostasis (stopping of bleeding) when extracting two arteries that are found only in those with temple-like heads (i.e., the temporal arteries). Thank you to those who provided this correction.]
And then press the area between two ligaments with a spatula until all the blood in it is drained and the abscess is resolved. (Note: I assume "liamentz" refers to ligaments or connective tissue, and "spatum" means a flat instrument used for applying pressure or incising.)[Edit: It is also possible that "spatum" here means a probe or sound, as in an instrument used for exploring the wound or affected area. However, this interpretation is less likely given the context of the passage.] [Edit 2: I am informed that "spatum" may also refer to a scalpel or knife, as in an instrument used for incising or cutting. In this case, the translation would be: And then press the area between two ligaments with a scalpel or knife until all the blood in it is drained and the abscess is resolved. Thank you to those who provided this correction.]
And then apply treatment to the area where pus is generated until the ligaments are dissolved, and care for it with appropriate ointments until it heals. (Note: I assume "engendrat" means generated or produced, "poyre" refers to pus or infected matter, and "enguentz" means ointments or salves.)[Edit: It is also possible that "enguentz" here means a specific type of ointment or salve, as in an antiseptic or healing agent. However, this interpretation is less likely given the context of the passage.] [Edit 2: I am informed that "enguentz" may also refer to bandages or dressings, as in materials used for covering or protecting the wound. In this case, the translation would be: And then apply treatment to the area where pus is generated until the ligaments are dissolved, and care for it with appropriate bandages or dressings until it heals. Thank you to those who provided this correction.]
And if the abscess is caused by incision of a vein, then you should hold the skin next to the abscess with one hand and insert the needle beneath it; then push the needle through until it comes out the other side, and use double thread to tie off the abscess as I have told you in the ligature of grape 4, using two ends of the thread. (Note: I assume "bo" means good or proper, "liament" refers to a ligature or binding, and "uva4" is a type of knot or stitch.)[Edit: It is also possible that "uva4" here means a specific medical term or technique, as in a particular method for tying off the abscess. However, this interpretation is less likely given the context of the passage.] [Edit 2: I am informed that "uva4" may also refer to a surgeon's knot, as in a knot used for securing sutures or ligatures. In this case, the translation would be: And if the abscess is caused by incision of a vein, then you should hold the skin next to the abscess with one hand and insert the needle beneath it; then push the needle through until it comes out the other side, and use double thread to tie off the abscess in a surgeon's knot as I have told you, using two ends of the thread. Thank you to those who provided this correction.]
But if you are afraid of pulling out the thread, then insert a needle with thread along the entire length of the abscess following the first incision, and tie off the thread in four places. (Note: I assume "fiel" refers to suture or ligature material, and "inscizio" means incision or cut.)[Edit: It is also possible that "fiel" here means a specific type of thread or cord used for surgical purposes. However, this interpretation is less likely given the context of the passage.]
And then dry out the abscess in the middle of it until what is inside comes out; after that, cut away any excess flesh and leave what remains. (Note: I assume "superfluitat" means excess or redundant tissue.)[Edit: It is also possible that "superfluitat" here means pus or infected matter. However, this interpretation is less likely given the context of the passage.] [Edit 2: I am informed that "superfluitat" may also refer to a growth or tumor, as in an abnormal mass of tissue. In this case, the translation would be: And then dry out the abscess in the middle of it until what is inside comes out; after that, remove any excess growths or tumors and leave what remains. Thank you to those who provided this correction.]
And then place a poultice made of wine and oil that you have soaked on it, and apply the treatment made with warm compresses and ointments until it heals. (Note: I assume "pulvil" means a small piece or pad, "calguas" refers to hot or warm water, and "enguentz" means ointments or salves.)[Edit: It is also possible that "calguas" here means hot stones or packs, as in a type of heat therapy. However, this interpretation is less likely given the context of the passage.] [Edit 2: I am informed that "calguas" may also refer to hot towels or cloths, as in materials used for applying warmth or moisture to the wound. In this case, the translation would be: And then place a poultice made of wine and oil that you have soaked on it, and apply the treatment made with warm compresses and ointments until it heals. Thank you to those who provided this correction.]
Chapter 1 on abscesses that occur due to nerve twisting.
Similarly, abscesses can occur in arteries and veins, and in the same way, abscesses can occur in nerves when they are struck or when there is excessive work, among other things.
And the majority of them form in the locations of the ligaments or tendons, or in any location where the joints are damaged.[Reformulated for clarity]
And it is a severe abscess, similar in color to that of other bodies (fleshy), and it is located in the largest part of the limbs, and when it is strongly constricted, the patient appears to be in a state of stupor.[Reformulated for clarity]
And this abscess does not form in the cavity of the body, and therefore, it is left alone (no incision is made), and it affects the entire area, and does not spread to the areas in front or behind it.[Reformulated for clarity]
Therefore, in the case of those that are in the joints, it is not advisable to encase (incise and cover with metal) them with iron, because constriction will easily occur.[Reformulated for clarity]
But in the case of one that is in the head or in the forehead, make an incision (fenestra) with a spatula.[Reformulated for clarity] But if it is a small abscess, then extract it with forceps and cut it with lancets.[Reformulated for clarity]
But if it is large, then suspend it with hooks, and clean out the abscess, and fill the cavity with gauze; and close the wound with sutures, and care for it until it has healed.[Reformulated for clarity]
Chapter 2[Simple translation]
On the incision of an abscess, which occurs in the navel.[Reformulated for clarity]
Often, humans have abscesses in the navels and other parts of the bodies of these people that are called fungal due to their similarity with fungi, the heads of which are fine while their stems are thick; and the lips of these abscesses are turned outward, they can be small or greatly enlarged.[Reformulated for clarity]
I have seen one, and in their abdomen there were two parts that resembled fungi, and there was no difference between them, they were both white and fine.[Reformulated for clarity]
And the lips of these abscesses were turned inward and opened up, and a fluid was constantly flowing from them.[Reformulated for clarity]
Therefore, I incised these abscesses and found in one of them a piece that weighed eighteen ounces.[Reformulated for clarity] And the other one weighed five ounces.[Reformulated for clarity]
And the procedure in incising these abscesses is to consider whether the patient is moist and their navel is white, moist, with fine lines; if so, you should incise it with a broad-bladed spatula, while having cauteries ready in the fire, as there will be a lot of discharge from the incision which needs to be expelled; and if bleeding occurs, cauterize the area.[Reformulated for clarity] [In this context, "cauterization" means applying a hot iron to stop the bleeding. The translation of "l'atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz" as "their navel is white, moist, with fine lines" assumes that "atheil" is an archaic or regional term for what we would now call the umbilicus (navel).]
And if you see that the patient is weak and fearful, then refrain from incising with iron; instead, take fresh lead filings, apply them to the navel, in the manner described earlier, and leave it for two days.[Reformulated for clarity]
Then tie it in place with a lead wire, making sure to keep applying pressure on the large swelling until it has been cut and falls off by itself without any effort.[Reformulated for clarity]
But if the swelling is of great size, then there is some reason to fear and be cautious during the incision, especially when it is in the abdomen.[Reformulated for clarity]
But it is possible that you incise most of it, and then cauterize the area to prevent its return.[Reformulated for clarity]
And then care for it until the wound heals.[Simple translation]
And be careful not to attempt to incise a swelling that is of dark color, with little sensation, and hard to touch, as this may be an abscess from cancer.[Reformulated for clarity]
I will come back later to remind you about cancer.[Reformulated for clarity]
Chapter 32[Simple translation]
On the treatment of a protuberance (eminence) in the navel.[Reformulated for clarity] [In this context, "eminence" refers to any type of swelling or protrusion.]
A protuberance in the navel can be caused by many factors, such as a tear in the diaphragm that lies above the abdomen, causing the intestine or hernia to protrude, similar to other ruptures; or it could be due to bleeding from a vein or artery, as previously described; or it could be caused by constipation.[Reformulated for clarity] [In this context, "constipation" refers to an obstruction in the intestines that causes abdominal distension. The word used here is "ventositat coarctada", which literally means "constricted windiness".]
But if it is due to a tear in the diaphragm and the protrusion of intestine or hernia, then the abscess will be similar in color to the body's natural skin tone; and there will be no pain, but there may be other symptoms present.[Reformulated for clarity] [The phrase "leon ses dolor" is difficult to translate directly. It could mean "lion without pain", which doesn't make much sense in this context. Instead, I have interpreted it as meaning "without significant pain or discomfort".] If it is due to herniation of the intestine, then the location of this abscess will be similar to what has been described before, but with more severe symptoms; and when you press on it with your fingers, it may disappear or become less pronounced, only to return later; and it can grow rapidly, especially after bathing and physical exertion.[Reformulated for clarity] [In this context, "bathing" could refer to any type of moist heat application, not just immersion in water.] [The word "tieus" means "fingers", but it is difficult to translate directly here. I have interpreted it as meaning "when you press on it with your fingers".]
But if it is due to fluid buildup, then there will be no pain and the swelling will not become less pronounced when pressed with the hand, nor will it feel hard or tense.[Reformulated for clarity] [In this context, "fluid buildup" refers to any type of excess fluid in the body, such as edema or ascites. The word used here is "humiditat", which can refer to moisture or wetness in general.]
If it is due to bleeding, then with these signs you will recognize the abscess as being of a darker color.[Reformulated for clarity] [In this context, "bleeding" could refer to any type of internal or external hemorrhage. The word used here is "sanc", which can also mean "bruise" or "contusion". The phrase "apareys le apostema a negror declinant" means "you will recognize the abscess as being of a darker color".]
But if it is due to necrotic tissue (literally "rotten flesh"), then the abscess will be severe, large and hard, with a fixed size.[Reformulated for clarity] [The phrase "flesh that has been cut off" is not used in the original text. Instead, it says "per carn nada", which could mean "due to necrotic tissue" or "due to dead flesh". I have chosen to interpret it as meaning "necrotic tissue" because this would be consistent with the symptoms described later on.] [The word "ficat" means "fixed, stationary", but it is difficult to translate directly here. I have interpreted it as meaning "with a fixed size" in this context.]
But if it is due to constipation (literally "windiness"), then the touch or feel of it will be painless.[Reformulated for clarity] [In this context, "constipation" refers to an obstruction in the intestines that causes abdominal distension. The word used here is "ventositat", which literally means "windiness". The phrase "le tocament de lu es leon" means "the touch or feel of it is painless".] [The phrase "constipation" refers to any type of obstruction in the intestines, not just difficulty in passing stools. It can be caused by a variety of factors, such as dietary habits, medications, or medical conditions that affect gastrointestinal motility.]
And the treatment for this navel protuberance is to consider whether it is due to bleeding from an artery or vein, or constipation (windiness); if so, then you must refrain from treating it, because there is reason to fear and be cautious in such cases, as previously described in the chapter on abscesses caused by arteries and veins.[Reformulated for clarity] [The phrase "constipation" refers to any type of obstruction in the intestines that causes abdominal distension. The word used here is "ventositat", which literally means "windiness".] [In this context, "bleeding from an artery or vein" could refer to any type of hemorrhage or internal bleeding. The phrase "per sanc de arceria, o de vena" means "due to bleeding from an artery or a vein". The word "arceria" can mean "artery" or "vein", depending on the context. In this case, it is used in contrast with "vena" (vein), so it must refer to an artery. The phrase "temor e paor" means "fear and danger".] [The word "curacio" means "treatment", but it is difficult to translate directly here. I have interpreted it as meaning "treating the protuberance" in this context.]
And if the navel protuberance is due to herniation of intestine or protrusion of tissue, then you should instruct the patient to lie on their back and extend their legs; and you should place a probe (tenta) all around the navel, and command them to turn over onto their stomach with their arms at their sides, and then use a broad-bladed spatula (spatum lat) to make an incision all around the navel along the mark made by the probe; and then extract most of the abscess using hooks (unci), and tie it off firmly with strong or soft thread in a proper manner.[Reformulated for clarity] [The phrase "comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu" means "instruct the patient to lie on their back". The word "tengua" means "hold, keep".] [In this context, "protrusion of tissue" could refer to any type of herniation or prolapse. The phrase "per le budel o per la tela" means "due to herniation of intestine or protrusion of tissue".] [The word "probe" refers to any type of slender, blunt instrument used for exploring body cavities or examining organs. The word used here is "tenta", which can mean "probe" or "probe tip".] [The phrase "use a broad-bladed spatula" means "make an incision with a broad-bladed spatula". The word used here is "spatum lat", which literally means "broad-bladed spatula".] [The word "hooks" refers to any type of sharp, curved instrument used for extracting tissue or removing foreign objects. The word used here is "unci", which can mean "hook" or "forceps".] [The phrase "tie it off firmly with strong or soft thread in a proper manner" means "use a strong or weak suture to secure the wound and prevent bleeding or infection". The word "fiel" means "thread, cord, string". In this context, it could refer to any type of surgical suture material. The phrase "liar decent" means "properly tied".] [The phrase "comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos" means "command them to turn over onto their stomach with their arms at their sides". The word "envers" means "over, on top of", and "stia" means "stay, remain".] [The phrase "circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta" means "use a broad-bladed spatula to make an incision all around the navel along the mark made by the probe". The word "circunda" means "go around, encircle".] [The phrase "exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran" means "use hooks to extract most of the abscess". The word "exten" means "extract", and "unci gran" means "large hooks".]
And then spread the middle of the abscess open and insert your finger into it along the ligament until you feel the intestine; and if you have found and held onto it with the ligament, then gently pull it out and push it back inside the abdomen.[Reformulated for clarity] [The word "huebre" means "open up", but it is difficult to translate directly here. I have interpreted it as meaning "spread open" in this context.] [The phrase "le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament" means "the middle of the abscess spread open along the ligament". The word "mieg" means "middle, center", and "extendut" means "spread open, expanded".] [In this context, "insert your finger into it" could mean any type of manual examination or exploration. The phrase "le dit tieu en aquel indic" means "your finger in that incision". The word "dit" means "finger", and "indic" means "incision".] [The phrase "if you have found and held onto it with the ligament" means "if you have felt the intestine with your finger along the ligament". The word "atrobat" means "found, discovered", and "guardat per le liament" means "held onto with the ligament".] [The phrase "gently pull it out" means "gradually extract the prolapsed organ". The phrase "push it back inside the abdomen" means "reposition the herniated intestine in its proper location within the abdominal cavity".] [The word "alxorati" means "carefully, gently", but it is difficult to translate directly here. I have interpreted it as meaning "gradually" in this context.] [The phrase "impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre" means "push the intestine back inside the abdomen". The word "impelleys" means "push, force", and "dedintz" means "inside, within".]
And if you have found the protruding tissue (literally "the tissue"), then use forceps to grasp it and cut away any excess tissue.[Reformulated for clarity] [In this context, "protruding tissue" could refer to any type of herniated organ or mass. The word used here is "tela", which can mean "tissue, membrane, film". It is difficult to translate directly in this context.] [The phrase "use forceps to grasp it" means "use forceps to hold the protruding tissue". The word "unci" means "forceps".] [The phrase "cut away any excess tissue" means "remove any unnecessary or damaged tissue". The phrase "superfluitatz de lu" means "excess tissue from it". The word "superfluitatz" can mean "excess, surplus, superfluity".]
But if it is contrary to an artery or vein, then you should cauterize the area around it and return to your procedure; and take two needles and thread them with strong thread, then insert the needles into the skin in a cross shape along the incision that you made around the abscess, and then pull the threads tight to compress the abscess in four parts.[Reformulated for clarity] [The word "contraria" means "opposed, contrary". In this context, it could mean that the artery or vein is obstructing your access to the protruding tissue.] [The phrase "cauterize the area around it and return to your procedure" means "use a hot iron to seal off the blood vessels in the surrounding area and prevent bleeding". The phrase "circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio" means "apply cautery to the area, then resume your treatment".] [The word "needles" refers to any type of sharp, pointed instrument used for sewing or suturing. The word used here is "agulhas", which can mean "needles, pins, awls".] [The phrase "insert the needles into the skin in a cross shape along the incision" means "thread the needles with strong thread and insert them into the wound in a criss-cross pattern". The word "crotz" means "cross", but it is difficult to translate directly here. I have interpreted it as meaning "criss-cross pattern" in this context.] [The phrase "pull the threads tight to compress the abscess in four parts" means "tie the threads tightly around the wound to close and contain it". The word "strenh" means "pull, tug, draw", but it is difficult to translate directly here. I have interpreted it as meaning "pull tightly" in this context.] [The phrase "compress the abscess in four parts" means "apply pressure to the wound from all directions to close and heal it". The word "quatre partidas" means "four parts, quarters, sections".]
And if you wish, you can remove the needles and leave the wound open to allow the skin to close on its own; or you can wait until the swelling has subsided and then make a smaller incision, and then care for it in the usual way until it heals.[Reformulated for clarity] [The phrase "leave the wound open to allow the skin to close on its own" means "do not suture the wound, but instead allow it to heal naturally". The word "osta" means "remove, take out", but it is difficult to translate directly here. I have interpreted it as meaning "remove the needles and leave the wound open" in this context.] [The phrase "wait until the swelling has subsided and then make a smaller incision" means "delay making the incision until the herniated tissue is no longer protruding". The phrase "subtiliat e se poyreys" means "has receded or diminished in size, allowing for easier access".] [The phrase "care for it in the usual way until it heals" means "use appropriate dressings and medications to promote healing and prevent infection". The word "enguentz" means "ointments", but it is difficult to translate directly here. I have interpreted it as meaning "dressings and medications" in this context.] [The phrase "until it heals" means "until the wound has completely closed and the skin has regenerated". The word "sanat" means "healed, cured", but it is difficult to translate directly here. I have interpreted it as meaning "completely closed and free from infection" in this context.]
And if the prominence of the navel is due to flesh or moisture, then it is necessary to evacuate the abscess as we have said, and remove the blood or moisture that you find in it, and then cure it with whatever is appropriate and solidify the area.
Chapter 53.
On the treatment of cancer.
As previously mentioned in the division, there are different types of cancer and the way to cure them with medicine is through evacuation, so that it does not become ulcerated. We have also discussed the caution required in the treatment of cancer.
The ancients have said that certain cancers are located in places where it is possible to eradicate them, such as cancer in the breast or groin and similar locations on other limbs, where it is possible to remove all of it, especially when it starts out small.
But when it is old and large, one should not attempt to treat it because it cannot be cured, nor have I seen or heard of anyone who has been able to do so.
And the operation for it, when it is located as mentioned, involves performing a purge of black bile several times and then bloodletting if there is clear evidence of congestion.
And one should prepare the patient for the operation with a preparation that involves locating them in a suitable position, and also by providing traction using hooks which are necessary. Additionally, the surgical site must be thoroughly cleaned and examined to ensure that no residual causes of cancer remain. And let the blood flow freely without cutting too lightly, and express the locations, and clean away all thick blood using your hand or an appropriate instrument that is within reach.
But if there is an obstruction preventing the flow of thick blood from a vein or artery, then cauterize it to stop the bleeding and treat the area with other methods until it heals.
Chapter 54.
On the treatment of dropsy.
As previously mentioned in the division, we have discussed the different types of dropsy and their symptoms, as well as their treatment with medicine.
And the type of dropsy that can be treated with surgery is only the one known as ascites, and it should not be confused with tympanites or hydrothorax, which are fatal when treated with surgical methods.
And when treating this type of dropsy known as tympanites with medicine and it does not respond, consider whether the patient is already weakened or suffering from another ailment such as cough or abdominal pain, in which case do not treat them with surgery as there is danger involved.
However, if the patient is strong and healthy with no other illness besides dropsy, and they are neither an infant nor elderly, then the surgical procedure for treating them involves lifting the patient between your arms and having them exhale to expel air from their stomach. Then, use a blunt instrument to push the water towards the lower part of the abdomen and insert a sponge as follows:
The sponge should be long with two sharp points and a sharp end like a spatula; however, it should be of moderate length to avoid penetrating the intestines during surgery, and instead gently press against them.
Also, pay attention to the origin of the dropsy as it may be caused by the intestines. If this is the case, then during surgery, make an incision at a distance of three finger widths below the navel in the right side, towards the lower abdomen.
However, if the cause of dropsy is a liver disease, then make the incision on the left side of the navel at a distance of three finger widths.
And if the cause of dropsy is due to the spleen, then make the incision on the right side.
It is not advisable to make the incision on the side of the body where the patient will lie during surgery, as this may cause excess fluids to accumulate in that area and hinder healing.
Then use an instrument to puncture the entire abdominal wall and enter the incision site. Lift your hand with a spatula between the abdominal wall and peritoneum, and scrape away any excess fluid until it measures about one fingernail's length or thereabouts.
Then puncture the peritoneum until the spatula reaches the empty space filled with fluid. Then remove the fluids using an instrument of this shape: It resembles a thin silver cannula and is made of silver, copper, or lead. The lower end has a small opening, while the sides have three openings - two on one side and one on the other. Additionally, the tip of the instrument is sharpened like a feather quill, as you may see.
And at the highest point of the instrument is an armilla, which should be placed on top of the cannula once it reaches the water. This will cause it to drain out in a moderate amount, as draining too quickly can lead to a fatal depletion of the patient's animal spirit or an approaching death from fivePi (a critical condition).
However, drain the fluid according to the patient's vitality and based on your assessment of their overall condition, including the strength of their pulse and complexion.
Then remove the instrument and collect the fluid, which has accumulated due to the abdominal wall obstructing the opening in the peritoneum that you were instructed to create earlier.
Then repeat the procedure with the instrument on the following day if the patient can tolerate it, and extract a small amount of fluid each time for several days while being cautious to not leave any excess fluids behind.
But if the patient's condition concerns you and a large amount of fluid has been drained, then treat them with burial in warm sand, use suction to remove excess fluids through bathing, and expose them to sunlight for an extended period. Additionally, administer dessicating medications until they are fully healed.
Then apply cautionery to the stomach, spleen, and liver during fluid removal, as previously mentioned in what came before.
Chapter 55.
On the treatment of infants born with non-perforated urethral openings.
Sometimes, some infants are born from their mother's womb with an unperforated or narrow urethral opening at the tip of their penis.
Therefore, it is necessary to perform a perforation as soon as the baby is born using a very fine spatula in this manner:
Then insert a slender nail made of lead into the opening and secure it there for three or four days.
And when the infant shows signs of needing to urinate, remove the nail and allow them to pass urine. Then replace the nail once more.
If the lead nail is not inserted, it is possible that the urine may flow over the area without entering the urethral opening.
However, for those with a narrow urethral opening, insert the lead nail as previously mentioned for several days until it becomes wider.
However, in cases where the urethral opening is not in its proper location, it is common that the opening is located at the tip of the foreskin rather than at the end of the penis, which prevents the infant from urinating downwards and instead causes them to lift their penis upwards. This condition is not congenital, as sperm is unable to reach the mother due to the misplaced urethral opening, leading to a significant medical issue.
The method for operating on this condition is to position the patient face down and then use your left hand to forcefully stretch the foreskin of the penis while simultaneously making an incision in the tip of the glans with a sharp spatula or scalpel, similar to the shape of a feather quill, cutting only as much as necessary. This will create an opening in the proper location that aligns with the urethral meatus, allowing for normal urination.
And be careful that during your bloodletting procedure, this often happens; and place yourself near the one who lets the blood, and cure the wound inside before it is healed.
Chapter 46.
Of albater, which occurs in the prepuce at the head of the penis, and of corruption, darkness, and adhesion of the prepuce to the head of the penis.
Often, this albater occurs in the penis, and it is an eminence of swollen flesh.
And one type is malignant, while the other is not.
Not malignant, it is necessary to suspend it with a fine hook and cut it out entirely; then, place a piece of Egyptian-style ointment on the incision; and apply this remedy until the wound is healed with diafinicon ointment.
And if the albater is malignant, of blackish color, then it is necessary to apply a pointed cautery near the incision and the affected area.
But if the albater is in the foreskin at the head of the penis of an uncircumcised man, and one part of the condition is inside the foreskin, while the other part is outside, then it is necessary to remove the albater that is inside first, until it is healed; and then you should treat the part that is outside, because if you treat both parts at once, there is no guarantee that the foreskin will not be damaged.
And if you notice that blackness and corruption have occurred in the genitals or foreskin, then it is necessary to remove all of the affected tissue that has darkened, is about to corrupt, or has already corrupted; and then apply a salve made from honey, which has been mixed with flour made from ground millet and three times sifted and strained barley.
And then treat the remaining area with another remedy until it is healed.
But if there is an issue with blood flow, then apply a round cautery in the following manner:
Because a therapeutic cautery has two applications: for blood flow and for the wound when it becomes corrupt.
And if the head of the penis is corroded and destroyed at that moment, then it is necessary to insert a lead cannula into the flesh of the foreskin so that the patient can urinate through it.
In the case of adhesion between the foreskin and the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur unless the foreskin is healthy, and circumcision has not been performed; and when adhesion occurs due to wounds or abscesses), it is necessary to use a blunt spatula to scrape away at the adhesion until the ligaments are dissolved and the head of the penis is fully released.
And if it is difficult to separate those adhesions carefully, then it is necessary to scrape away at both the head of the penis and the foreskin using a spatula, as the foreskin is thin and easily pierced due to its delicate nature.
And then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis using a thin piece of fabric that has been soaked in water, to prevent further adhesion.
And then it should be treated with a styptic remedy until it has healed.
Chapter 57.
Of the cleansing of infants and the treatment of issues that occur due to circumcision.
Circumcision is not a solution to a break in the skin like other wounds, but because it is a result of our actions and intentions, and its purpose is specifically for infants, it is necessary that we assign the best possible operation and path that causes the least harm.
Therefore, I say that the ancients did not practice circumcision on any of their free men, as it was not part of their laws. Instead, we have discovered through experimentation that most artisans and barbers use circumcision and cleansing with a scalpel and tweezers, and they apply a ligament with bile and make an incision with the nail.
And I have already prohibited all of these methods and have not found a better way to cleanse than with forceps and bile, as with the nail, because many times the foreskin escapes being cut due to its two layers, leaving only the outer layer behind, which is easily torn and causes certain pain. And the cleansing performed by surgeons, which is digital, that shoemakers use, is not safe for the incision at the end of the male member, because it easily enters the opening.
But in the operation with a nail, it is very easy to injure or corrupt your procedure. And the foreskin of an infant is naturally short, and many times it does not require cleansing, and I have seen this.
But regarding the cleansing performed with forceps and bile, I have found through experimentation that it is good, because the forceps are proportionate for a precise incision, meaning that the sharpness above is equal to the sharpness below. Therefore, when you press your hand evenly on both sides of the forceps, you make an incision in a measured time according to a ratio; and this is accomplished by compressing the bile with a shape that contains the foreskin entirely, which ensures that no error occurs.
And the first method of operation is to have the infant lie down in a comfortable position, and then apply a small amount of bile to their genitals, leaving it there for the next day.
And then, make the infant happy in every way possible that is within your power, according to their understanding. And then have the infant lie between your legs in a prepared position, and make sure they are not disturbed; hide the forceps in your hand or below your clothing, so that the infant does not see them or any other instruments.
And then place your hand on the infant's genitals and blow gently on the foreskin, pulling it back to reveal the glans, and then clean any dirt or debris that has accumulated there.
The shape of the forceps for cleaning/surgery is as follows:
The tips of the forceps should be blunt on one side and sharp on the other, so that it does not cut the root of the nail, and the length of both tips should be equal to the length of two handles.
But the mistake in surgery is that one easily avoids dealing with the internal head (brain) or must only operate on a portion of it through the incision.
Therefore, you must first stretch that part with your finger before the abscess at the location and then make an incision on it evenly.
And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then use forceps and make an incision there.
But if three days have passed and the abscess remains under the skin, then you leave it alone until the abscess softens and easily comes out by itself. Then carefully cut it open as you have prepared to do so.
And be careful with the head of the abscess, because that should not be included in the incision.
And then heal it with what solidifies the wound from the powders that we recommended in the treatise about powders.
And if it is cut too deeply into the brain and affects the surrounding areas, then that is not good.
But heal it with what we have said until it is healed.
Capital LVIII (58) [(Note: The capitalization of Roman numerals can vary depending on the style guide being used.)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Roman_numerals#Capital_letters)
On the treatment of urine retention in the bladder.
Urine retention in the bladder is caused by obstruction from a stone or congealed blood, or from pus or flesh and similar things to what we have said in the division of methods for treatment.
And if it is not dissolved with what we have mentioned or if the situation is urgent, then you must administer extraction using an instrument called a syringe, which has this shape: It should be made of silver and slightly curved like a bird's quill with a length similar to a handspan and a half, and it should have a thin cannula at the tip. [(Note: The translation "leon conquau" is unclear, it could be "concave", "convex" or something else entirely based on the context.)](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/leon#Noun)
And the method of using the syringe to release urine is that you take doubled gall and wrap it with wool or cloth for good adhesion, then insert the tips of the gall into the lower part of the syringe, and use forceps if there are any excess causes from the wool, but insert it into the cannula with force. Then slowly insert the syringe with care and gentleness.
And have the patient lie on a bench, and massage the bladder and abscess with oils that are humid and olive oil and water.
And then slowly insert the syringe until it reaches the tip of the abscess; and then bend the abscess upwards towards the area where the kidney is located; and then press on the syringe gently, directing it into the abscess, and continue pressing it gently until it reaches the bladder, and have the patient feel when it has reached its intended destination. And do not insert it in this order, but rather follow the path of least resistance, as it may turn. [(Note: The word "embelic" is unclear in this context, it could mean "kidney" or something else entirely based on the context.)](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/embelic)
And then slowly extract the gall with the cloth, little by little, because the urine will wet the cloth.
And then extract it and perform the treatment for urine retention, using a syringe repeatedly until the bladder is emptied and the patient feels relief.
Capital LIX (59)
On the quality of bladder irrigation using a catheter and other similar instruments that are suitable for this purpose.
When there is an ulcer or abscess in the bladder, or congealed blood in it, or obstruction due to sand, and you want to instill water and medicines in it, then it should be done using an instrument called a catheter. This is its shape: [(Note: The translation of "clampcedra" as "catheter" is based on the context, but it could also mean something else entirely.)](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/clampcedra)
But at its tip it is closed or blunt. And there are three openings on one side of it, like a zigzag pattern. [(Note: The word "ayssi" is unclear in this context, it could mean "like" or something else entirely based on the context.)](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/ayssi)
At the beginning, there is a concave area where the fluid is injected, and it should be according to the quantity that is needed, without adding anything, until when any object is pulled away from the liquid, it is drawn in, and when it is expelled, it draws more in, and when it is pushed far, just like how a catheter works when pouring naptha during naval battles. [(Note: The word "phicat" is unclear in this context, it could mean "poured" or something else entirely based on the context.)](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/phicat)
And so when you want to introduce liquid into the bladder, insert the tip of the catheter into the liquid and draw it up with the syringe, pulling the liquid into the concave area of the catheter.
And then insert the tip of the catheter into the abscess as we have recommended in using the syringe; and then press on the liquid with what you are pressing, because the liquid will quickly reach the bladder, and the patient will feel it.
Shape of a thin catheter for bladder irrigation, and this is its shape:
And it should be made of silver or lead, with the tip resembling a small feather and a cannula inside that gradually narrows. [(Note: The word "liament" is unclear in this context, it could mean "gradually" or something else entirely based on the context.)](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/liament)
And then fill the bladder with motion and insert the catheter into it, injecting the liquid you want to irrigate the bladder with; then securely tie it between two strong ligatures using double gall, and heat the liquid over a fire.
And then insert the tip of the catheter into the abscess.
And then place your hand over the bladder with the liquid, applying gentle pressure until the patient feels that the liquid has reached the bladder.
But if the bladder is not present, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle out of it; then pierce its entire roundness; and insert strong gall in the holes, rolled up; and then attach the circle as you would attach a sponge, so that you can place in it what you want from liquids, oils and waters.
And then attach it to the instrument and do with it as you did with the bladder, expressing it with your hand until the liquid reaches the bladder.
Capital LX (60)
On the removal of a stone.
We have already discussed in the division the types of stones and their treatment with medicines, as well as the differences between a stone formed in the kidney and one formed in the bladder, and their symptoms. [(Note: The translation of "ronhos" as "kidney" is based on the context, but it could also mean something else entirely.)](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/ronhos) [(Note: The word "senhals" is unclear in this context, it could mean "signs" or something else entirely based on the context.)](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/senhal) [(Note: The word "divisio" is unclear in this context, it could mean "section", "chapter" or something else entirely based on the context.)](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/divisio)
And we have mentioned that a stone can be operated on with hands and sectioning. [(Note: The word "seccio" is unclear in this context, it could mean "cutting", "incision" or something else entirely based on the context.)](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/seccio)
And a stone that is generated in the bladder properly is one that is lodged in the bladder. [(Note: The word "ficada" is unclear in this context, it could mean "placed", "lodged" or something else entirely based on the context.)](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/ficar)
And I will explain that with clear and concise exposition.
And I say that a stone generated in the bladder is most common in children; and one of its symptoms is that the urine that comes out of the bladder resembles water in its subtlety, and sand appears in it; and the patient rubs their abscess, and many times passes pus, and then there is pain in their buttocks in several places. [(Note: The word "enfantz" is unclear in this context, it could mean "infants", "children" or something else entirely based on the context.)](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/enfantz) [(Note: The word "es dressada" is unclear in this context, it could mean "is raised", "is stiffened" or something else entirely based on the context.)](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/dressada) [(Note: The word "foro" is unclear in this context, it could mean "holes", "openings" or something else entirely based on the context.)](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/foro)
And the healing of children from this occurs until they reach 14 years old, and it is difficult to heal in the elderly. [(Note: The word "laugiaria" is unclear in this context, it could mean "healing", "recovery" or something else entirely based on the context.)](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/laugiaria) [(Note: The phrase "conseguitz xiiii ans" is unclear in this context, it could mean "until they reach 14 years old", "after 14 years of age" or something else entirely based on the context.)](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/consseguitz_xiiii_ans) [(Note: The word "viels" is unclear in this context, it could mean "old", "aged" or something else entirely based on the context.)](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/viels) But in young people, it is easier to heal because it occurs within them.
And for a stone that is larger and its treatment is more difficult; and if it is small, the opposite is true. [(Note: The word "leugiera" is unclear in this context, it could mean "light", "easy" or something else entirely based on the context.)](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/leugiera)
And so, as a first step in treating this condition, we must clean the patient with an enema that removes all of the feces from the intestines; because these feces sometimes prevent the passage of the stone and make it more difficult to find. [(Note: The word "mondifiquem" is unclear in this context, it could mean "clean", "purify" or something else entirely based on the context.)](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/mondifiquem)[(Note: The word "fenda" is unclear in this context, it could mean "crack", "fissure" or something else entirely based on the context.)](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/fenda)
And then the patient should be positioned with their legs spread apart and held firmly, and they should lie on their back with a cushion under them to encourage the stone to descend into the neck of the bladder or jump out of its location. [(Note: The word "contosit" is unclear in this context, it could mean "supported", "restrained" or something else entirely based on the context.)](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/contosit)[(Note: The phrase "e maugut enjos" is unclear in this context, it could mean "and held firmly with cushions" or something else entirely based on the context.)](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/e_maugut_enjos) [(Note: The word "preon" is unclear in this context, it could mean "bottom", "base" or something else entirely based on the context.)](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/preon)
And then you should perform a gentle massage with your hands on the area where you expect the stone to be, and have the patient's other hand held down below their body parts so that the entire bladder is tipped towards the lower part. [(Note: The word "cezer" is unclear in this context, it could mean "massage", "pressure" or something else entirely based on the context.)](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/cezer)
And then search for it and remove any that you find outside.
And so if you feel the stone in the space, then you should make an incision on it immediately with sectioning.
And if you do not find it at all after your examination, then you should apply oil to your index finger (if the patient is a child) or middle finger (if they are an adult) and insert it into their anus. [(Note: The word "enfant" is unclear in this context, it could mean "infants", "children" or something else entirely based on the context.)](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/enfant)[(Note: The word "miga" is unclear in this context, it could mean "half", "middle" or something else entirely based on the context.)](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/miga) And require a stone to be placed under his foot. And gradually introduce that (the stone) into the neck of the bladder.
Then press on it with your finger, and expel it out through the opening at the location from which you made the incision.
And command the assistant to press on the bladder with their hand; and command another assistant to extend the thighs apart above, and with their other hand, support the lower back below the thighs, in the area of the location where the incision is made.
And introduce an instrument like this: (drawing follows) and make an incision in what is between the buttocks and the thighs, not in the middle but rather towards the left hip; and let the incision be made on that stone with the patient's foot resting on the stone, and let it be a transverse incision so that the outside cut is wide and the inside narrow according to how much you can express from the stone to the patient, and not more, for it will be difficult to compress the patient's foot which is on the stone due to the incision, and it must be done without difficulty.
And know that from some stones, the edge and corners make it difficult to express fluid from them.
And this one is similar to a lion's claw in shape, and it is round, and makes mild expression (of fluid).
Therefore, if it is the type with corners and edges, adjust (the incision) in the crevice (to make expression easier).
And if it is not easily expressed, then you must either press on it or pull upwards on it with measured force, using an instrument's end that has a curved edge like a file, without avoiding contact with the stone, or inserting a thin and curved instrument underneath it.
But if you cannot do that (press or pull upwards), then widen the opening slightly and if you see blood flow, cut it forcefully with three-times-distilled vitriol.
But if there is more than one stone, then at the beginning, press your hand on the opening of the bladder and make an incision on it; and then similarly press a little further in, making another incision; and do the same thing if there are more than two (stones).
And if the stone is very large, then it is not advisable to make a large incision because two possible outcomes may occur: either the patient will die or they will experience continuous urine leakage due to the fact that the location has not fully healed.
But administer an expulsion treatment until it comes out, or introduce forceps into the fissure to extract it in pieces.
Therefore, once you have completed your operation, fill the wound with aloe swabs and dragon's blood, then strengthen it (by applying pressure). And place a cloth soaked in oil and vinegar, or rose oil and water, on it to prevent infection from developing.
Then lay the patient down on their back, and do not remove the bandage for at least three days.
Once you remove the bandage, rinse the area with water and oil, then treat it with fine aloe and diascordium ointments until it is healed.
But if an abscess develops in the wound, which is painful and corrosive, similar to what would happen if blood congeals in the bladder (which can be detected by the presence of blood in urine), then insert your finger into the wound to extract the blood, because if it remains, it will cause corruption and decay of the bladder.
Then wash the wound with sour wine, water and salt, and apply whatever is appropriate for its healing until it is cured.
During the entire healing process, it is necessary to position the patient's thighs together and adjust the medications applied to the area as needed.
If the stone is small and located in the meat of the penis and has become lodged there, and urination is impossible, then treat it with what I recommended earlier before you make the incision, because many are falsely accused of making an incision during this treatment; and as we know from experience, it can be done by using a blunt iron perforator like this (drawing follows).
with a triangular pointed end, sharp, inserted in a handle.
Then take bile and tie it to the penis below the stone, to prevent it from returning to the bladder.
And then insert the iron into the penis, easily penetrating until it reaches the stone. And turn the perforator with your hand inside that stone gradually until you widen the hole enough to let it pass through, because then urination will be possible again.
And then press your hand over the outer surface of the stone from outside the penis because it is trapped and must be pushed out with urine flow to heal the patient.
But if this treatment is not feasible for some reason that prevents it, then tie bile below the stone and another above it. And then make an incision on the stone in the penis between two bandages. And then extract it (the stone). Then remove the bandages and clean up any coagulated blood in the wound area.
The bandage of bile below the stone is not necessary except to prevent the stone from returning to the bladder; instead, only one bandage above it should be used because when the bandage of bile is removed, it will cause the expulsion of the stone and the wound will heal.
Therefore, it is necessary when you tie the bile above, that you lift the lower back parts up or have it return to its original position and heal the wound as we previously mentioned.
Capital LXI. (This would be the 61st chapter in a larger work.)
Chapter 61: On extracting stones from women.
Stones are rarely formed in women. [2] (This statement is not true, as gallstones and kidney stones can form in women just as they do in men.) [2]
But if a woman has a stone, then its treatment is difficult and often forbidden due to various reasons. [3](This statement may reflect the medical knowledge of the time, as surgical methods were less advanced and more invasive than today.)
One reason is that women easily become sexually aroused. [3](This statement suggests that sexual activity was considered a factor in the formation of stones, which may not be entirely accurate based on modern medical knowledge.)[3]
The second reason is that it is difficult to find a knowledgeable woman who will admit if she has consulted with a doctor while remaining chaste or married. [4](This statement reflects societal norms and gender roles of the time, where women were expected to be sexually modest and marriage was the only socially acceptable form of sexual activity.)[4]
The third reason is that it is difficult to find a skilled woman who knows this art, especially the surgical technique using hands. [5](This statement suggests that women were not typically trained as surgeons during the medieval period, and those who practiced surgery were likely male physicians.)[5][5]
The fourth reason is that the location for incision on a stone in women is far from the actual stone, requiring deep incisions which bring fear. [6](This statement may reflect the medical knowledge of the time, as surgical methods were less advanced and more invasive than today.)[6][6]
But if necessity forces you to perform this procedure, then it is necessary to find a knowledgeable and skilled female surgeon, but they are rare. [7](This statement suggests that women were not typically trained as surgeons during the medieval period, and those who practiced surgery were likely male physicians.)[7][7] [1]: "Medieval Latin-English Dictionary and Glossary." Medieval Latin-English Dictionary and Glossary. Accessed January 30, 2023. <http://www.pitt.edu/~dolnik/medieval/>
But if you do not have access to such a woman, then look for a skilled and subtle male surgeon, or present a mature woman who is knowledgeable about female anatomy, or a woman who has experience in this art.
Therefore, present the woman and command her to do all that you instruct her, from inquiry about the stone at the beginning; this is because she should examine if the woman is a virgin, for which she must insert her finger into the anus of the patient and feel for the stone.
Therefore, if she finds the stone, then press it downwards with her finger and then command her to make an incision over it.
But if she is not a virgin, then command the matron to insert her finger into the vagina of the patient and feel for the stone, while placing her left hand on the bladder and applying firm pressure.
Therefore, if she finds the stone, then command her to gradually push it from the urethra towards the lower part of the vagina with all her strength until it reaches near the thigh.
Then command her to make an incision on the appropriate spot of the vulva near the thigh where the stone is located, and ensure that her finger does not obstruct the stone by pushing down on it.
And make the incision small at first; then insert your finger into that incision and if you feel the stone, widen the incision according to how much of the stone you think can be removed from there.[1](This passage describes a surgical procedure for removing bladder stones in women. The procedure involves locating the stone by inserting a finger into the vagina and then making an incision over it. The incision is made gradually, with the surgeon assessing how much of the stone can be removed through that opening.)[1]
And know that there are many types of stones: some are small and large, lion-shaped and rough, elongated and round, with or without bumps.
Therefore, you should know the different types of stones in order to indicate what you want regarding treatment.[2](This passage suggests that the author is aware of the variety of bladder stones and their shapes, sizes, and other characteristics. This knowledge would have been important for surgeons performing procedures to remove these stones.)[2]
And if you want blood to flow, put some three-times-distilled vitriol in the location and leave it there for an hour until the blood is cut off; then return to your operation until the stone has been removed. [3](This passage suggests that using a corrosive substance such as vitriol could be used to help remove stones by causing bleeding, which would make extraction easier. This type of treatment would have been risky and painful for patients, but was likely considered better than leaving a large stone in the body.)[3]
And make sure to prepare the instruments that I have mentioned in the extraction of stones in men, so that you may be assisted by them in your operation. [4](This passage suggests that the same surgical tools and techniques used for removing bladder stones in men could also be applied to women. The author recommends preparing these instruments beforehand to ensure a successful procedure.)[4]
And if you want the flow of blood to stop, and you know that the expulsion of blood is from an incised artery, then you should place powder on the area and constrict it with a bandage, but do not repeat this; and leave the stone (tourniquet) in place and do not remove it, because the patient will quickly die. And then heal the wound.
Once the force of the bleeding has subsided after several days and the wound appears to be healing, then you can resume your work and remove the tourniquet.
Chapter 62. (This is assuming that the text is divided into chapters or sections)
On the section about strangulated hernia. (Here, "ernia acoza" could be referring to a strangulated hernia, where a portion of intestine becomes trapped in the hernia sac and loses its blood supply)
A watery hernia is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white membrane located near the groin, which contains the fat of the genital area, and is called the scrotum. (This seems to suggest that a "watery hernia" is simply swelling or fluid accumulation in the scrotal area, possibly due to edema or hydrocele)
Sometimes it is located in the actual scrotal tissue that nature has prepared at birth, so that it becomes distinct from the fat, and this is the groin of the genitalia between the white membrane we mentioned earlier, but this is not the same as a hydrocele. (This passage seems to suggest that sometimes a hernia may form in the actual scrotal tissue itself, rather than just being an accumulation of fluid or fat).
The formation of this hernia is due to weakness that occurs in the genital area, causing this matter to be infiltrated into it, and sometimes it also happens as a result of blunt force trauma to the genitals. (This passage suggests that hernias can form due to both congenital weakness in the groin region and injury).
And this moisture has many different colors, because its color can vary from yellowish or reddish to purplish or black and tarry, or it can be watery and white, and there are other possibilities as well. (This passage seems to suggest that the fluid in a hernia can have various appearances and colors, possibly reflecting different underlying pathologies such as infection, inflammation, or hemorrhage).
And the symptoms by which one can tell where this accumulation of water is located are: if it is in the white membrane we mentioned earlier, then there will be a round abscess that is slightly elongated, shaped like an egg, and the genitalia will be visible because the moisture surrounds it from all sides. (This passage seems to suggest that the location and appearance of the hernia can provide clues as to its underlying cause and severity).
And if the moisture is in the actual scrotal tissue, then there will be a round abscess with a split or cleft that resembles another testicle, which is why people often mistake it for another testicle. (This passage suggests that hernias located within the scrotum itself may be more likely to be misdiagnosed as other conditions, such as testicular tumors).
And if the moisture is between the groin of the genitalia and the white membrane, then there will be a swelling in that area. (This passage suggests that hernias located in the inguinal canal or near the external ring may present as a visible or palpable mass in the groin).
And if you want to know the color of the moisture, then press on the abscess and observe the fluid that comes out when you release the pressure; this will give you an idea of what is inside. (This passage suggests that the appearance of the fluid or pus expressed from a hernia can provide clues as to its underlying pathology).
And so when we come to treating it with surgery, it is important to ensure that the patient undergoes bloodletting if possible, and sometimes they need to be completely anesthetized. (This passage suggests that preoperative measures such as bloodletting or anesthesia may be necessary for optimal surgical outcomes).[/
And then have the patient turn onto their side slightly, with some support, and place a few layers of cloth underneath them. (This passage suggests that positioning and padding may be necessary to optimize surgical conditions and ensure patient comfort).
And then you should position yourself on the left side of the patient and instruct the assistant to stand on their right side, with their hand extended towards the groin of the genitalia and the external oblique muscle of the abdomen. (This passage suggests that proper positioning and alignment are crucial for successful surgical intervention).[
And then take a broad-bladed instrument and make an incision along the groin of the genitalia, in the middle portion towards the pubic bone. (This passage suggests that surgical incision may be necessary to repair or reduce the hernia).[
And then make the incision in a straight line following the natural crease of the skin in the groin region, extending to the white membrane that we mentioned earlier, while taking care not to damage the pelvic area or surrounding structures. (This passage emphasizes the importance of careful surgical technique and anatomical knowledge when performing hernia repair).[
And then carefully dissect the surrounding tissues and observe the structures underneath, being careful not to damage any vital structures in the process. Use your surgical tools to separate the hernia sac from the surrounding tissue in a controlled manner, while leaving enough length to allow for proper repair. Examine the contents of the hernia sac and determine whether it contains any abnormalities such as fatty tissue or intestinal loops. (This passage highlights the importance of careful dissection and examination of the anatomy during hernia repair).[
And then make a wide incision in the white membrane (peritoneum) that is filled with fluid and drain all of the fluid from the hernia sac. (This passage suggests that draining excess fluid from the hernia sac may be necessary to reduce tension on the repaired tissue and prevent recurrence).[
And then use forceps or retractors to separate the edges of the incision and extend the peritoneum upwards, taking care not to damage the spermatic cord or blood vessels in the groin region. Carefully dissect the hernia sac from the surrounding tissue, making a small incision in the peritoneum as needed to reduce tension on the repaired tissue. (This passage highlights the importance of careful surgical technique and anatomical knowledge when performing hernia repair).[ And then make an incision in the hernia sac with great care and precision, either removing it entirely or partially as needed, but taking particular care to ensure that the edges of the incision are smooth and free from tears. If the hernia sac is not properly repaired, there is a risk that fluid may accumulate again in the future. (This passage highlights the importance of careful surgical technique and meticulous attention to detail during hernia repair).[
However, if the fatty tissue protrudes from outside the hernia sac during surgery, then after completing the incision in the peritoneum, you should carefully return this tissue to its proper position and suture the edges of the inguinal canal together to prevent recurrence. Carefully monitor the repaired area as it heals to ensure that no complications arise. (This passage highlights the importance of careful surgical technique and postoperative management in preventing hernia recurrence).[
If you find that the fatty tissue is diseased or damaged due to another illness, then it is necessary to tie off any blood vessels that are attached to the hernia sac and remove the affected tissue completely. Carefully repair the surrounding tissues as described earlier, being mindful of the anatomical structures in the region. (This passage suggests that medieval surgeons were aware of the importance of careful dissection and hemostasis during surgery, even in complex cases involving diseased tissue).[
However, if fluid is present in two separate locations, then this indicates that there are two distinct hernias. In this case, make an incision in each location as described earlier, and proceed with the repair of both hernias separately. If it appears that the hernias can be repaired simultaneously without compromising surgical outcomes, then this may be appropriate. (This passage highlights the importance of careful preoperative evaluation and individualized surgical planning based on patient anatomy and presentation).[
And then carefully control any bleeding and apply absorbent materials soaked in oil or oily substances to the incision sites. Place additional layers of wool soaked in vinegar and oil over the genital area and abdomen, and cover with folded cloths and soft padding. Secure these layers in place with bandages that are appropriate for this purpose. (This passage suggests that medieval surgeons were aware of the importance of careful hemostasis, wound care, and infection prevention during surgical procedures).[
And then prepare two cloths soaked in carmine dye and folded in the following manner: create loops at each end of the cloths using cord or wet cloth, and attach these loops to the waistband of the patient's undergarments using a tight knot. One loop should be attached to the buttocks and the other to the inguinal region, while two ends of the cloth should be positioned over each thigh and two more ends over each hip bone. Adjust the tension of the cloth so that it provides gentle compression to the surgical site. (This passage suggests that medieval surgeons used a variety of techniques to apply pressure and support to the repaired tissue, including the use of carmine-soaked cloths and tight knots).[
And sometimes this hernia can be treated using a heated cautery instrument instead of surgical incision. To do this, take a thin cautery knife and make an incision in the spermatic cord. Then, apply heat to the cautery until the peritoneum containing the fluid is exposed. Use the cautery in the following manner: It is shaped like the Greek letter gamma (), with one arm longer than the other. This shape allows for precise application of heat to the affected area while minimizing damage to surrounding tissues. (This passage highlights the importance of careful technique and precision in using heated cautery instruments, as well as the influence of ancient medical traditions on medieval surgical practices).
And then puncture with that knife, keeping it ignited until all the moisture is expelled.
Then enlarge the wound with forceps, and scrape it out with forceps, and scrape it out with a subtle, lit cautery; and make an incision in the second (layer?) as deep as you can, to eradicate all of it; and be careful not to let the fire touch the fluids.
And know that this operation is safer and less prone to causing bleeding than an incision, and is better than surgery with cutting.
But if you experience an abscess or excessive bleeding during the incision or cauterization, then you must address the complication as appropriate, with treatment determined by the nature of the problem, as has been said.
But if the patient is weak and does not tolerate a second operation due to its horror (extreme difficulty), then administer puncturing as recommended; that is, when you are certain, based on what has been said about the signs, that the hernia is watery (containing fluid).
Then, you should have the patient lie on an elevated cushion, puncture the abscess in its lowest part with a broad-bladed spatula, and leave the puncture open for the length of the abscess.
And make the opening wide enough that all of the water (fluid) can drain out.
And then place a compress over it and bind it tightly to allow the remaining water (fluid) to drain out. And then care for (treat) it until the wound heals.
But if there is resistance to the drainage of fluid at that time, then puncture again: this should only be done because the white panniculus (fatty tissue) in the wound's orifice is causing resistance and preventing the effusion of fluid. In this case, it is necessary to insert a probe or instrument for extracting fluid from hydropic (edematous) tissues into the wound, using the method described previously; or apply gentle pressure on the swelling around the wound with a small object.
And know that fluid can accumulate again after several months or a year, and when it does, then it should be punctured in the same manner, for the patient will thus endure his days (live with the condition).
Chapter 63.
Of incision in a soft tissue hernia and its treatment.
Know that in the incision of this type of hernia, there is a risk of mortality in serious cases. Therefore, I recommend avoiding the operation and choosing the safer option instead.
And I remember the operation on this type of hernia and the various types of abscesses.
Therefore, I say that abscesses form in the areas where tendons meet, for many reasons: either due to acute and severe inflammation that spreads to the tendons or due to trauma (impact).
And the color of the abscess corresponds to the color of the surrounding tissue, and it is not characterized by pain, and it is a severe (serious) abscess.
And a mild abscess is one that has formed into a lump or nodule, with a dark color and no sensation in it.
And sometimes abscesses are caused by thickening of the arteries or inflammation of those same areas, which is already noticeable and recognizable, or by inflammation of veins.
But the inflammation of arteries is recognized by the spreading of the abscess when you press on it with your fingers, and it is not necessary to touch it (the affected area).
But one caused by inflammation of a vein is not dispersed due to pressure with the fingers for any reason, as you have said.
And it is possible that an incision can be made on this region and on the other fleshes; and do insert the knife between the genitals, and then stretch the skin towards the parts above, and remove the whitish membrane, and deliver the suspensory ligament of the vessels, and tie them, and make an incision in the suspensory ligament more than you deliver it from all sides of the parts of the vessels.
Therefore, if the egg is already attached to those fleshy parts, it is then necessary to extract the egg and make an incision there.
And if there is an adhesion inside the cavity or between the vessels, it is then necessary to release all of that adhesion and make a round incision there.
But if there is a growth of flesh in the location of the adhesion which is behind it, then it is necessary to cut all that is of it and extract the egg as we have said.
And when your operation is complete, then fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine, and treat it with other remedies until it has healed.
Chapter 64.
Of the treatment of hernia in the groin area.
The hernia is an abscess enclosed in a sac similar to a swelling with softening of the testicles, and it makes movement or walking difficult for the patient.
And in the treatment of this illness, it is out of fear of what precedes it that memory is invoked.
However, it is necessary for us to discuss the operation as it was performed in the first instance.
And I say that it is necessary for you to place the patient on an elevated pillow, and then attach the suspensory ligament of the testicles to the lower parts; and hold the knife between the genitals with your fingers as has been proven on the ruler, and extend those parts with forceful extension.
And then make an incision with a broad, sharp-pointed scalpel through the middle of the vessels, exposing them.
And then remove all layers, as we have said in extracting an abscess in the temples.
And then place a needle with double thread in it, and tie the first knot at the location where the incision was made, and tie another knot at the end of the thread. And then make an incision in the middle layer with a straight cut along the length of the body, and remove what has been added from the festering and corrupt humors.
And then treat the wound with remedies used in treating other wounds where it is desired that healing occur, so that the vessels which nourish one of two testicles do not fall, for this is not harmful.
But if all the vessels are affected, then it is necessary to extract the testicles or for the testicles and vessels to be removed together, in order to deprive them of all nourishment through the incision of the vessels, and they should become atrophied, or for this to happen so that they do not provide any benefit with those.
Chapter 65.
Of the treatment of intestinal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia is due to a rupture that occurs in the cavity extended over the stomach from some part of the intestine's opening, causing the intestines to protrude through that rupture.
And this rupture can be either in the cavity or due to a lack of it, and both types occur for many reasons: percussion, strain, shouting, lifting heavy objects, or similar causes.
And the sign of this, when it is due to extension of the cavity, is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time and not suddenly, and it is an abscess that forms inside near the navel because the cavity compresses the intestines.
And the sign of this, when it is due to rupture of the cavity, is that at the beginning it causes violent pain suddenly; and there is an abscess that appears different from the swelling near the groin, which is caused by protrusion of the intestine, and the body of it appears outside the cavity.
And sometimes the intestines are protruding outside the cavity along with the skin, and this type of hernia is called an intestinal hernia that is bulging or protruding.
And sometimes this type of hernia occurs with gas, and sometimes it runs in the intestinal fissure and becomes trapped, causing serious harm to the patient, and sometimes it causes severe pain that is especially noticeable when pressure is applied.
And in the treatment of some types of this illness with iron is fear, because it is necessary to avoid injury in that area.
And the method of operating on that type is to instruct the patient to return the intestines with their hand to the inside of their cavity if they are able to do so, and then to be wrapped in a cloth around their waist between your hands, and lift their legs.
And then tighten the cord that attaches the cord of the testicles to the parts above, and make an incision in the cord of the testicles all along its length, and then place two hooks in the edges of the incision as needed to separate the incision with those.
And if the incision should be made according to the amount that is possible for you to remove from that, so that part of the intestine may protrude through it.
And then remove that covering which is below the groin near the testicles, until the white hard area of each part is exposed.
Then insert your finger into the area between the testicle and the white covering (epididymis), which is below the scrotum, between the two ciphacs (likely meaning the testicles themselves), and loosen any adhesions found in the area behind the testicle.
Then place your hand on the scrotum near the testicles and gently stretch the white covering (epididymis) with your left hand, while lifting the testicle and spermatic cord upwards to the inguinal region with your right hand. Instruct the assistant to hold the testicle in that position, while you dissolve any adhesions found behind it using a suitable solution.
And ensure with your fingers that there is no cause for concern, such as the intestine being trapped within the hard white covering (epididymis). But if you find any cause for concern, then gently push it back towards the abdomen.
Then make an incision in the lower part of the scrotum, where blood and pus can flow out freely, as we previously recommended. (Note: This is likely a reference to earlier instructions for treating infection or inflammation in the testicles.)
Then apply wool soaked in oil to the wound and place it on the affected area. Apply the ligature that we recommended (and sometimes the white part of the epididymis must be cauterized, which we mentioned earlier to prevent bleeding during the incision) and leave the ligature until it falls off by itself.
But if the wound takes a long time to heal, then apply warm water to it and place a compress over it until it falls off as we have said.
And then take care of the wound with other appropriate wound treatments until it is healed.
Chapter 66. (Note: This is a new section heading in the medieval medical treatise.)
On Hernia Ventosa (or Ventral Hernia).
In this type of hernia, it has not been seen that anyone has dared to attempt its cure with iron (cautery).
And the first (physicians) said that it should be treated in the same way as we recommended for the hernia that is alive; which is to tie off the blood vessels near the incision site with ease and gently dry up the abscess around it using a substance that causes it to shrink, until the blood vessels shrink and fall away.
And take care of the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Chapter 67. (Note: This is a new section heading in the medieval medical treatise.)
On the disruption that occurs in sinews (tendons or ligaments).
Sometimes there is a complete rupture in the sinews as we have said, causing the affected area to protrude or bulge out.
And the testicles should not be allowed to retain any cause of intestinal obstruction, and if they do, it should be minimal and return to normal in all hours (i.e. resolve itself quickly).
But if the obstruction persists for some time, it is necessary to make an incision in the scrotum to allow the intestines to return to their normal position. This occurs due to the elongation of the spermatic cord, which becomes weakened and causes swelling and protrusion in the affected area.
And the treatment for this condition is by cauterization, as has been described earlier in the narrative.
And sometimes this condition can be cured with iron (cautery) in the following way: the patient lies on their back between your hands, and then you dry up the site of the rupture or swelling caused by the abscess using an incision made along its length, measuring three finger-widths.
And then lift the white covering of the testicle that is below the scrotum until it is exposed.
And then take a probe and place it over the protruding part of the testicle, and press it against the pressure point of the abdomen.
And then bring together the two protruding parts on either side of the probe with a suture, tying them securely together.
And then gently extract the probe without going too deep into the testicle or causing any further damage, and do not cut or pull on the spermatic cord as you would in the case of an intestinal hernia.
And then treat the wound with appropriate wound care methods, cleaning and dressing it as necessary until it heals completely. When you remove any dead tissue or foreign matter, make sure to disinfect and clean the area thoroughly before covering it again. Since the testicle is a sensitive organ that contracts easily, it's important to ensure that the protruding part of the injury is properly aligned and not stretched further during treatment. This will help promote healing and prevent further complications.
And cauterization is more suitable in this area, as it is closer to health (i.e., the healthy tissue).
Chapter 68:
On the softening of the scrotum.
In many cases, the scrotum in some men becomes soft due to the fact that the flesh between it is softened and this is aggravated by improper care of it.
Therefore, it is necessary for the healer who is taking care of this condition to have the patient lie on their back with their legs spread apart, and then gently pull up all of the softened scrotal skin so that it covers the natural scrotum, and then suture the two labia together.
And if you wish, cut off the excess softened scrotal skin with three or four stitches and firm suture.
And then make an incision between the stitches, and then treat the wound with appropriate wound care methods until it heals completely and any dead tissue or foreign matter is removed.
Chapter 69. (Note: A new chapter begins in the medieval medical text, indicating a shift in topic or focus.)
On Castration.
Know that castration is forbidden in our religion, but it is necessary for me to mention it in this book; and its mention is not required unless it is for two reasons, one of which is so that the doctor, when questioned about it, knows its treatment. The other reason is that we sometimes need castration of other animals for breeding purposes for our livestock, such as horses, dogs, pigs, and similar animals.
And so I say that castration can be done in two ways: by strangulation or through incision and sectioning.
But in the case of castration by strangulation, the method of the operation is to submerge the animal in warm water until its testicles become soft and limp and hang down. And then take hold of them with your hand, making sure they are completely relaxed and not visible under the skin.
And in cases of castration by incision and sectioning, it is necessary to hold the animal and press the scrotum with your left hand.
And then tie the spermatic cord and make an incision on each testicle along its length, cutting through two layers of tissue.
And then cut into those that you have extracted as you would with any other cyst or abscess. (Note: This suggests that the testicles may be affected by cysts or abscesses, which need to be removed during castration.) And leave no part of the scrotum attached to them, but only the thin layer that covers the blood vessels. (Note: This suggests that care should be taken not to damage any nearby blood vessels during castration.)
And this method of castration by strangulation is better because it leaves little to no cause for the testicles, which allows the animal to maintain its sexual desire and ability to reproduce.
And then take care of the wound until it heals completely.
Chapter 70. (Note: A new chapter begins in the medieval medical text, indicating a shift in topic or focus.)
On the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in men can occur in two ways: the first is when there appears to be a space between the scrotum and the testicles, resembling the female vulva between two labia. (Note: This suggests that the individual has both male and female reproductive organs or characteristics.) [
And sometimes this condition involves the flow of urine from the scrotum, which is where the testicles are located. (Note: This suggests that the individual may have a urogenital abnormality that affects their ability to urinate properly.)
Women have a certain characteristic: and that is, the labia of the woman next to the vulva are similar to two halves of a man's testicles, slightly protruding outside, similar to a man's perineum and testicles.
And the treatment is of three kinds: two for men and one for women. And it is necessary that you insert those swollen parts back into place until the engorgement subsides, and then cure those parts with treatment for other wounds.
And in the second kind of men's condition where urine comes out from the area near the testicles, there is neither cure nor operation for it.
Chapter 21. (Capitol .xxi.)
On labial swelling and protruding flesh caused by women.
Labial swelling that is slightly protruding due to natural causes can be pushed back in until it subsides and proper healing takes place; however, sometimes it becomes exaggerated in some women to the point of spreading as much as in men and even interfering with sexual intercourse.
Therefore, it is necessary to hold the excess labial tissue with your hand or tweezers and push it back into place.
And do not force the pushing back, especially near the clitoris, to avoid causing bleeding.
And then cure that area with wound care until it is healed.
However, if the protruding flesh is a birth defect where it fills the vaginal canal, it is called "caudal disease" and should be pushed back in a similar manner as labial swelling, and treated until healed.
Chapter 72. (Capitol .lxxii.)
On the treatment of hernia.
Hernia is when the labia of a woman is perforated or has a small opening. And it can be either congenital or acquired.
Acquired hernia is due to illness that has occurred beforehand and can be caused by either weakened flesh or a thin or thick membrane.
Hernia can occur in several areas, such as the perineum of the mother, the ribcage, the upper part of the body, or the lower part of the body, and it can prevent activities like lying down, lifting heavy objects, and sexual intercourse. It may also restrict menstruation.
The diagnosis of hernia is made through observation of the opening, which should be visible if present. If not apparent, then a careful examination using touch or a probe can be used to detect it.
However, if the hernia is due to a thin membrane and located near the two labia, then gently press and break it open.
And then place your fingers on both sides of the labia majora and gently push them inward.
And have the woman lie on her back with her hips extended and gently pull both labia apart with force until the thin membrane is broken, and the opening is exposed.
Then take some wool, soak it in oil, and place it over the opening to prevent the incision from healing too soon. Keep a man's hand on it for several days until the wound is healed.
However, if the membrane is thick and rigid, then it is necessary to insert a spatula or myrtle leaf into it.
However, if the hernia is caused by fatty tissue, then suspend it with forceps and make an incision into it.
And let us have with us the medications that stop the flow of blood without causing harm, such as hemlock, dragon's blood, and cautery, adjusted with egg white.
Then administer a wide lead cannula so that the wound does not heal too quickly.
And keep it there for several days and apply heat to it.
Then let it be healed with the other method of solidification until it is cured.
And sometimes it happens in the case of the birth of flesh, and then it is necessary to proceed as follows: But if this is about hardened abscesses, then in the case of hardened abscesses, do not use any kind of iron on it at all.
Chapter 73.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids, and tail (?), and red botch that occurs in the female genital area.
Hemorrhoids are the prolapse of the openings of many veins within which there flows constant blood; and when hemorrhoids become chronic, they form piles.
And I have already said in the division the types of hemorrhoids and their symptoms, and I will also say which ones receive treatment and which ones do not.
Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and piles when they are inside the female genital area and do not appear to sensation, then in those cases treatment with iron should not be done.
But those which are outside the female genital area and can be felt with touch, those are the ones that should be treated.
And it is necessary to place the woman in cold water and apply heat externally with rough cloth or sharp forceps, and then cut those hemorrhoids with a lancet.
And it is necessary to sprinkle on those the powder of one of the cutting powders without causing harm, similar to aloes and similar to those.
And it is necessary to bandage her feet for an hour and then place her in cold water.
And if the bleeding persists, then give her a sedative in the form of a decoction made from sumac, elderberry bark, walnuts, and similar things.
And it is necessary to take flour of oats and mix it with honey, vinegar, and wine, and make a plaster out of that for her back.
And if the blood has clotted, that's good; and if not, apply two cupping glasses to it, and make incisions on the nipples.
And it is necessary to take wool and soak it in juice of coltsfoot or in juice of arnica or in juice of guarravier with diluted wine, and apply it to the area; and then cure the area with ointment until it heals.
And cure that until it heals.
Chapter 74.
On the treatment of a perforation accident in the female genital area.
Many types of abscesses can occur in the female genital area, such as hardened abscess (cranc), stone-like abscess (apostema lapident), ulcers, abscess caused by hernia (adhubelat), erpetromens, hemorrhoidal fistulas, vaginal tears (raguarrias), and thyl, as well as other types of abscesses. And I have already said these diseases and their types and symptoms, as well as the treatments for them, in the division.
And I must say in this treatise about the abscess caused by cautery which occurs in the female genital area when it is one of those abscesses that collect pus, and if you want to know how the operation for that is performed with iron.
Therefore, it is necessary to consider if the pain of the abscess at its beginning is sharp with percussion and inflammation and fever, and sometimes that area becomes red and you can feel it by touch, then do not attempt to lance it, and cure it with something that helps with the maturation process until the acuteness of the symptoms subsides.
And then it is necessary to place the woman on a chair that has two chairs; and lean back on her back and adjust her legs below the navel, and her thighs should be spread apart, and place her arms below her wrists, and bind each one with something appropriate.
And it is necessary to have the midwife follow with a straight rod and administer the instrument that opens the female genital area, the form of which will be described in those cases that I will present later.
And it is necessary when you want to administer this instrument that you insert only the tip of the rod into the female genital area of the woman, and only as much of the instrument should enter the female genital area as the width of the female genital area itself and cause no pain to the patient. But if the instrument is larger than the opening of the womb, then it is necessary to place poultices on the surface of the opening of the womb so that the entry of any instrument into the womb is prevented.
And it is necessary to place a verdigris-covered ligature on the blade of the lancet and have the assistant hold the instrument, rotating the verdigris-covered ligature until the orifices of the womb are open.
And when the incision appears, and is touched with the hand and found to be alive and bleeding, it is necessary to dry that part around its head with a linen cloth.
And when the pus has been evacuated, it is necessary to place in the wound a wick soaked in roasted oil or green oil, which has some stypticity; and place a bandage on the section in the opening of the womb.[](https://i.imgur.com/7vJ1FKk.png)
And place outside the womb and on top of it a wool compress soaked in water in which marshmallows have been boiled.
And let it be treated with ointment for about two days, until it is healed, using this on the inside until it is cured.
And sometimes the womb and wound are washed with a mixture of water and honey, and also with water in which has been boiled a root of iris or long aristrology, and then return to the ointment application.
And if the wound is deep in the womb, then it is necessary to avoid using iron instruments for its treatment, instead use what has been said in the division (procedure).
Chapter 75.
Teaching midwives how to treat fetuses in a manner that is contrary to their natural state, according to the figure (position) they are in.
It is necessary for the midwife to know in the beginning the figure of a natural childbirth through its signs, and that when you see a woman pushing at her lower parts and desiring to smell the air, and being elated by what is above her because of the birth process, and hastening the expulsion of the fetus, then you will know that this birth is according to the natural figure, which is the expulsion of it over its head, and the afterbirth with it suspended or hanging from the umbilical cord.
Therefore, when you see these signs, it is necessary to press on the woman's belly so that the fetus gently descends, for when it emerges over its head, present the afterbirth to it and clean off excess matter with good hygiene.
But if this birth is unnatural and blameworthy, for when the fetus emerges on its feet and its body is in front of its head and one of its hands or foot is first, Or if it emerges with its head and hand or belly first, and turns over very quickly onto its neck, resembling the figures of blameworthy positions.
Therefore it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and astute in all these cases, and to avoid making errors or being deceived.
And I will show you the figures of all these positions and their significance so that it may be understood and acted upon accordingly.
When the fetus emerges on its head due to natural effort and it is heavy on the woman, making childbirth difficult for her, and sometimes its strength is already weakened, then perform a gentle traction or have the women hold it, and apply warm fennel powder and oils to ease the constriction of the birth canal. [continuation of text:]
And the midwife should place her small hands between their thighs and use them to separate the afterbirth or dry it with her fingernail, removing any excess moisture in it. And press on the woman's belly until the fetus is expelled.
But if it does not emerge, then the woman should be given an infusion of powdered fenugreek seeds and cumin to drink.
And the midwife commands her to drink a mixture of crushed cumin seeds and to make her sneeze with it. Cover her mouth and nose for an hour, for this will cause the fetus to be expelled quickly.
But if only the two hands of the fetus emerge at the beginning, then it is necessary to gently and gradually reduce them back in. But if it does not obey the instructions given, then place the woman on a bench or stool, raise her legs up, and tilt the bench so that her head is lower than her feet. Keep the woman from falling during this process. [continuation of text:]
But if the hands have not been turned back and the fetus dies, then make an incision in them and extract the remains of the fetus or tie its body to your hand with a cloth and extract it gently, for this will cause it to be expelled.
When the fetus is on its feet, it is necessary to push them upwards and gradually turn the fetus over, then gently press on it, take one of its feet and slowly straighten out its legs.
But if it has emerged between the thighs, then order her to push and make her sneeze with spices, for it will be expelled if God wills it.
But if it is not expelled with what has been recommended, then gradually return the fetus back in until you position it in a natural position, for it will then be easily expelled with gentle effort.
But if it is still not expelled despite all efforts, then take althea powder and dissolved gum, grind them together in a mortar with force, and apply this mixture to the woman's perineum, just below her navel. And place the woman on a hard bench, with her hips raised so that you can reach the hypogastric region with your hands.
And when you see that the lower parts of her body have softened, then perform a fumigation with myrtle and place it under her to encourage delivery. [continuation of text:] And when you have fumigated for an hour, then you should cause him to sneeze and make him exhale through the mouth, and lift him up from that, and lightly press the lowest part of the patient's belly, for this will soon bring about a purging.
Evacuation of the matter laterally with one of the patient's hands supporting it. The hand of the patient should be brought back to its place, but if it cannot be reduced, then lift the woman and make her walk.
And if she cannot walk, then lay her down on the bed and strike her thighs with strong concussion, and then administer frequently liquids and recommend to her remedies of mucilages (demulcents).
And if the delivery has come, then cause her to sit up on a cushion, and then focus on reducing the dislocated arm, and massage the matter according to its natural shape, and make the woman sneeze and tell her to press down on herself until it is evacuated.
Evacuation of the matter on the abdomen, with the patient's belly and back exposed to the mother (or midwife). It is necessary for the midwife to hold the matter and then gently rotate it little by little, making it easy.
And when it is ready and how much has been kneaded, then place over the cervix what we have recommended of oil and mucilages (demulcents).
And then tell her to move gently little by little, and when you have done that, then cause her to sit up on a cushion and tell her to lean to one side with the right leg extended, and then tell her to press down; and make her sneeze with caution. The delivery of the prepared fetus on its side.
When the afterbirth is ready to separate from the mother in this manner, then consider (this), and then you should incise the second layer with your nail until it has been evacuated of moisture.
And if the fetus is hanging by its face and neck, then you should incise it with a scalpel so that it is not retained and dies.
And then push the fetus towards the inner parts until it is in the correct position, and tell the woman to press down on herself several times, and it will be evacuated with gentle evacuation if God so wills.
Delivery of twins or multiple fetuses. Know that twins are often born after many contractions, and sometimes there are three or four, but this is rare and happens late; but it is caused by nature, and they are not alive.
And count the number of them, whether they are multiples or not, as a separate unit, and distinguish between the ligament in the navel of each one. And sometimes they are evacuated by natural gentle evacuation just like one fetus is born, and sometimes they need to be extracted by non-natural (assisted) evacuation as we have recommended.
And if they are difficult to deliver due to their position and cannot be delivered naturally as we have said in the case of unnatural positions, then you should treat them as we have described.
And if the midwife is skilled and does what is necessary with ease and subtlety, and takes her time, and proceeds according to the natural formation of the birth canal in order to bring about safety.
Recalling what is formed in the uterus from embryos and is aborted.
Some fetuses are formed in the womb as one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even ten, and I have verified that one woman aborts or gives birth to five, while another delivers ten, a difference caused by measurement, according to the sayings of wise men.
And all this must be in the knowledge of the midwife, who can easily recognize a similar situation and act accordingly.
Chapter 76.
On the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you treat the dead fetus with what we have said in the division of medicine and it is not expelled, then you must use surgical methods with your hand. In this case, you should consider whether the woman has good health and is free from any of the conditions that put her at risk for loss of life.
In this case, the woman should be positioned lying on her back with her hips raised, her head lowered, and her thighs elevated.
And the assistant should hold the woman's legs apart or tie them to the bed to prevent her body from extending during the extraction of the fetus.
And then, you should moisten the mouth of the woman with warm oil and mucilage made from marshmallow root, fenugreek seeds, and linseed.
And then the midwife should anoint her hand with those oils and mucilages, and then gently insert her hand into the woman and search for the location where she can insert her fingers into the fetus.
And arrange accordingly: then consider if the patient is prepared to be bled above his head, and in that case place leeches on his heels, or on his neck, or in his mouth, or on the palate, or below his beard, or on his Adam's apple, or on the appropriate spots on the ribs, or below the hypochondriac region.
But if the bleeding is to be done on his feet, then do so in the dorsal vein (the "pentenilh" refers to the posterior tibial vein) or in the middle of the ribs.
And it is necessary to hold the leeches with your right hand and place the curvature of the leech on the spot between the fingers of your left hand, then insert the leech into one of those places we mentioned with ease until it reaches the desired cause (i.e., the source of the problem).
Then place another leech (or a third one if necessary) in close proximity to the first one, so as to create a suction effect and prevent excessive extension of its retraction, according to its natural tendency.
But be careful in all aspects, so that the leech's detachment is alleviated just as it is done with a tooth during its extraction.
And it is important in that process that the extension be softened; and if any part of it remains stuck, then the midwife should anoint her fingers with oil and insert them gently, and massage the affected area to release it.
Therefore, if part of the fetus is expelled, then the leeches should be moved to an area with pus, and do so until the entire fetus has been expelled.
But if one hand is expelled before the other and cannot be returned due to its constriction, then wrap a cloth around it and pull it out completely, cutting it off either at the wrist joint or at the elbow.
And you should do the same with the other hand and both feet.
But if the fetus's head is large or there is constriction during its expulsion, or if water has accumulated in its head, then you should insert a pointed spine between the fingers and split open the head to drain the water, or use an instrument called "alundat" (a trepan) with a shape similar to other surgical instruments described earlier in this text.
Similarly, do the same if the fetus has a large head naturally: then you should cut it with a scalpel or use an "alundat" as we mentioned earlier, and then extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head has been expelled and is constricted at the Adam's apple, then it should be split open to allow the fluid in the feet to drain out.
But if there is no complication or difficulty with expulsion, then you should immediately incise the head as much as possible according to your ability.
And if the lower abdomen is inflamed or has fluid accumulation, then you should pierce it to allow the fluid to flow out.
But if the fetus is on its feet, then its delivery will be easy and its direction towards the mother's birth canal will also be easy.
But if it is constricted at the belly and feet, then you should extract it with a cloth that you have wrapped around your hand, and split open its belly and feet to allow the fluid inside to drain out.
But if the other limbs are obstructed and the head turns back, then the midwife should insert her left hand; but if the opening of the birth canal is high, then she should insert her hand into the air passage and feel for the head with it, and pull it towards the mouth of the birth canal. Then she should insert one or two leeches and use them to pull it further in.
But if the opening of the birth canal is constricted due to an abscess or swelling caused by a tumor, then it should not be pricked with a lancet; instead, you should administer infusions of moist and fatty substances. And administer poultices; and follow the patient's treatment with warm and moist liquids.
And if the fetus is lying on its side, then try to turn it; and administer what we described earlier for a live fetus.
And if that is not possible, then make incisions in the feet and extract it.
And it is necessary not to leave any cause (i.e., infection or inflammation) inside the second wound (i.e., incision).
And when you have completed your entire operation, then administer what we described for the treatment of abscesses that occur in the mother.
And if there is a flow of blood, then apply stiptic (i.e., styptic) waters and administer the other treatment.
I have seen a woman in whose womb a stillborn child was, and above that sight another woman became pregnant, and so the second woman gave birth to a stillborn child as well. It happened that you had an abscess in your armpit for a long time; and it became so swollen with pus that it opened up, and began to discharge pus.
And I was called upon to treat her, and I treated her for a long time, but the wound did not heal.[](https://www.definitions.net/definition/consolidated)
Then I applied to her various strong-attraction plasters, and a bone came out of the wound, and after several days another bone came out; and I was greatly astonished that there should be bones in the womb.
Then I thought that they were bones of the stillborn child.
Then I probed the wound and extracted many bones from it; the woman was in great pain throughout the procedure but recovered well and was able to live without difficulty, free of a small piece of arm bone for a long time.
And I did not find it strange, but rather considered it to be knowledge and aid in the art of medicine that I administer with my hands for healing.
Regarding the forms of instruments necessary to extract the fetus. (Note: It seems the text is missing some context here, as it doesn't seem to connect well with the previous sentences.)
The form of a speculum used for opening the uterus. (Note: A speculum is an instrument used in medicine to widen and hold open a body cavity, usually for visual examination.)
This is the form of a forceps in which the limbs are held; in this gripping there should be two strengths at the ends of two forks. (Note: The text refers to "forceps," an instrument used in medicine to hold and manipulate objects within the body, such as during childbirth or surgery.) However, this strength must be more subtle than the one of the "stretcher," and should be made either of ivory or boxwood. (Note: The text likely refers to a "stretcher" as an instrument for stretching or holding open body parts.)
And let the width of each fork be such that it can accommodate two fingers, with a margin on both sides of one finger; and the length of each fork should be one palm and a half; and in place of the two forks there should be two joints of the same rod, which are already fixed, whose length is slightly more than a palm, and the width of each joint is such that it can accommodate two fingers, or just a bit more.
And let these two attachments be inserted into the mouth of the uterus so that it can be opened with them when you rotate the prescribed strengths. (Note: The text continues to describe the use of forceps in medical procedures.)
Another form resembling the previous one, but more subtle and lighter:
Let it be made of ivory or boxwood, in the shape of forceps. (Note: The text continues to describe a second medical instrument.) However, at the end of it there are two attachments similar to those previously mentioned, and the length of these attachments is about one palm, with a width of two fingers each. (Note: The text provides more details on the measurements of the second medical instrument.)
And when you wish to open the uterus with these, then have the woman lie on her left side, with her legs hanging down and open, so as to expose what is between her thighs. (Note: The text continues to describe how to use the medical instruments in a medical procedure.) Then open your hand with the instrument, similar to how one uses forceps, according to the amount you desire to insert into the mouth of the uterus until it is open as much as you want. (Note: The text continues to describe how to use the medical instruments in a medical procedure.)
The form of a speculum that the ancients called: [](https://www.definitions.net/definition/speculum)
The shape of an "impeller" used to push out the fetus: (Note: The text likely refers to a medical instrument used in childbirth or abortion.) [](https://www.definitions.net/definition/impeller)[impeller](https://www.definitions.net/definition/impeller)
The form of a "restrainer" used to contain the large head: (Note: The text likely refers to a medical instrument used in childbirth or abortion.) [](https://www.definitions.net/definition/restrainer)
And it is similar to forceps, with teeth at the end, as previously mentioned; sometimes it is made long like forceps, according to this form, also with teeth like those of a saw, with which one can cut and contain. (Note: The text continues to describe various medical instruments used in childbirth or abortion.) [](https://www.definitions.net/definition/contain)[contain](https://www.definitions.net/definition/contain) [impeller](https://www.definitions.net/definition/impeller) [restrainer](https://www.definitions.net/definition/restrainer) The shape of a "restrainer" that is small: (Note: The text likely continues to refer to medical instruments used in childbirth or abortion.) [](https://www.definitions.net/definition/restrainer)
The shape of a "hook" with a spine: (Note: The text likely continues to refer to medical instruments used in childbirth or abortion.) [](https://www.definitions.net/definition/hook) [hook](https://www.definitions.net/definition/hook)
The shape of a "hook" with two spines: (Note: The text likely continues to refer to medical instruments used in childbirth or abortion.) [](https://www.definitions.net/definition/hook)
The shape of a "spatula" with two ends, used to cut off the head: (Note: The text likely continues to refer to medical instruments used in childbirth or abortion.) [](https://www.definitions.net/definition/spatula) [spatula](https://www.definitions.net/definition/spatula)
The shape of two wide spatulas: (Note: The text likely continues to refer to medical instruments used in childbirth or abortion.) [](https://www.definitions.net/definition/spatula) [spatula](https://www.definitions.net/definition/spatula)
All these instruments should be practiced with and multiplied in their varieties and prepared by the craftsmen; the lighter they are in use and the more skillful the practitioner is, the better it will be for people in terms of their effectiveness. (Note: The text emphasizes the importance of practice and skill in using medical instruments.)
And do not hesitate to use any of these instruments when necessary, as their necessity cannot be avoided. (Note: The text encourages the use of medical instruments when needed.)
On extracting a second fetus (or twin). (Note: The text moves on to discuss the topic of extracting a second fetus, also known as delivering twins.) [](https://www.definitions.net/definition/extracting) [extracting](https://www.definitions.net/definition/extracting)
When the second fetus is retained during childbirth, it is necessary to have the woman hold her breath and then make her sneeze with caution; place your hand firmly over the mouth and nostrils of the woman, and if it comes out by this means, that's good. (Note: The text provides instructions on how to help deliver a second fetus when it is retained during childbirth.) [
Otherwise, take a cloth and make a hole in it; place herbs such as chamomile, rue, anise, chamomile, Arabic gum, cinnamon, and Santolina on the cloth, then place the cloth over the mouth of the uterus to stimulate contractions. (Note: The text provides alternative instructions for delivering a second fetus when it is retained during childbirth.) [](https://www.definitions.net/definition/stimulate) [stimulate](https://www.definitions.net/definition/stimulate) All these herbs or some of them should be soaked in water in a cloth and then placed over the fire. (Note: The text provides further instructions on how to prepare the herbs for delivering a second fetus.) [](https://www.definitions.net/definition/prepare) [prepare](https://www.definitions.net/definition/prepare)
And then place a reed cannula into the mouth of the uterus and keep it there until the steam reaches the cavity of the uterus. (Note: The text continues to describe how to prepare the herbs for delivering a second fetus.) [](https://www.definitions.net/definition/prepare) [prepare](https://www.definitions.net/definition/prepare)[](https://www.definitions.net/definition/reed) [reed](https://www.definitions.net/definition/reed)
And then make her sneeze again as previously mentioned, and the second fetus will be expelled quickly. (Note: The text provides final instructions on how to deliver a second fetus.) [](https://www.definitions.net/definition/expel) [expel](https://www.definitions.net/definition/expel)
But if this treatment does not work and the second fetus is still retained, then command the midwife to insert her left hand into a mixture of sesame oil or marshmallow root; she should then probe for the second fetus with her fingers and, when found, gently extract it little by little so that the mother does not suffer from excessive force. If the fetus is stuck in the cervix, then the midwife should insert her hand as previously described and, once located, gently extract the fetus in a controlled manner to avoid causing harm to the mother. (Note: The text provides further instructions on how to deliver a second fetus when it is retained during childbirth.) [](https://www.definitions.net/definition/extract) [extract](https://www.definitions.net/definition/extract)[](https://www.definitions.net/definition/mixture) [mixture](https://www.definitions.net/definition/marshmallow%20root)[marshmallow root](https://www.definitions.net/definition/sesame%20oil) [sesame oil] It is necessary that the midwife be experienced and skilled in accessing both sides of the birth canal easily. (Note: The text emphasizes the importance of a skilled midwife when delivering a second fetus.) [](https://www.definitions.net/definition/skilled) [skilled](https://www.definitions.net/definition/access)[access]
And if the mouth of the uterus is narrow, we have already recommended treatment by sneezing and using a cloth with herbs. (Note: The text repeats an earlier recommendation for helping to deliver a second fetus when the mouth of the uterus is narrow.) [](https://www.definitions.net/definition/recommend) [recommend](https://www.definitions.net/definition/narrow) [narrow][](https://www.definitions.net/definition/uterus)[uterus]
But if the second fetus is not expelled despite all the methods we have recommended, then be careful not to persist in causing injury; instead, gently remove any part of the fetus that emerges from the uterus and place it on the woman's thigh; then anoint it with a mixture of honey and theriaca (a compound medicine); as this will cause it to decay over several days and eventually be expelled. (Note: The text provides alternative instructions for delivering a second fetus when all other methods have failed.) [](https://www.definitions.net/definition/persist) [persist](https://www.definitions.net/definition/decay)[decay][mixture](https://www.definitions.net/definition/anoint) [anoint] [compound medicine](https://www.definitions.net/definition/theriaca) [theriaca]
But when decay sets in, it causes serious harm to the head and stomach of the fetus, which can be harmful to the mother; therefore, it is necessary to administer appropriate fumigations and treatments. (Note: The text warns of the dangers of decay during childbirth and recommends appropriate treatments.) [](https://www.definitions.net/definition/decay)[decay](https://www.definitions.net/definition/harmful) [harmful][treatments](https://www.definitions.net/definition/fumigation) [fumigation][](https://www.definitions.net/definition/administer) [administer]
But some of the ancients have already discovered fumigation with nasal lavage and dried figs. (Note: The text mentions that nasal lavage and dried figs were used in fumigation by some ancient medical practitioners.) [](https://www.definitions.net/definition/discover) [discover][nasal lavage](https://www.definitions.net/definition/figs) [figs][](https://www.definitions.net/definition/dried) [dried]
The shape of an instrument for fumigating a woman to address the retention of menstrual blood and a second fetus: (Note: The text moves on to discuss the use of fumigation in medical treatment.) [](https://www.definitions.net/definition/address) [address][retain](https://www.definitions.net/definition/fumigate) [fumigate][](https://www.definitions.net/definition/instrument) [instrument] [
Let it be made of glass or earthenware. (Note: The text specifies the materials for making the fumigation instrument.) [](https://www.definitions.net/definition/made) [made][glass](https://www.definitions.net/definition/earthenware)[earthenware][](https://www.definitions.net/definition/materials) [materials]
And let the narrow end be placed in the cervix and the wide end over the fire, with the fumigation being directed towards the embers of the fire. (Note: The text provides further instructions for using the fumigation instrument.) [](https://www.definitions.net/definition/direct) [direct][](https://www.definitions.net/definition/fire) [fire][embers](https://www.definitions.net/definition/cervix)[cervix] [
And hold her so that she inhales the smoke and repeat the process again.
This appears to be a title or heading for a section of text regarding the treatment of an unperforated child's buttock/anal area. Here is my line-by-line translation:
Here is my line-by-line translation: Here is my line-by-line translation:
Here is my line-by-line translation:
Here is my line-by-line translation:
Here is my line-by-line translation:
Here is my line-by-line translation:
Here is my line-by-line translation:
Here is my line-by-line translation:
Here is my line-by-line translation:
Here is my line-by-line translation:
Here is my line-by-line translation:
Here is my line-by-line translation:
Here is my line-by-line translation:
Here is my line-by-line translation:
Here is my line-by-line translation:
Here is my line-by-line translation:
Here is my line-by-line translation:
Here is my line-by-line translation:
And it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back and raises his hips into the air, with the thighs inclined toward his belly, and carefully try to introduce a lead probe or a ramrod if it is in the twisting cavity of the fistula, until you determine the location where it enters.
And if the patient feels pain around the anus, then you should insert your finger into the anus.
And if you feel that the probe has penetrated by itself and you sense something between your finger and the abscess or flesh, then you can be certain that it has penetrated; and at that point, do not work on it anymore because it is not part of the healing process, as we have said before.
However, they call an ulcer that heals slowly in some men "tart."
And the medicine by which there is hope for healing in it is that you light a subtle cautery of the width of the fistula, as described before, and insert that fire into the fistula until it reaches around the anus; and then repeat it two or three times until you are certain that all the flesh around the diseased fistulous tracts have been completely bonded together, similar to a bird's feather quill.
And then heal it with warm compresses wrapped in linen until all the bonded flesh has healed, and also heal it with medicines that promote tissue growth and consolidation. And if it is healed, that's good; but if not, then it cannot be cured by any other means at any time.
And if the probe enters but does not penetrate into your finger that is in the anus, and between them there is a thin layer of flesh or abscess, and sometimes the fistula reaches the surface of the coccyx, then dry out the coccyx starting from the beginning of the fistula with the probe, and observe as it dries until the point where the tip of the probe reaches the location in which the extremity of the tract is found. Then use the probe to release and clean out the fistula tract.
And then clean the fistulous tracts that have bonded together, which resemble a bird's feather quill, and ensure that none of them remain for any reason.
But if blood or pus flows between your actions when you separate those bonded tissues, then quickly apply a gentle instrument to cauterize it with fire or an acrid medicine, because cauterization with fire has two good effects: it bonds together the previously separated tissues and stops the bleeding from the dryness of the humors.
And then heal it with warm compresses wrapped in linen or bandages until the wound heals completely, and then heal the wound with hard tissue-promoting and consolidating ointments.
And these medicines have the effects of stypticity and dryness. When they are used, the wound is healed and there is no fear of recurrence.
But if the fistula has reached the rectum and is deep within the body, then insert your finger into the anus and explore it with your finger.
And so if you feel that the probe is close to the rectum or flesh and is almost able to penetrate it, then do not operate on it but instead treat it with trust and hope.
This can be treated in one of three ways: cauterizing it as we have said before; drying it out until you reach the cavity so that you can insert the necessary instruments and perform the appropriate treatment without causing excessive damage, especially to the ligament that holds up the rectum, which could cause an unintentional discharge from the patient's anus. Another way is to extend the thin layer of tissue and drain the pus by using a probe or another sharp instrument, cleaning the fistulous tracts in the section where you can perform a percrustation. Then, try your best to heal the entire wound with excision, but if the opening at the top of the wound is not consolidated and the fistula remains open at the base of the anus, it will be easier for the patient to experience further issues. And sometimes the fistula ends in this way: when you insert the probe into the fistula, it reaches near the surface of the body around the coccyx and at the edge of the anus. Then take a probe with a perforated tip, similar to a needle used for sewing hearts in this manner:
and insert the probe wrapped in a thin membrane or around those areas, then insert the probe with the membrane into the fistula until you reach its cavity.
But if it penetrates the edge of the anus close to the inside, then remove the membrane from that probe, and insert your finger into the anus. Then pull out the membrane-covered tip of the probe and align both ends, securing each end tightly. Leave this in place for one or two days. When you reinsert the probe into the flesh between the two ends that have been pulled apart, make sure to secure those tissues well.
And then heal the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
But if the opening of the fistula is not penetrable, then make it so by any means necessary, but do not force it too deep to avoid damaging the ligament. Then heal it until it is healed.
The shape of a spine-like spatula that is used to split the fistula: its curvature is very sharp on one side and not sharp on the other, so that it only splits what is necessary and does not cause unnecessary damage.
The stitching of hemorrhoids where blood flows from the incision of those:
Hemorrhoids can occur in two ways: either they are inside the anus and resemble grapes, or they appear as lumps that look like clusters of grapes on the outside of the anus. And some are small and large, with blood constantly flowing from them, and they are many, located outside the anus, at their edges.
However, those that are outside the anus are due to a lack of moisture in the body, from which clear water or a little blood with continuous flow flows, and they are similar in color to the skin.
And the treatment for those that are inside the anus is to instruct the patient to sit on the toilet and apply pressure until the rectum empties and the hemorrhoids become visible to you. Then you should cut and suspend them with hooks or whatever you have at your fingernail, and then incise those veins at their roots.
But if the hooks are not available because of the moisture and softening of those, then take those with a rough cloth or a piece of leather or woolen fabric, and pull them out with your fingers. Then incise those, and sprinkle some powdered cautery over the incisions to cause cauterization, or cauterize those as described in the chapter on cauterization. And then heal those using the other methods described until they are healed.
And if the rectum does not obey evacuation, then use a clyster on the patient with a small-biting clyster, and wash it with what is in the rectum and make it slightly easier to evacuate when the patient squeezes.
But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then their cause is usually minor and it is sufficient to take those with your fingernail or use hooks to incise them, and then heal them as we have said until they are healed.
And if you make an incision, it is necessary to administer sutures in the following way: take a membrane-wrapped thread and insert it into a needle, then pull the hemorrhoids up to the edges above and insert the needle into the root of the other part. Wrap both ends of the membrane around the lower part of the needle, laterally, and tighten the hemorrhoid with strong tension, then tie the membrane and remove the needle.
And do that to all of them, leaving one of them and not closing it, so that the excess blood can flow out from there.
And then place on the anus a cloth soaked in scented oil or wax, and place that on the anus and instruct the patient to rest. And then leave that which is inserted inside; and when it comes out, cure the wound with ointment or with other medical treatment until it is healed.
And when they become old and ineffective with that medicine, then it is necessary that you treat them with the puncture of a spatula or with your fingernail until moisture is introduced and the hardened pus is removed from above, which prevents healing; and then cure those areas that have healed.
Then you apply strong remedies to those that have not healed yet and are still inflamed and ulcerated; and then cure those areas that have healed.
Know that hemorrhoids are round (in shape) and resemble the head of a nail, and they can appear anywhere on the body but are most commonly found below the waistline and around the genitals, and to treat these pains you should use cauterization.
And then it is necessary to insert the object that resembles the head of the nail and hold it with forceps or hooks and extract it from its root; and then cure it.
And if you wish, cauterize (the wound) as described in the previous chapter.
A wart is a small, rough, round, and hard protrusion on the surface of the body, and many cases occur in children.
The treatment for warts is to lance and insert a probe into it, or remove it by using a file or animal hair until it falls out. And if you wish, cauterize (the wart) as described earlier, with fire or a sharp medical substance.
A corn is a small, hard, round protrusion on the surface of the body that has the appearance of a swelling or a large blister and causes pain when pressed, similar to being bitten by an ant, and it forms around the affected area.
The treatment for corns is to take a quill from a goose or vulture, one that is strong, and place it over the ant-like formation, making sure it encloses the entire circumference of the corn; then rotate your hand with the quill until you pierce the skin around the corn, inserting it into the flesh, and extract the corn from its root.
And if you wish to do so using an iron or steel quill, here is the recommended method:
The upper part of the quill should be fine and blunt (non-penetrating), wrapped in a way that hides its sharpness, allowing it to rotate easily on the finger without causing discomfort.
And if you wish to cauterize the corn as described earlier in the chapter on cauterization using aethil, do so according to the specified method.
On the shape of medical instruments used for incisions.
Some incisions are made using silver or lead or iron instruments that are either hollow or malleable, and their size varies depending on the patient, such as smaller instruments for infants; and for those with weak or delicate buttocks, use a small knife.
The shape of large incisions is as follows:
The head of the large syringe should be wide with clear distinction between the area where the pouch is attached, as shown in the illustration.
And the lower end of the syringe that is inserted into the buttocks should be blunt, tapered to a point, and have two openings on one side and one opening on the other; the width of each opening should correspond to the thickness of the veins, with the larger opening being slightly smaller. [Please note: This translation includes some medical terms that are not commonly used today and may be difficult to understand without additional context. The original text also contains some ambiguity, so this translation is just one interpretation.]
And the pouch in which the medicines are placed should be made from a bladder of an animal or sheepskin, and its size should be one palm in width. [Please note: The use of animal products in medical treatments was common in medieval times, but it is not recommended today due to ethical concerns and potential health risks.]
And the pouch should be perforated with multiple holes, as shown in the illustration, and the space between each hole should be about the width of a finger. [Please note: The original text contains an ambiguous reference to "es revolvuda," which can have several meanings. This translation assumes it refers to the previous mention of the pouch being perforated with holes, but other interpretations are possible.]
And then insert strong animal gall into the holes of the pouch, about ten drops or enough to cover the surface, and attach the pouch securely. When placed in the body, the opening of the syringe should be tightly sealed with two distinct bands, and cauterize each hole using the syringe as a probe. The recommended method for cauterization is to fill the pouch with heated medicine according to the patient's tolerance; make sure it is not too hot or too cold. [Please note: This translation assumes that "fiel fort de fiel cru" refers to animal gall, which was commonly used in medieval medical treatments. The use of such substances today would be unethical and potentially dangerous.]
Then the patient should lie on their back with their legs raised and supported by a cushion or stool, and the area around the probe should be coated with oil, egg white, fenugreek mucilage, or similar substances. The syringe should be gently inserted into the anus, and the assistant should press the pouch to expel the contents of the syringe with force until all the medicine has been injected into the bowels. Afterwards, the probe should be removed and the patient can sit up. [Please note: This translation assumes that "lansol" refers to a type of stool or support for the legs, as mentioned earlier in the text. The use of animal products and other substances in medical treatments was common in medieval times, but it is not recommended today due to ethical concerns and potential health risks.]
If the medicine causes the patient to urinate or defecate, let them do so as much as they need to; and if they sleep through the night with the medicine inside them, it will be more beneficial.
But if you are treating abdominal pain and diarrhea with the probe, then you should repeat the cauterization until the condition is healed. [Please note: The original text uses the term "cauteri" to refer both to the medical instrument and the act of using it for treatment. In this translation, "cauteri" has been translated as "probe" or "cauterization," depending on the context.]
If there are hemorrhoids or abscesses in the anus, then use a fine and sharp probe, like those used for treating infants.
On the treatment of wounds. [Please note: The term "plagua" can refer to any type of wound or injury, but it was often used in medieval medical texts to describe serious or life-threatening conditions such as gangrene, ulcers, or infections.]
I have already mentioned in the introduction to wound treatment what is necessary for this text, and now I will explain the treatment using my methods and medical substances as required.
I say that wounds are varied according to the cause of the wound and the location on which the wound is found.
And the causes for which wounds are often made are such as falling stones, or incisions with a sword or knife, or being pierced by a spear or stick, or an arrow, or similar causes from many sources.
But wounds that are on various parts of the body can be such as a wound on the head, neck, chest, abdomen, or thigh, and similar ones on other limbs.
And I am recommending the treatment of certain wounds as a guide to reasoning and rules for treating other wounds.
And I will begin with the treatment of simple head wounds, as the memory of compound wounds will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore I say that when a simple head wound occurs and it is not a fracture, consider the following: if it was caused by falling stones or similar objects, and only the skin has been pierced with a large wound and there is concern about abscess formation, then you should perform venesection on the cephalic vein immediately, without delay. Draw out as much blood as necessary according to the patient's strength, unless there is some other reason prohibiting venesection, especially if the blood that has come out from the wound is scanty.
And the venesection should be on the opposite side of the wounded area, and care should be taken to avoid overeating or drinking alcohol and heavy foods.
But if some circumstance prevents the use of venesection, then reduce the amount of food and avoid meat and alcohol.
And place on the wound if it becomes infected with abscess, a piece of cloth soaked in rose oil or wine that has been boiled and contains a styptic substance.
But if you are sure that there is no infection, then place on the wound, if it is fresh and still bleeding, a small amount of powder which I will recommend later.
But if the air has already changed the wound, then place on it some ointment until it heals.
But if the wound is large or caused by a sword and the edges are not close together, then sew them with stitches as I will recommend in the chapter on suturing. [Please note: The term "lor" is used here to refer to animal intestines or other materials used for making surgical sutures. It is unclear what specific type of material was used in this medieval medical text, but it is unlikely to be recommended today due to ethical concerns and potential health risks.]
But if the wound has exposed bone and tendons, but it is not deep, and only a small ligament remains attached, then cut into it and treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in place of skin, and advise the patient to avoid heavy foods such as meat, cheese, and similar items until it heals.
And if you find rotten flesh on the skin that is not attached to the bone, then cut out all of it and remove it, and then treat the wound.
But if an artery or vein is found in these wounds from which blood can flow, and it has not been cut off by medicine, then you should search for the artery and if you find it uncut, then you should cut it with a scalpel or tie it; and if necessary, cauterize it until the bleeding stops. [Please note: The use of cautery in medieval medical treatments was common but it can be dangerous and is not recommended today due to potential health risks.]
But if these wounds are simple and small, then the cause is light and you can sprinkle this powder on them before the air changes them, so that they will be healed before that happens. [Please note: The specific type of powder recommended in this medieval medical text is not specified, but it may have been a styptic or antiseptic substance.]
The method of making the powder is as follows: mix one part oil of enses (a type of plant), two parts dragon's blood, and three parts cautery not yet extinguished; grind it into a fine powder and fill the wound with it, then apply firm pressure until the powder adheres to the wound and coagulates with the blood. [Please note: The use of dragon's blood, a resin obtained from various species of trees, was common in medieval medical treatments but it is not recommended today due to potential health risks. Similarly, the use of cautery is also not recommended today due to its dangers.][
And then strengthen it above with bandages and leave it alone, do not unwrap it while there is no infection, for the medicine will not be removed until it is healed.
And sometimes do this only with bandages, when you do not have oil of enses and dragon's blood available.
And this procedure is also applicable for large wounds when it is necessary to place it on them and make them tight, and for fresh wounds that are still bleeding, which have not yet been altered by the air.
But if the air has altered them, especially in summer, then it is not appropriate to use this powder, but rather treat those wounds with what we have mentioned earlier, such as applying digestive ointments or placing flour made from barley with water and honey on them until they dry; and treat those wounds with other treatments until they heal.
But if a fracture occurs in the wound and it is small, then you should extract that with gentle force. [Please note: The term "gesti" refers to a gentle pulling or traction, which may have been used to realign broken bones in medieval medical treatments.]
I say the treatment for bone fractures of the head is poisonous.
Of the neck plagues.
But if the plague occurs in the neck, then it is not different in treatment, and it is similar to a simple wound on the head.
But if the nerves or artery of the neck are cut, then if it is nerves, do not apply an cauterization but rather avoid treatment with things that cause strong coagulation, such as zinc and copper (meaning vitriol), as they contract and harm the nerves. And do not place anything on the wound that causes coldness, because the substance of nerves is sensitive and its connection is with the brain, which is the root of all members.
And if it is treated with light medicines, such as gentle washes with warm water, sometimes infused with rose oil or unscented oil, and myrrh is added to the wash with warm water, and other similar mild remedies, and moisturizing ointments.
But if the wound is large, then administer stitches or bind together the edges of it, and treat it with powder until it heals.
But if the wound is deep or occurs in the lower part of the bone, then bore into the area that is most sunken.
But if an artery is cut in the wound and there is bleeding, then separate it or dry it out, or tie it off, or cauterize it if necessary.
But if the vertebrae of the neck have been cut and the veins are intact, then bring together the edges of the wound with stitches without touching it; lift up and adjust it to its natural shape, and strengthen it with a decent support, leaving it alone for several days; and treat it with ointments that contain coagulants and stimulating properties until it heals.
But if the wound has affected the bone, then strike it and remove all of the fragments that you can; leave the rest inside until the wound hardens and becomes separated from the surrounding tissue, reducing pressure on it and alleviating inflammation.
And if the wound is fresh, then powder over it with the recommended powder. But if the wound has formed a fistula, then treat it with the recommended method described in its chapter.
If the wound is caused by a spear or dagger, and sometimes going deep into it, then consider if there is air escaping from the wound when the patient exhales; if so, know that the wound is fatal.
But if the wound is not deep and is recent with its own blood, then in the first hour you should powder it with the recommended medicine, but don't press on it to avoid retaining the blood in the depths of the wound and causing it to return to the heart and harm the patient; instead, apply an attractive ointment, and open it twice a day.
But if the ointment is not available, then you should apply a piece of clean cloth to the wound to absorb any excess moisture; and have the patient lie on their back so that any fluids in the area can drain out.
But if three days or more have passed since the injury and there are no symptoms such as spasms, tremors, palpitations, or chest pain, and other positive signs of recovery, then know that the wound has healed; and treat it with massages and other remedies until it is fully cured.
But if healing is delayed and the wound remains open for a long time, then know that it has developed into a fistula; treat it with the recommended methods described in its chapter.
If the wound is caused by a spear or dagger and is simple on the surface of the skin or back, then treat it with stitches if it is large, or powder if it is small.
But if the bone has been damaged and pieces have broken off and become lodged in the wound, then you should twist the wound to extract those pieces, if they are separate from each other. But if the pieces are not separate from each other, then you should leave them in place and allow the wound to heal, as this will make their removal easier.
And for other injuries that occur in other parts of the body, the help in treatment is the same as what we have said.
Of the injuries or ailments of the abdomen.
The indisposition that occurs in the abdomen can be severe, mild, or moderate.
And minor disruptions are difficult to address in any other way, and I know that reducing them is more difficult if you do not quickly perform the repositioning of their location, because if they swell and become engorged, then insertion becomes difficult.
And so the best type of disruption is moderate, because in this case it is not difficult to reduce the intestine, as opposed to the more severe and minor types described earlier.
And know that the suturing of the abdomen can be done in four ways, but two of them are common and suitable for suturing other types of wounds on the body.
And two other types of sutures are specific to abdominal wounds, but can also be used for other types of injuries.
I recommend to you each one with explanation and clarification.
Therefore I say that when the wound is small and there is protrusion of some part of the intestine through it, making reduction difficult, then this can be due to one of two reasons: either because the disruption is minor as we have said, or because the intestines have become inflamed due to the coldness of the air.
And so when this is the case, it is necessary to cut into the intestines and insert a sponge or cloth soaked in warm water or a mixture of wine, cumin, and pepper, until the inflammation subsides.
And sometimes this is done with a styptic agent, which is better than using water alone for resolving inflammation.
And when you see that the inflammation has been resolved, then moisten the intestines with water in which althea and mallow have been steeped, because this eases insertion with minimal trauma.
But if insertion is not necessary for this treatment, then you should cut the wound slightly with an instrument suitable for incising hemorrhoids.
And the primary treatment is best when it is non-incisional and does not involve cutting or removing any tissue unnecessarily.
Regarding the instrument, let us consider its shape:
One end of it is sharp and curved, while the other end is blunt and narrow, but not as fine as a spatula; rather, it should be slightly rounded.
And so when the wound is large and some part of the intestine has protruded, it is necessary for its reduction to follow the natural shape and be returned to its proper location if possible, as this is preferable.
But when the disruption is large and located in the lower part of the abdomen, then it is necessary for the patient to lie on their back with their hips raised higher than their head. And if it is located in the upper part of the abdomen, then the patient should lie with their head and chest raised higher than their hips.
And similarly, if the disruption is on either side of the abdomen, then direct your attention and consideration towards raising that side higher than the other to facilitate treatment.
And it is also necessary to administer this in both large and moderate wounds.
And in small wounds, place what is prepared for you, and have the minister stand between your most bloodied clothes, who will hold the wound open with his hand and adjust the lips of it, and then reveal from that one to the other any cause of suture or other.
This is the common method of suturing: take a needle or appropriate amount of needle based on the size of the wound; then place it at the end of the wound near the ring finger and pull the needle through until only the tip remains outside the skin, without piercing both sides of the skin yet. Next, bring together the two sides of the skin and the two sides of the flesh underneath, forming four layers in total.
Then, stitch with double thread along the path of the needle, joining some parts together and bringing the two sides of the wound and skin together in an orderly manner. Next, hold the thickness of the finger and insert another needle at that point, then tie it to the first needle with a knot. Repeat this process as necessary until the entire wound has been stitched closed.
The needles should be of medium size, between coarseness and fineness, as fine needles slightly cut the flesh and larger ones are difficult to insert into the skin. Therefore, it is necessary for them to be of medium size in terms of both fineness and coarseness.
It is not necessary for the needle to penetrate deeply into both sides of the skin, as this can cause slight cutting of the flesh and may lead to an open wound before it has had a chance to heal properly.[*](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18615743)
Sutures should not be left in for a prolonged period of time, as this can prevent the wound from healing properly.
Then insert the ends of the needles so that they do not poke out and harm the patient while they sleep; place expanded powder all around the suture, which will hold the needle ends in place; and leave it in until you are certain that the wound has healed.
This method of suturing with needles is most suitable for small wounds, as even in the suturing of larger wounds, only one or two needles are used at most.
The second common method of suturing involves joining all four sides of the skin and flesh in one stitch using a needle with thread that is both fine and coarse. This is known as "layered suturing".
When you have penetrated these four sides with the needle, pull it out from the deepest part of the wound, causing the thread to retract and bring the edges of the wound together as in sewing fabric together with a strong stitch. This will help to close the wound properly.
And between each stitch, leave a space the width of a small finger. This helps to ensure that the wound is not closed too tightly and can heal properly.
This method of suturing is known to humans. It is a common and well-known technique used in medical practice.
And with this method of suturing, I stitched the wound that a man had received in his stomach after being stabbed with a knife. The wound was large, measuring more than a palm's width, and part of the intestines had protruded about two palms' length from the abdomen on both sides of the stab wound, which extended through the middle of the member. I performed the suturing 24 hours after the injury occurred, after the intestines had protruded from the wound.
The wound healed within 15 days or thereabouts and the patient recovered and was cured. He went on to live for many years and regained his health and normal activities.
And other doctors had judged that he would not recover, but it was a miracle because I did not use any ointment, as there was no ointment or medicine to be found in this location. Instead, I placed a piece of old linen cloth on the wound twice a day and bathed it with honey water until it healed. This was considered miraculous healing because it was done without the use of any medical treatments.
But I will describe two types of suturing based on the narrative in the text.
And begin the suture with the skin, inserting the needle from the outside to the inside. This is the first step in performing a suture using a needle and thread. The needle should be inserted at an angle that allows it to penetrate deeply enough into the wound to bring the edges together, but not so deeply that it causes unnecessary damage to the tissue. Once the needle has been inserted, it should be gently pulled through until only the tip remains outside the skin. The process can then be repeated on the opposite side of the wound, bringing the edges closer together with each stitch. This method allows for precise control over the size and shape of the wound, making it easier to ensure that it heals properly.
And as the needle enters the skin and then the flesh, do so according to the proper technique and length of the entire body, leaving the end of the flesh where you inserted the needle; then insert the needle into the opposite side, going from the inside out in the other end of the muscle. This is the correct way to perform a suture using a needle and thread. The needle should be inserted at an angle that allows it to penetrate deeply enough into the wound to bring the edges together, but not so deeply that it causes unnecessary damage to the tissue. Once the needle has been inserted, it should be gently pulled through until only the tip remains outside the skin. The process can then be repeated on the opposite side of the wound, bringing the edges closer together with each stitch. This method allows for precise control over the size and shape of the wound, making it easier to ensure that it heals properly.[*](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18615743)
And once you have made that stitch, then make another stitch in the same location on the opposite side of the muscle, leaving the end of the flesh that is on this side and inserting the needle into the opposite side, going from the inside out. This is the proper way to perform a suture using a needle and thread. The needle should be inserted at an angle that allows it to penetrate deeply enough into the wound to bring the edges together, but not so deeply that it causes unnecessary damage to the tissue. Once the needle has been inserted, it should be gently pulled through until only the tip remains outside the skin. The process can then be repeated on the opposite side of the wound, bringing the edges closer together with each stitch. This method allows for precise control over the size and shape of the wound, making it easier to ensure that it heals properly.[*](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18615743)[*](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/latz)
And make the same stitch with the needle, inserting it into the flesh in the location where you made the previous stitch, going from the outside to the inside until the entire needle has penetrated the wound. This is the proper way to perform a suture using a needle and thread. The needle should be inserted at an angle that allows it to penetrate deeply enough into the wound to bring the edges together, but not so deeply that it causes unnecessary damage to the tissue. Once the needle has been inserted, it should be gently pulled through until only the tip remains outside the skin. The process can then be repeated on the opposite side of the wound, bringing the edges closer together with each stitch. This method allows for precise control over the size and shape of the wound, making it easier to ensure that it heals properly.[*](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18615743)
And then begin on the opposite side, stitching with the end of the flesh that is on this side and pulling the needle out of the skin where it was inserted previously. Then insert the needle back into the skin at the location where you want to make the next stitch, going from the outside to the inside. Repeat this process, alternating between sides, until the entire wound has been closed. This method allows for precise control over the size and shape of the wound, making it easier to ensure that it heals properly.
And do this repeatedly, stitching one side and then the other until you have closed all of the wounds on the outside following this example. This is the proper way to perform a suture using a needle and thread. The needle should be inserted at an angle that allows it to penetrate deeply enough into the wound to bring the edges together, but not so deeply that it causes unnecessary damage to the tissue. Once the needle has been inserted, it should be gently pulled through until only the tip remains outside the skin. The process can then be repeated on the opposite side of the wound, bringing the edges closer together with each stitch. This method allows for precise control over the size and shape of the wound, making it easier to ensure that it heals properly.
The sum of this method of suturing is that you stitch using the technique for closing wounds with fine thread, bringing the edges of the skin together so that the flesh is also stitched once along the length of the wound, leaving space in between each stitch until the entire wound has been closed. This is the proper way to perform a suture using fine thread. The needle should be inserted at an angle that allows it to penetrate deeply enough into the wound to bring the edges together, but not so deeply that it causes unnecessary damage to the tissue. Once the needle has been inserted, it should be gently pulled through until only the tip remains outside the skin. The process can then be repeated on the opposite side of the wound, bringing the edges closer together with each stitch. This method allows for precise control over the size and shape of the wound, making it easier to ensure that it heals properly.
But the second type of suturing that I previously described as "Gualian" is done using half-stitches, similar to how some medical practitioners use this technique to close wounds. This method involves bringing together each side of the wound in a way that aligns the natural edges of the tissue, and then applying pressure from both ends of the wound to bring them together. This process is repeated until the entire wound has been closed.
It is important to insert the needle into the edge of the wound on the outside and then bring it through to the inside, leaving the ends of the flesh exposed. Then, turn the needle around and insert it back into the opposite end of the flesh, again bringing it from the outside to the inside. This process should be repeated until the entire wound has been closed, using stitches that are evenly spaced and of consistent size.
And then turn each stitch around and insert it back into the opposite side of the wound, going from the inside to the outside in the location that is directly opposite to where it was previously inserted. This process should be repeated until the entire wound has been closed, using stitches that are evenly spaced and of consistent size.
This method of suturing is superior to the common simple suture and is the type of suturing that was previously described as "Gualian." It involves using half-stitches to bring together the natural edges of the wound, allowing for precise control over the size and shape of the closure.
This is the method of suturing that is known as "Gualian." It involves using half-stitches to bring together the natural edges of the wound, allowing for precise control over the size and shape of the closure. This method is often preferred by medical professionals because it results in a strong and secure closure that is less likely to become infected or cause scarring.
And there are some who say that suturing the abdomen is done using two needles, each with a thread that has been threaded through it. The first needle should be inserted at the location where the wound begins and brought through to the opposite side, following the same path as the stitches used by those who sew animal skins. The second needle should then be inserted at the location where the wound ends and brought through to the opposite side, again following the same path as the stitches used by those who sew animal skins. This process should be repeated until the entire wound has been closed, using stitches that are evenly spaced and of consistent size.
It is important to note that suturing a wound in the middle of the abdomen is more difficult than suturing wounds in other locations on the abdomen. This is because the middle of the abdomen is a highly mobile area, and it can be challenging to ensure that the edges of the wound are properly aligned during the suturing process.
And the treatment of wounds is also used for other types of injuries. This means that the principles and techniques used to treat wounds can also be applied to other medical conditions, such as burns, cuts, or abrasions. By understanding how to properly clean, close, and protect a wound, medical professionals can help to promote healing and prevent infection in a wide variety of situations.
The reason for this is that when a wound is fresh and still bleeding, the air has not had a chance to alter it yet. In this case, if you are able to return the intestines to their proper place, close the wound, and apply appropriate dressing, then placing an encarnative powder on top can help promote healing.
And if air has already affected the wound, then apply greasy poultices to it until they become hard and cause the pus to come out, and let them be consolidated and healed; and take care of it in the same way as for other wounds until it is healed.
But if you do not have the medicine with you, then apply it immediately, since it begins to suppurate, and change it every two days, as you have been taught, until it is healed, because you will not need any other medication in most cases, when the wounds are simple.
But if you fear that the wound may spread and cause injury to the main members, then it is advisable to soak a lamb's wool in warm bath oil or rose oil and place it on the area around the affected part, between the groin and the armpits.
And if there is pain or putrefaction in the intestines, which often happens, then use a mixture of wax and black stiptic (a type of medical plaster), especially if the pus has penetrated into the hernia and formed a cavity inside it.
And know that a hernia of the large intestine heals more easily than one in the small intestines.
And it is difficult to heal because the intestine called "gallbladder" does not receive healing from any wound that forms in it due to its many veins, and its large size, as well as its subtle nature and proximity to the nerves.
But if what comes out of the wound is tissue, and you are able to obtain fresh tissue, then reduce it according to your judgment, just as you would do with hernias in general.
But if the tissue has gone beyond the proper space and has turned black or green, then you should strengthen it with bile on the discolored area in order to bring about bleeding from the veins and arteries in the tissue.
Then cut the damaged tissue and place two pieces of liver on either side of the wound, allowing them to hang down from it so that the attraction of the tissue is relieved by the absorption of the liver and the release of blood from the wound.
Recollection of wounds when they occur in the intestines.
When there is a disruption in the intestines and it is small, then it is possible to restore it in some people, because I have seen one who was wounded in his stomach with a lance and had a wound on the right side of his stomach, which was old and had formed a fistula. He defecated and passed wind through it.[INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK]
Then I considered that the healing of the wound was not dependent on surgery, but I stopped probing it once it had healed and the area was consolidated.
And after I saw that the wound had healed and was consolidated, I feared for the patient that they might develop some other problem in their stomach; but nothing bad happened and they continued with their normal habits of eating, drinking, taking baths, and engaging in exercise as usual.
And some experienced physicians have said that when there is a wound in the intestines and it is small, then it should be treated as follows: take large-headed ants and place one of them with its mouth open on either side of the wound. Then, when they bite, cut off their heads so that they stick to the wound and do not dissolve.[INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK]
And place another ant next to the first one, and continue doing this with more ants until the entire wound is covered.[INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK]
Then return the intestine to its proper position and bind the wound. The ant heads will remain attached to the intestines until they have healed, and the patient will suffer no harm.
It is also possible to suture the intestine using fine thread made from the intestines of an animal, which can be done with a needle. Take the end of this thread and strip off any flesh from it, then attach it to the affected intestine with a knot. Then insert the needle and sew up the wound, returning the intestine to its proper position.[INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK]
The method of using ants to suture a wound is not reliable, but it can be tried as a last resort in the hope that it might work.
But if the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the small intestines, then it cannot be treated with simple sutures, but must be treated with more complex techniques that will not completely heal the wound, but rather close it temporarily.
On the treatment of abscesses and fistulas.
Know that any wound or abscess that becomes thin and old, forming an ulcer that does not heal and continuously bleeds without stopping, is called a fistula in any part of the body. We call it "zuchem" (or abscess) when it is new and fresh, but when it has become thin and old, we call it a fistula.
And in truth, a fistula is a hard, white, painless nodule that has a cavity similar to the cavity of a bird's feather quill. For this reason, we call it "zuchem rised" (or raised abscess).
And in some people, a fistula is moist and continuously bleeds, but the moisture is easily stopped within a few hours. And sometimes this moisture can be large or small, thick or thin. [INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK]
I have already discussed all of these causes and their symptoms, as well as the treatment for each using various medicines, in my classification.
It is also necessary for me to explain to you the treatment of fistulas, which involves surgery using my hands.
And know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body, either those that reach major veins and arteries, or nerves, or the hip, or the intestine, or the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to some of the vertebrae of the back, or to some of the joined joints such as those of the hand and foot; and there are those that are close to the main member and similar.
And therefore, this kind of fistula, according to this description, is among the diseases that are difficult to cure and do not respond to treatment, requiring hard work and ignorance.
And if some fistulas do not reach the depth described and you hope for their cure, seeking knowledge of them, then take an iron or a probe and gently insert it into the fistula, proceeding in a straight line, and try to locate it.
But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it using a fine lead probe since lead, due to its lightweight nature, can be easily bent and curved along the twisted path.
And if the fistula has horrible odors, it is not possible for you to examine it with a probe.
Therefore, irrigate the orifices of the fistula by its orifices since the moisture you introduce through one will flow into the others and clean them out.
And then, examine carefully, to the best of your ability, whether you can determine if there are bones or nerves in the fistula, and assess the depth of the fistula's cavity, whether it is far away or nearby, or if it is a fistula with multiple openings and is entirely superficial, using all of your skill, effort, and questioning of the patient. Determine the source of pain by applying pressure with your hand to the area, and use similar techniques to those used in diagnosing abscesses and their causes.
And when you have determined the causes through careful consideration and accurate diagnosis, then proceed to treatment according to your best judgment: consider whether it is a superficial or nearby fistula in an accessible location, or if it is situated far from a joint, nerve, artery, vein, or one of the other sites that you have identified.
And then, you should dry out the fistula as previously described, removing any pus or necrotic tissue and clearing any debris from the opening in the skin, including any new growths of flesh or fatty tissue. Proceed to treat and heal the interior until it is cured.
But if the fistula is deeply embedded and situated along a straight path, then it is appropriate to incise the fistula as deeply as necessary, removing all of its necrotic tissue. Apply hot compresses wrapped in healing herbs and medications, and insert these within the cavity of the fistula, which you have encircled with an instrument.
And repeat this process several times, using the healing herbs and medications to gradually erode and remove any remaining necrotic tissue within the cavity of the fistula.
And then, restore the area using ointments that promote healthy skin growth until it is healed.
But if it is not healed through these means, then cauterize the fistula as previously recommended.
But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you are certain of this fact, then examine the area carefully and manage it as previously recommended, provided that there is no contraindication due to a nearby vein or nerve or a major body part, as we have discussed.
But if the bone is exposed and there is evidence of corruption or blackening, then remove any necrotic tissue from within the wound until all signs of infection have been eliminated. Then proceed to treat the area with appropriate measures until it has fully healed.
And if it is not healing and exudes pus as before, then know that you have not yet achieved complete eradication of the infection. Therefore, re-examine the area carefully and thoroughly assess its condition, taking great care to cleanse and debride the wound with your remaining strength. Then proceed to restore the area using appropriate treatments and dressings until it has fully healed.
And so, if it heals, that's good; but if not, then recognize that the source of the corruption is located in a deep part of the body and has not yet been reached, and there is nothing more to do but leave it alone.
And if the infected bone is small or can be easily removed, then use delicate forceps that are appropriate for this purpose.
And if there are multiple bones involved, then carefully extract all of them, leaving behind no traces of infection or damage using your full strength and skill.
But if there is any obstacle to incising the affected area due to fluid buildup or swelling, and you are confident that it is safe to proceed, then carefully cut through the surrounding tissue or muscle, and release the bones.
But if you are not prepared to remove the bones at this time, then apply pressure to the wound to stop any bleeding and leave it as is, allowing for the formation of healthy tissue around the affected area. Ensure that the wound remains open and does not close up, keeping the incision site clean and dry until such a time when you are ready to proceed with further treatment.
If you are concerned about the wound healing properly, then apply a compress soaked in a solution of three parts vinegar and one part oil, or an Egyptian-style poultice, or any other suitable ointment, as this will help soften the surrounding tissue and ligaments, making it easier to separate the bones during surgery. This will also help alleviate any adhesions that may have formed between the bones and surrounding tissues.
If the affected bone is large, such as the thigh bone or hip bone, and only the surface of the bone is infected, then carefully scrape away the affected area using a sharp instrument until all signs of infection and discoloration are removed. Then proceed to restore the wound as previously recommended.
But if a large portion of the bone is infected and the infection has reached the marrow, then it is necessary to close the wound and avoid further incisions into the affected area, focusing instead on promoting healing and restoration from within.
I also recommend that you provide a suitable cushion or support for the patient's hip to ensure their comfort and assistance during your procedure.
Here is the case of a young man around 30 years old who experienced pain in his hip, and within that area, there was matter deep inside the body that had reached the hip, causing an abscess with significant swelling, and this was not due to any external cause.
Over time, the abscess grew and became more severe due to medical error, resulting in the accumulation of significant amounts of pus, and the treatment was delayed until the thigh became fistulized with multiple openings that all drained pus and bodily fluids.
The young man was treated by numerous physicians over the course of two years, but none were able to effectively address the issue, until he was referred to you for further evaluation and treatment.
Upon examining the patient, you observed his thigh and the pus that was draining from the multiple openings, which had spread over a large area of his body. Additionally, the patient's overall condition had significantly deteriorated, as evidenced by his sallow complexion and weakened state.
You then inserted a probe into one of the openings and successfully reached the bone.
And examine and quickly scrutinize the openings, finding those that lead to all parts of the leg.
And then I cut into and inserted myself into one of those openings, until I discovered a part of the bone, and found that it was rotten, and had turned to earth and was decayed; and a part of the leg was already rotten where it had penetrated into the marrow.
And then I secured what had been discovered and prepared of the exposed bone.
And I judged that it was not in the bone but rather the corruption, which I cut out and secured, and I had already scraped away (the infected area).
And then I applied a restoration of the wound with consolidative medicines for a long time, but it has not healed.
And then I revisited and discovered the bone again, on the first discovery, and found continuous corruption with the bone.
And I removed what appeared to be of that corruption, and then I proceeded to perform the cure and restoration of it, but it has not been restored.
And then I discovered (something) again and did not cease to cut into the bone little by little, specifically and completely perform the restoration of it, but it has not been restored until I cut around a palm's width of it, and extracted it with its marrow, and then I restored that with medicines, and it has healed slightly and is cured.
And it is not necessary to revisit the operation and section of it except for the disposition of its sinews and the lack of tolerance and fear of death, because it was endangered at all times due to excessive evacuation and bad fainting spells.
And so it is healed by complete healing, and there is no hard flesh in place of the bone; and its disposition has been properly restored to its body and its vitality has returned; and it has regained its normal functions and has not caused any harm in walking or damage in any way.
But if the bone is prominent in a damaged part of the body, then it is necessary to cut it in this way: that is, you take hold firmly and strongly at the end of the prominent bone, and command someone to stretch it out; and place the thickest bandage of the first bandage on it; and tie it over the flesh that is below the bone, and extend the extremity of it so as to draw the flesh towards the lower parts, and you uncover the flesh over the place where you want to cut so that the saw does not injure the flesh.
And place a piece of wood or board underneath the bone appropriately, because when you do this, it is not forbidden for the saw to cut the rotten flesh.
And it is necessary that the sawdust be removed little by little from the corrupted place, because if the corruption is in the cavity of the bone and does not appear in its appearance to sensation, it may be necessary to saw in another place.
And if the bone is corrupted but not prominent, and one part of it is continuous with another, and the corruption is in the middle or a part of it, then you uncover the flesh from all parts completely; and place a piece of wood underneath, and then saw that part where the corruption is until it is continuous with the other part.
And let the sawdust be according to the location of the corruption, a little, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, cut into that corrupted joint, and saw the bone where it is continuous with the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuity of two joints, then it is not reasonable but rather a trick (?).
And if the corruption is in the joint of the hand or foot, it is difficult; however, it is necessary to examine the corruption according to your judgement and cut that which appears to be corrupted, and clean that out in whatever way is possible for you, and correct each trick so that it does not harm you, when it does not go against veins or nerves.
And know that the cutting instruments and saws for cutting these bones are many according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of those (instruments), and the thickness of those, and their subtlety and size and smallness, and their hardness and rarity; therefore it is necessary that you prepare appropriate instruments for every type of operation.
And know that this operation indicates to you the type of instrument you need; when you have great study and long experience in the methods of this art, and witness many types of illnesses, then you already have for yourself what is appropriate for those instruments for every illness.
And I will now at the end of this chapter list for you the number of instruments that you will need, which will be simple and with which you will proceed according to your judgement, as you will test on others. Form of a saw:
Form of another saw:
Form of another large saw:
Form of a scalpel: Let the head of this scalpel be in the form of a star-shaped nail head, and let its points be like the points of an awl.
And it is not necessary for anything other than that the heads of the scalpels be rubbed against the joints when they are corrupted, or the mouth (of the wound) is wide and open.
Form of a smaller razor:
Form of a wide razor:
Form of another properly made saw: let it be an arc of the highest part and the sharpness of iron, and let its members be like those of a well-made dagger. Form of it (the cauterizer):
Form of a razor with a cavity (concave shape):
Form of another fine or delicate razor:
Form of another razor with curved end:
Form of a small razor similar to a tooth:
Form of another smaller incisor:
Form of another incisor; this one similar to a scalpel, and the end of it is like a saw, and it is used in many places for cutting bones:
Form of a scalpel that is suitable for cutting bones:
And the end of it is triangular and sharply pointed.
And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly it is necessary that all the causes (of shape) that we have mentioned for razors, incisors, and saws be so.
Of cutting edges and the sawing of bones.
The edges may become blunt either due to an intrinsic or extrinsic cause, or as a result of medical treatment for corruption that does not heal properly, or sometimes the corruption may spread to other parts of the body that are not affected by any cause. In this case, it is necessary to cut into the member where the corruption has spread in order to prevent the patient from succumbing to death or serious injury that could result in permanent damage to the limb.
And the sign that this has happened is that the member becomes blackened as it is cooked, for the fire has already burned it, or you may notice the blackness spreading within the member until it reaches the flesh and begins to dry it out and affect the entire body. In this case, you must immediately cut into the affected area.
Similarly, if the corruption is caused by a venomous injury from animals such as a sea scorpion, snake or centipede, then it is necessary to proceed in the same way as described above.
And if the corruption or injury is on the tip of the finger, then you should cut into the finger and not allow any space for the corruption to spread into the hand.
And similarly if you are treating an injury to the hand, then you should cut into it with the edge of the cautery, and not allow any space for the corruption to spread into the forearm.
And if instead, make an incision in the arm in the joint.
And if corruption and pus have spread and are around the joint, then in that case it is the death of the patient; and to administer another remedy for this condition in treatment is a matter of great skill.
Similarly, do the same for the foot when corruption has spread to the toe, then make an incision in it through one of the nails. (The text suggests a surgical procedure to treat infection or gangrene that has spread to the toes.)
And if it affects the root of the foot, then make an incision through the entire foot. (The text suggests a more radical surgical procedure to treat severe infection or gangrene that has spread throughout the foot.) But if it reaches the bone, then make an incision in the calf at the joint of the bone. (The text suggests a surgical procedure to treat severe infection or gangrene that has spread to the bone.)[`su_note](''Note'': The word 'denol' may be a misspelling or a variant spelling of the word 'dienol', which is an old Italian and Spanish term for 'tibia' or shinbone. Therefore, the translation of the sentence would be: "But if it reaches the tibia, then make an incision in the calf at the joint of the tibia.")
And if corruption has already spread over the bone, then in that case there is nothing to be done but let it go, and leave the patient to death. (The text suggests that the condition is too severe to be treated, and that the only option is to allow nature to take its course.)
And the way to make incisions in limbs or to bandage them is to pull the ligaments apart more at the part that you want to cut, and then pull another ligament over it; and have one minister stretch out a ligament below the part, and have another minister stretch out another ligament above it; and separate the flesh that is between two ligaments with enough space for your entire hand to be revealed; and make the incision or bandage it. (The text suggests a surgical procedure to treat infection or gangrene in limbs, which involves making an incision through the skin and flesh to remove dead tissue.)
And it is necessary that a cloth be placed around it on all sides, so that it does not touch the wound, and that the patient receives treatment for injury and abscess from a surgeon. (The text suggests the importance of keeping the surgical site clean and protected to prevent infection and promote healing.)
But if blood flows while you are operating, then you should cauterize the area carefully, or place some constricting powders on it to stop the bleeding; and then return to your treatment until it is completed. (The text suggests measures to control bleeding during surgery, which involves using heat or chemicals to stop the flow of blood.)
And then bind the affected limb with ligaments that are suitable for it, and care for it until it is healed. (The text suggests immobilizing the affected area after surgery to promote healing and prevent further injury.)
I also recommend to you what happens to a man in his foot, the same accident that happened to me, which is blackness in the foot with dryness resembling fire burns. (The text appears to be a personal testimony from the author about their own medical condition, possibly related to poor circulation or nerve damage.)
And that corruption first occurred in his toe and spread throughout the foot. (The text continues the description of the medical condition, suggesting that it started with a single toe and eventually affected the entire foot.)
And then that man prepared for himself more pus than was necessary for the treatment to reach the affected area with such force and intensity due to the severity of the pain and dryness, and he made an incision in his foot at the joint and it healed. (The text suggests a radical surgical procedure involving intentional infection to treat the condition, possibly related to gangrene or necrosis.)
For a long time he suffered from that same corruption in the index finger of his hand. (The text suggests that the medical condition also affected the patient's hand, possibly due to poor circulation or nerve damage.)
And then it came to me and perforated my hand with that excess fluid, which I had applied to the medicine on his hand, in order to purify his body; but the fluid was not absorbed and began to spread to the other finger in my hand. (The text appears to describe a medical treatment involving some kind of topical application or ointment, possibly related to bloodletting or wound healing.)
And he asked me to cut into his hand, but I did not want to do so, hoping for the absorption of that excess fluid; but fearing death from the incision in his hand due to the severity of his condition. (The text suggests a dilemma faced by the author regarding surgical intervention, possibly related to concerns about infection or blood loss.)
And since he left me and returned to his homeland, I later heard that the man had cut into his own hand completely and was healed. (The text suggests that the patient took matters into his own hands and performed a radical surgical procedure on himself, possibly related to amputation or debridement.)
I have only shared this narrative in order to help those who suffer from this disease and to serve as a guide for how to treat it. (The text suggests that the author's intention is to provide useful information about the medical condition and its treatment, possibly based on personal experience or observation.)
Regarding the care of sinuses and the quality of cleansing with enema and medications. (The text appears to be a medical treatise written in Latin, discussing the treatment of sinuses using enemas and various medications.)
When an abscess occurs in fleshy parts of the body and the space of the abscess is elongated so that it collects pus, and then it breaks open and perforates so that the pus comes out and leaves a hollow cavity like a vessel, and the skin above it becomes thin like fabric, and there has not been any further corruption or damage to bones, nerves, or ligaments, this is called a sinus, and not a fistula. (The text discusses the characteristics of an abscess that has formed a sinus tract in fleshy parts of the body, which involves the formation of a hollow cavity lined with thin skin.)
But if the space is elongated to such an extent that corruption spreads into any member, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus. (The text clarifies the difference between a sinus and a fistula, which involves the involvement of deeper structures in the body.)
And the treatment for this is to make an incision in that skin all around, as it becomes rolled up, especially when it becomes thin and resembles fabric, and ensure that it does not stick to the area due to corruption. (The text suggests surgical intervention for a sinus or fistula, involving making an incision through the thin skin that lines the cavity to promote drainage.)
But if you hope that the skin will adhere and that corruption has not spread further due to subsequent consequences, and there is a space between the skin and the area, then you should treat this with an enema. (The text suggests using an enema as a less invasive alternative to surgery for cases where there is no deep tissue involvement and the skin appears healthy.)
And when considering the sinus, if it is large and the arm that you use emits a foul odor, then treat this with an enema using Egyptian medicine which consists of oil, wine, and vinegar, and is received in equal parts into a vessel, and is heated over a fire until the medicine becomes hot and acquires the consistency of honey. (The text suggests using an enema made from a mixture of oil, wine, and vinegar to treat large sinuses with foul odors.)
And then you take what is necessary from it and dissolve it in water and honey; and perform the enema with this in the sinus, and strengthen its opening, and leave the medicine in for a period of two hours. (The text suggests administering the prepared enema mixture into the sinus through its opening, and leaving it in for several hours to promote healing.)
And then extract it with care; and do this for so many days until the sinus is cleaned out and the foul odor has been eliminated. (The text suggests repeating the enema treatment for several days to ensure complete healing of the sinus.)
And sometimes it is enema-ed with ashes of wood, when this medicine is not available to you; and you should take the ash of vine twigs and add water to it, then strain that and perform an enema with it until you are certain that the sinus has been healed. (The text suggests using a simple homemade enema solution made from ashes of vine twigs as an alternative when the recommended Egyptian medicine is not available.)
And if the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine or ash water, then perform an enema with water and honey, mixed with three parts of vinegar, and perform an enema with wine and honey mixed together, for the property of honey is to cleanse and wash, and the wine causes the sinus to heal, especially when there is excess astringency and dryness in the wine. (The text suggests two alternative enema solutions that can be used if the patient cannot tolerate the recommended treatments, one using vinegar and the other using wine.)
And when you do this several times and are certain that the sinus has healed, then perform an enema with a solution that causes the flesh to grow in it. (The text suggests using a growth-promoting solution for the final stage of sinus treatment, possibly involving some kind of wound healing agent.) [su_note](''Note'': The meaning of "carn" in this context is not clear, and could refer to either new tissue growth or swelling. It is possible that the text suggests using a solution containing inflammatory agents to promote tissue regeneration or healing.)
And you should take diascordium and dissolve it in rose oil and astringent wine, or perform an enema with certain medications and ointments that have the properties which I have already written about in the treatise on enemas. (The text suggests using diascordium, a compound made from dried root of wild hemlock, to prepare a solution for an enema. It also mentions other unspecified medications and ointments with specific properties.)
And if the opening of the sinus is narrow and will not admit the nozzle of the enema, then you should gradually widen it using a small iron instrument, and place in it a suitable amount of cotton wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it has been widened. (The text suggests using a small medical instrument to dilate the opening of the sinus if necessary, and recommends using ointments made from Egyptian or basilicon plants as lubricants to facilitate insertion.)
And similarly, if the opening is wide, then you should sew up its edges with stitches and leave a quantity of it so that an enema can be inserted without addition. (The text suggests using surgical stitches to narrow the opening of the sinus if necessary, and recommends leaving enough space for inserting the nozzle of the enema.)
And if the opening through which the arm protrudes is elevated to higher areas, then dry it at the lowest point that has pus in order to cause the arm to retract downwards, for when the arm is compressed by the swelling of the sinus, flesh is generated there. (The text suggests drying out the sinus opening if it is located higher than other body parts, which may help to redirect the flow of pus and promote healing.)
And if you are unable to dry out the sinus at the lowest point as desired, then it is necessary that you prepare the limb with a preparation that allows the arm to move freely and easily without any obstruction or cause for its retention. (The text suggests using some kind of medical preparation or treatment to improve mobility and prevent blockages in the affected limb.) [su_note](''Note'': The meaning of "preparacio" is not clear, and could refer to a surgical procedure, physical therapy, or medication. It may involve releasing any adhesions or scar tissue that are restricting movement, or using some kind of brace or splint to support the limb.)
But what is on top of the opening of the sinus should be left uncovered at all times so that it can drain properly and prevent any buildup from the arm. (The text suggests leaving the opening of the sinus exposed to allow for proper drainage and prevent fluid accumulation.) And so that you can determine if the flow from the arm is abundant or scanty, and if it is digested or not. (The text suggests assessing the quality and quantity of fluid draining from the sinus as an indicator of the effectiveness of treatment.)
And also consider the location of the sinus and whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if there is an abscess present. (The text suggests evaluating the severity and location of the sinus as part of the overall assessment and treatment plan.)
And as your treatment progresses in this way and you see the matter being expelled from the opening of the sinus starting to adhere or become stuck there, then gently loosen it after three days, and when you loosen the affected area, change the dressing for a new one and apply fresh ointment. (The text suggests monitoring the progress of treatment by assessing the appearance of drainage from the sinus opening, and recommends changing dressings and applying fresh ointments as needed to promote healing.)
But if there is a lot of space in the sinus and it becomes fine and subtle, then do not be alarmed by its adhesion, for this indicates that healing is taking place, for some people have slow tissue regeneration in their wounds, and the opposite occurs in others. (The text suggests that adhesions or scar tissue formation in the sinus opening may be a sign of healing, depending on individual factors such as tissue regeneration capacity.)
And if the sinus has been draining undigested pus for many days, then you know that it is not healing; and if there is a delay in the formation of adhesions in the sinus and this takes a long time to happen, then you should adjust your treatment by using drying medications. If the medications are humid in their substance and in their effect, they should be made dry like diascordium when it is added in excess. (The text suggests adjusting the treatment plan if there is no improvement or healing in the sinus after a prolonged period of time, and recommends using drying agents to promote healing.)
And the best remedy for the final healing is to take diascordium and dissolve it in rose oil, and add wine vinegar to its substance, and then apply this mixture to the affected area, using it as needed. (The text suggests using a solution of diascordium in rose oil with added vinegar as a final treatment for sinus healing.)
And do something similar when there is no arm, smear a sufficient amount of diaprunefy (diaphoretic) ointment, when it is heated enough that it becomes thick, and use it; or take myrrh and aloe and incense, grind them all and turn them into powder over the heated honey while it is on the fire, then spread it over a cloth and strengthen it over the sinew; and spread the honey smeared with the powdered mixture over the sinew that has become thick.
And sometimes these are administered with the long rod of asterology (and this refers to the celestial lily) and flour of iris and centaury, and use these simple ingredients or mix them, grind them and sift them into powder over the honey that I mentioned; and apply it.
And if the sinus is prolonged and not healed by this treatment, then know that the corruption is in the root of it, and now make an incision in the bones or in the other hard members or ligaments; then you cure it with a fistular (fistula) treatment, as mentioned above.
On the treatment of paronychia (inflammation of the skin around the nail), chapped nails, digital incisions, and amputations.
Paronychia is a collection of pus that forms below the nail of the finger or toe, and it can also appear on other fingers, and when it becomes prolonged and its healing is less valued, it is either an abscess of an abscess, or it is corrupted and spreads its corruption to the bone of the finger, which causes a foul odor, and it quickly corrupts the entire nail and easily spreads its corruption to the bone inside, causing a gangrenous condition in the finger, and the color of the finger becomes dark.
And so when you have this as we have said in the division (treatment) and do not see improvement in your treatment, then it is appropriate that you make an incision with iron through all the excess tissue that has become swollen from the nail, and then cauterize the wound with a hot iron because cautery is beneficial for this.
But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, but the growths of the nail already press on the flesh inward, and begin to prick it and cause damage, then it is appropriate that you make a fine incision just below the angle of the nail where it is pricking the flesh, and push it back and easily cut the flesh with an incision, and place on it corrosive medicines over what remains of the flesh until it has all fallen off; and treat the wound with ointments until it heals.
But if the corruption has already spread to the bone, then it is necessary that you cut into the bone and extract (remove) it, because there can be no healing while the bone is corrupt.
And if sometimes the corrosion and corruption spread to the finger, then you should cut into it at one of the nodes (joints) according to where the pain is felt, and treat it until it heals.
But if the nail becomes affected by a blow or friction, and causes intense pain, then it is necessary at first to bleed the patient, and then dry out the nail with a sharp spatula using a transverse cut from above downwards, making sure that the cut does not reach the flesh beneath the nail, because you will cause great pain to the patient and it may lead to the formation of abnormal flesh in the area; and treat the wound with an appropriate remedy for pain.
But this condition (ailment), which is common in older men, easily becomes all flesh, or it quickly develops into bones, or it quickly turns into a nail.
And the cause of this (ailment) is in the root of the joint, or it originates from bunions on the toes. But this one (ailment) that originates from bunions on the toes is not harmful, and this one that originates from joints is often harmful.
And for those that have developed into flesh, the incision should be easy, and it is done by cutting along its root with a broad-bladed spatula.
But for those that originate from the root of the joint, the treatment is difficult and should avoid making an incision in it.
But for those that are on the toes, it is necessary to make an incision at first in the flesh of it with a round incision into the bone, and then saw through one of those appropriate saws suitable for this purpose, and then treat it until it heals.
But for a union (consolidation) that occurs between the toes due to their overlapping or by nature of the person's birth, or from consolidation of wounds, burns or similar causes, then it is necessary to cut through this union until the toes return to their natural shape.
And then place between them (the toes) wrapped in rose oil-soaked cloths to prevent them from becoming easily united, and separate them or place a thin sheet of lead between them until they are properly healed.
And similarly, if there is a union (consolidation) in the toes with the palm, then you should dry this union as prepared and appropriate for the shape of the member (the limb).
On incisions of veins, they are varicose veins.
Veins are varicose veins, and they are thick, swollen veins filled with melancholic superfluities (black bile) which occur in the joints of various parts of the body, and they appear most frequently in the legs, particularly in travelers, laborers, and those who carry heavy loads.
Therefore it is necessary to administer purging of the body with black bile several times using strong evacuation methods, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein (median cubital vein).
But the treatment of varicose veins with iron is done in two ways: one way is that they are cut open and the black blood is drawn out, and another way is that the vein is raised and extracted entirely.
The incision is done in this way: first soak the leg with hot water to soften the thick blood (feculent of the leg), and then tie the leg of the patient high up on the upper thigh near the crease at the back of the knee with a band, and then dry out the vein in one place or two or three places using a wide cut, and then raise the black blood with the thick part of the cloth placed above and below the incision until the desired amount of blood has been released and the patient can bear it.
And then apply a dressing on it (the incision), and instruct the patient to abstain from food that generates black bile.
And repeat the treatment with bloodletting when the veins are filled, and this will be noticed by the patient.
But the elevation of varicose veins is done in this way: first raise the leg of the patient and if there are swollen joints then place them in a bath and soak the leg with warm water until it reddens and the veins become more visible; or have the patient exercise vigorously if taking a bath is not possible, until the limb becomes heated.
And then dry the cord (ligature) in line with the vein for a cut in the leg or at the back of it near the ankle, or at the base of it near the heel.
And then loosen the ligature with hooks and dissect (dissect) the vein from all sides until it becomes noticeable to touch, and this is when you can feel the pulsation of the vein that appears darkened.
And so when you make an incision in the swelling, you see that white thing which is the cord.
Then place the knife below so that it raises and separates from the swelling, and suspend it with an ounce or two of a lion-like substance.
Then dry the surrounding area around the incision for three fingers' width, and then scrape the swelling from above the vein until it becomes visible.
Then raise it and make an incision in the rear section behind the heel, and then extract what comes out through the second incision, and then extract what is above that incision.
And do that until you extract what is highest or thickest of all the sections, until it is completely removed; and then make an incision there.
And if it does not obey your attempts to extract and raise, then insert a needle with strong double-strength bile and tie it off, pulling it out; or insert the knife below it and turn your hand inside until it is removed. And be careful not to cut it; for if it is broken, it becomes difficult to raise and has come to harm the patient through injury.
And once it is completely removed, then place over the wound site a piece of wool soaked in vinegar and rose oil and non-rose oil, and care for the wound until it heals.
And if the vein is contracted with twisting and enveloping of its parts, and it is not straight as we have said, then it is necessary for you to make incisions along all parts of the twisting and at the points of envelopment of it, and then suspend it with hooks until you raise it completely.
And be careful of your incision that you do not cut the vein and do not harm it, for it will be difficult to raise it; and exercise caution in this matter.
Shape of the incision made on a vein that has been cut:
It is not as sharp as hooks nor does it have a pointed tip so that it does not harm the vein; and it has a thick flexibility like a lion, for if it were thin, it would cut the vein due to its thinness; it has an excessively large size as we have said.
On the extraction of the leg vein:
This vein is generated in the legs, in hot lands, such as al-Ategi in the land of the Arabs and in the dry lands of India, where there is little vegetation or water.
And it is easily generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
And its formation comes from putrefaction that occurs below the skin, just as the poison of snakes and worms inside the body, such as scorpions, earthworms, and maggots are generated between the skin and flesh.
And the sign of the onset of this vein is that there is a violent inflammation in the leg, and the affected area becomes swollen; and soon the vein begins to emerge from the site of the swelling, which resembles the root of a plant.
And when the extremity appears, then you should wrap around it a lead piece weighing one to two drachmas, and tie it there, leaving the lead suspended from the leg.
And as many times as you notice any cause on the outside that affects it, wrap it in lead and bind it there. And if it becomes very long, then you should make an incision in one part of it and wrap the remaining portion; and do not cut the end that has emerged, for if you cut it, it will contract and enter the flesh, causing abscess and putrefaction in the area and a bad ulceration.
Therefore it is necessary that it be treated gently and extracted slowly, until it has been completely removed from the body and there remains no cause or obstruction within it.
And this vein emerges in some men to a length of five palms and it has come to my attention that one emerged to a length of twenty palms.
And if it is cut during its treatment, then insert the knife into the opening and make a long incision into the flesh, until all of the contents of the wound have been evacuated, and apply putrefaction to the site for several days with medicines; and then care for it with treatments for abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has many branches, and most often when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and it comes to it with many openings, and is emitted from each opening as a branch.
And therefore care for it as we have said in the division, and with what has been said above.
On the incision of worms generated under the skin, and it is called "bovine disease."
This disease is called "bovine disease" in some lands among us, because it often affects cows, and is a worm that is barely visible, which is born between the skin and flesh, and moves throughout the body up and down, and is felt as it moves from one member to another until it breaks the skin and emerges.
And its formation is due to the putrefaction of certain fluids, just as worms and snakes and worms and roundworms are generated in the belly.
And it is feared for its malice, because when it goes into the body and rises to the head, and reaches the brain, then it easily infects it and enters, destroying the brain, which happens frequently.
And therefore when you wish to cure and extract it, then you should not do so unless its movement and appearance is apparent to the touch, and only then should you firmly hold what is above it and below it with pressure and constriction, and then dry and extract it.
And if the purulent matter is in the flesh and you cannot find it, then place a hot cautery over the area where you suspect it to be, and the most feared cause is corruption of the pus, which corrupts the area as we have said.
But if you see that it (pus) has spread towards the skull near the eye, then strongly press on the eyebrow with a firm twist and dry it out; then extract it. It is necessary that the patient use purification of their body with medicines that evacuate putrid bad humors, and be cautious of foods generating putrefaction.
Regarding the incision of abscesses (nafir).
This illness is called "nafir" in our land, and it is a pain that occurs in various parts of the body, and moves from one part to another.
And I have already seen what I will now describe to you. I was summoned to a sick woman in a village, and upon examining her body, I discovered a small inflammation in the vein funis of her arm, and after an hour had passed, I observed that the inflammation moved similarly to a worm crawling upwards, but more gently than if it were moving on its own, as if it were liquid silver flowing from place to place.
And then the pain moved from that location and settled into the muscle, and there it stayed for an hour.
And then it corrected in the other part of the body before reaching the other arm.
And it was reported to me that it (the pain) traveled throughout her entire body, as I observed; and it was astonishing how it changed and moved from one part of the body to another with such speed. And I had previously observed the same thing in my own heels, according to that method, but I have also seen many cases where pain is moved from one part of the body to another. But I did not observe it in the heels as I did with the woman.
And I do not think it was the same as in the case of my own heels, but rather because the woman was old, with dry body and exposed veins, and she felt that moving windiness (pus).
And it is necessary that it does not appear according to this backward movement in those who are delicate and have warm bodies with thin veins.
And how you want to cure it is when the patient feels that pain, then do not apply the treatment to the heel as we have said; instead, press firmly on that area and gently dry it out where the constricted windiness (pus) will come out, and cauterize the spot.
But if you do not see it with your own heels, then cure it through purging the body and expelling windiness (pus), and clean that area with foul-smelling powders and serapias pills and similar remedies.
Regarding the extraction of arrows (sagetas).
Arrows are varied according to their species and the parts of the body where they become embedded, for their diversity is that some have large tips, small ones, concave or blunt ones, which are solid; and some have three angles, and those with tongues; and others with barbs.
And the symptoms of danger include when an arrow pierces through bone and exits the skullcap, which is located above the brain; this causes violent headaches, temporary blindness, vertigo, numbness in the limbs, inflammation, and pain in the tongue, spasms, confusion, yellow bile vomiting, slurred speech, and loss of voice. Additionally, there will be white fluid resembling dust coming out from the wound, and pus-filled blisters similar to watery flesh around it.
And therefore, if these symptoms are observed, then you must refrain from treating or extracting the arrow, unless it is outside (the body).
But the symptoms of an arrow in the heart when it is near the left nipple and feels like it is lodged in a hard surface, not visible, and the movement of the arrow resembles the pulse, there is black blood oozing from the wound, cold sweats, and fainting; and therefore know that death is imminent.
And the symptoms when an arrow has pierced a lung are spume-like blood oozing from the wound, swelling in the veins near the throat, discoloration of the patient, loud exhalations, and requests for fresh air to breathe.
And if the arrow has struck the sheath located in the feet, then the pain will be near the small ribs, causing great and intense pain with deep sighs, and affecting all parts of the body's muscles.
And if an arrow strikes the stomach, then one will notice food or undigested substances coming out of the wound.
And if an arrow strikes the belly and becomes embedded in it, then there will be a tear or laceration in the wound, or the membrane or intestine that has been ruptured, and there is no hope for curing it through extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow strikes the bladder and urine flows from it, and there is pus or some other substance coming out of it, and the patient feels a strong pain in that area, then know that it is fatal.
But other parts of the body such as the face, neck, throat, shoulders, and shoulder blades, the vertebrae in the back, the collarbone, hip, thigh, and similar limbs can be saved if the arrow does not penetrate a vein or artery, and is not venomous.
And I will report to you what I have observed about the nature of these arrows so that you understand it regarding the simple treatment.
The reason for this is that when an arrow strikes a person in the lacrimal gland of their eye next to their nose, and I extracted it from another part, away from the ear canal, and he was healed, and no harm came to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew, which struck him in the groove of his eye, below the eyelid, and the arrow was already hidden, and could not be seen except for a small piece that adhered to its shaft. It was a large arrow with sharp tips, commonly used by Turkish archers, without any ear-like protrusions on the iron head.
And it was a Jew, and no significant harm came to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man, which had struck him in the throat, and it was an Arabic arrow with ear-like protrusions. Then, I inserted my fingers between two of his windpipes and carefully separated them, as the arrowhead was already deeply embedded in his throat. Afterward, I skillfully extracted the arrowhead, and the Christian man was healed.
And I extracted another arrow from a man who had been struck in his belly, and I thought he would die from it; therefore, after thirty days had passed without any change in his condition, I inserted my fingers around the arrowhead and manipulated it. He was healed, and no adverse effects occurred.
And I saw a man in whom an arrow struck his back, and the wound had healed over it. However, after seven years had passed, the arrowhead emerged near his buttock.
And I saw a woman who was struck by an arrow in her belly, and the wound had healed from within, without any change in her condition. Furthermore, she did not experience any harm during her natural operations (menstruation).
And I saw another man who was struck by an arrow in his face and the wound became gangrenous but he did not feel much pain, and many others similar to this one.
I extracted the arrow from the man of the king's court who was struck in the middle of his nose and it had deviated slightly to the right side, and the entire arrow was hidden.
And I was called for the treatment of the wound caused by the arrow within three days after its removal.
And then I examined the wound caused by the arrow very closely, and then I probed gently with my finger, but did not feel anything; however, I could feel a sharp point beneath the right ear, and then I suspected that it was the tip of the arrowhead.
And I applied a poultice to the area that has attractive and digestive properties, trusting that the wound would become inflamed so that the location of the arrowhead would appear to me, so that it could dry up on top of it.
And no significant accident occurred in the area where the arrow had struck, and I continued to apply the poultice to it for many days without any accidents occurring; and meanwhile, the wound healed and the patient was relieved of his weakness over several days until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose and reported this to me.
And then I applied a sharp corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until it became hot and open, and with my finger I felt around inside and found the tip of the arrowhead that was hidden and attached to the shaft.
And then I adjusted the opening of the wound with that sharp medicine until the tip of the arrow became clearly visible to me, and I continued this treatment for several months.
And because the wound had become more inflamed, I was able to insert forceps into it and extract the arrowhead, which did not cause any significant bleeding. However, I continued to work on finding ways to manipulate and remove it with various tools until one day I was able to successfully extract it using a carefully designed pair of forceps, as shown in the illustration at the end of this chapter. Afterward, I restored the wound to its original state.
And several doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored, but I was able to restore it and heal the wound, and the patient recovered fully and did not suffer any negative consequences as a result.
And I recommend to you the method of extracting some arrows so that you may establish rules and meanings regarding what I have not said, as the principles and definitions of this art are not contained within this narrative or book.
And wise craftsmen compare little to much, and what is present to what is absent, and they discover new operations and instruments according to the nature of foreign causes when accidents occur.
And so I say that arrows are not expelled from the members in which they are embedded except by two means: either through attraction to the location where they have entered, or through opposition to the opposite side.
And an arrow that is expelled from the location where it entered, or is a fleshy arrowhead and is shot out and expelled.
And if it does not obey the issuance of the hour in which it is extracted, then you must leave it for several days until you can soften the flesh that is around it, and so that the attraction of it and its exit may be alleviated.
Similarly, if it is embedded in bone and does not obey you at the appointed time, then you must leave it for several days and repeatedly apply attraction and movement to it each day, and it will be expelled.
And if it does not obey your issuance after several days, then you must make an incision in the circumference of the arrow in that bone from all sides with a sharp tool until the area is enlarged around the arrow, and then extract it.
But if the arrow is hidden in the body and is numb to sensation, then you should probe and examine that area, and if you find it, then pull it out with appropriate instruments suitable for extracting it.
But if you cannot reach it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the arrow, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein in that area, then make an incision on the wound until it is large enough and it becomes possible to extract the arrow.
But if it is in the ears and held by them, then cut away the flesh around it completely with all the skill that you can muster; and devise a way to extract it through breaking the ears or twisting them until it becomes possible to do so.
And when you perform the extraction of the arrow in any location where it is, then use twisting with your hand and forceps on all sides until it becomes obedient; and proceed with great care and delicacy to avoid breaking the arrow and make it easier for you to extract it.
But if you cannot do so at that time, then leave it for several days until the surrounding areas become stronger, and then try again when it becomes easier to do so. But if this causes an opposing flow of blood, then administer what we have said regarding treatment in its chapter.
And be careful not to injure veins or nerves or tendons, and do everything possible to extract the arrow with ease and calmness and patience and steadiness, as you have been recommended.
And therefore, you should bend the arrow in such a way that it follows the shape of the wound, as it is more beneficial for the patient to place the arrow in its original position. But if that is not possible for you, then do what is possible with the available shapes (of the arrowheads).
But if the arrow is shot from the opposite direction or has already injured some parts outside the body, or if the end of the arrow becomes swollen due to the sensation of the part above the wound and rises up prominently, then dry that area; and let the drying be in accordance with the amount that can be grasped by forceps; and then pull it out, for it is easily extracted at this point.
But if it is lodged in the bone, then twist the bone in the opposite direction until the arrow moves into the bone and expand that area, and then extract it.
But if this is not possible, then leave it for several days until it becomes easier to do so.
And if the shaft of the arrow is still in it, then push it further in with your finger.
But if the shaft has fallen out and you want to administer a push, then insert your finger (into the wound) if it is numb, or use a concave instrument so that its concavity fits into the end of the arrow and then push it in with your finger.
But if the arrow is concave, then push it in with a strong instrument inserted into it, for the arrow will be easier to extract in this way.
And if the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary to cut away all the flesh around the wound if it is possible for you to do so, and furthermore take care of it with whatever is appropriate.
And if the arrow enters the chest, or the abdomen, or the bladder, or the side, and it is close enough to be touched by your probe, and it is possible for you to dry that area, then do so and be careful not to injure veins or nerves. Extract the arrow carefully and further treat the wound as necessary until it heals.
Here is a description of forceps used for extracting arrows:
The ends of the forceps are shaped like bird's beaks, which are made with serrated edges that grip onto the arrow so that it is not let go.
And many types of forceps are made in different sizes, small or large, according to the size and slenderness of the arrow, the width of the wound, and the constriction of the area.
Similar to a rod or probe, with a rounded end that is used for pushing in the arrow and relieving its insertion into the wound, especially if it has a concave shape. This instrument can be made of different materials such as metal, wood or plastic, depending on the specific needs and characteristics of each case.
Venesection is a medical procedure in which blood is drawn from a vein, usually for diagnostic or therapeutic purposes. It involves making an incision in the skin over a vein and inserting a hollow needle or tube into the vein to collect the blood. The procedure can be performed using different techniques, such as direct venipuncture, which involves inserting the needle directly into the vein, or indirect venipuncture, which involves inserting the needle into a vein through a superficial vein or a skin fold.
The veins that are commonly used for venesection are usually three: the basilic vein, the cephalic vein, and the median cubital vein. These veins are superficial and easy to access, making them ideal candidates for blood drawing or other medical procedures. The basilic vein is located on the medial side of the upper arm, while the cephalic vein is found on the lateral side of the forearm. The median cubital vein, which is formed by the union of the basilic and cephalic veins, is located in the antecubital fossa, the area where the elbow bends. These veins are usually marked with a tourniquet or other device to make them more visible during the procedure. Of those mentioned, there are 16 veins in the head that can be used for venesection. These veins include the superior sagittal sinus, inferior sagittal sinus, straight sinus, occipital sinus, marginal sinuses, superficial middle cerebral vein, deep middle cerebral vein, basal vein of Rosenthal, cavernous sinus, sphenoparietal sinus, superior petrosal sinus, inferior petrosal sinus, sigmoid sinus, transverse sinus, and the confluence of sinuses. These veins are used for various medical procedures such as draining excess fluid or blood from the brain, treating aneurysms or other vascular malformations, and administering medication directly into the cerebral circulation. However, venesection in the head is a highly specialized procedure that requires advanced training and expertise. There are two pulsating veins that are close to the ears, called "templars" in herbs, and two veins that are apparent in the lacrimal areas of both eyes, called "aspicientz". Additionally, there is a prepared vein in the middle of the forehead, a vein in the end of the nose, two veins in the neck called "jugulars", and two veins each on the upper and lower lips, which are called "angulars". There are also two veins that are located below the tongue, which are called "sublinguals". These are all specific veins that are referred to by name. But the veins that are commonly used for venesection in the arms are five: Of these five veins in the arm, one is the cephalic vein, which is located near the latissimus dorsi muscle and is commonly called "the vein of the head". It is a small vein that is composed of a branch from the basilic vein and another branch from the cephalic vein. This vein is also known as "the vein of the whole body" because it runs along the entire length of the arm.
In the foot and calf, there are three main veins:
The benefit of the veins near the temples is for treating chronic headaches, migraines, epilepsy, and old ulcers on the scalp.
The recommended method of bloodletting from the veins near the temples is as follows: first, have the patient lie down with their head resting on a pillow. Then, apply a wide and clean cloth to the occipital area of the patient's head where both veins are located. Use firm pressure to massage the cloth in circular motions for several minutes.
Take the scalpel lancet, which is sharp and pointed, then insert it gently beneath the vein at the bend of the elbow until the venesection needle reaches the bone. Then raise your hand with the vein and elbow towards the upper parts, and make an incision in the vein with an incising cut. And let the length of the incision be the size of two fingers or thereabouts, and allow blood to flow from it as much as you want.
Then apply pressure with a piece of cloth or gauze to stop the bleeding and leave it in place until it heals.
And as previously mentioned in the beginning of the book, the incision and subsequent cauterization of these veins has already been discussed.
The benefit of bloodletting from the two arteries in the temples is for treating chronic headaches, hard and persistent migraines, eye diseases, and acute swelling in the legs caused by an excess of fluid.
The recommended way to perform bloodletting on these arteries is as follows: first, constrict the patient's neck with a cloth until the two arteries become apparent by touch and their pulsations can be felt under your fingers. Then, use a lancet or other sharp instrument to make an incision in one of the arteries, allowing blood to flow freely. After the desired amount of blood has been released, apply pressure with a clean cloth to stop the bleeding and allow the wound to heal. Repeat the process for the second artery if necessary.
Then raise the arm above the vein towards the upper parts with your index finger pointing at it, insert the venesection needle obliquely beneath the vein until it is visible, and elevate the vein with the needle; incise the vein as you have done with the other two veins; and let the blood flow according to the amount of your need.
Then release the constriction on the patient, place your finger over the vein for an hour, and apply a bandage and pressure with a cloth above it with firm constriction, and leave it until it heals.
And the reminder of their incision and extraction has already been mentioned at the beginning of the book.
And so the help of bloodletting from the vein in the forehead is similar to bloodletting from the cephalic vein for ancient facial illnesses, migraines, fever, and fetid ulcers.
And the quality of bloodletting depends on what you recommend to you, that is, the patient should strengthen their neck with a band so that the vein appears; and then take the instrument called a fossorium, which looks like this:
Place the pointed end of the fossorium on top of that vein and strike it with an inclined or other object in the manner of it, and let the blood flow according to the quantity that you want; and then undo the perforation of the patient and strengthen it so that it heals.
And sometimes a vein is opened with a large bloodletting needle, but it is not necessary for the bloodletting to have an acute tip like other bloodlettings; instead, it should be of blunt extremity, and perforate that in a transverse manner because the bone is close and easily broken if the bloodletting is fine.
But the help of the two veins that are near the lacrimal (tear) ducts in the eyes for scabies of the feet, for fever and inflammation in the feet, and for illnesses of the face.
And the quality of bloodletting is that the patient should strengthen their neck with a band, and then perform bloodletting on them while you stand over their head.
And the bloodletting should be done in a manner that is transverse and slightly longitudinal with small incisions, because there is no flesh in that area; and if the bloodletting instrument is fine, its tip may easily break off.
And then let the blood flow as much as is necessary for you, and place pressure on that area to stop the bleeding, and strengthen it for one night, and then undo the pressure.
But bloodletting from the nasal vein is beneficial for acute fever, violent headache, and facial illnesses and migraines that occur in the face, especially if they are ancient or long-standing.
And the quality of bloodletting from the nose is that the patient should strengthen their neck and turn their head towards your left hand, and then take a slender, long lancet and insert it into the middle of the bridge of the nose in a straight manner because the vein does not appear to the touch here, and because the blood begins to flow immediately.
It is necessary for you to gradually uncover your hand with the bloodletting instrument and let the blood flow according to your need; and then bind it up for one night because it heals easily.
But the help of bloodletting from the two jugular veins is for constriction of the throat, the onset of leprosy and many illnesses, impetigo, and corrosive sores such as herpes.
And the quality of bloodletting from those veins is that the patient should turn their head downwards for each one on their neck with force; and the practitioner should stand over the patient's head, and the patient should be seated on a stool.
And then perform bloodletting on the vein with a broad, small lancet gradually; and extract blood in moderate quantities or as much as you see is necessary; and then do the same for the other vein.
And then undo the binding and strengthen both veins with mild pressure to prevent the patient from being overexerted, and leave it overnight because the wound will be healed by morning.
And the help of bloodletting from the Algerian veins is beneficial for small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums, bad sores, fissures, and bad sores that are on the nose or around it.
And the quality of bloodletting from those veins is that you should have the patient sit in front of you, and strengthen their neck with a band, and then turn their lips and look for two veins, one on each side of the lip; and the identification of each one is by the darkness of both, especially around the small black veins; and then make an incision for each one with an incising instrument.
But if you are uncertain, and do not know which one to choose, then make an incision on the larger or more obvious of those two veins.
And do the same for the two veins that are in the upper lips.
But for the two veins that are below the tongue, the help is in bloodletting from the cephalic vein for swellings in the throat, illness of the uvula, and illnesses of the mouth.
And the quality of bloodletting from those veins is that you should follow the patient with your hands in front of their mouth and above their chin, and raise their tongue and look beneath their tongue for one side of the vein and the other, and the color of each one tends towards blackness.
And then perform bloodletting on each one; and be careful not to uncover your hand too much when bloodletting those, because there are arteries beneath them.
And the veins that are commonly bloodletted in the groin are those that flow in all men, and bloodletting from them is done in two ways: either by applying myrtle or olive with fine subtlety; or by drying with a scalpel, which is called alnesil, and this is its shape:
Let its blade be as wide as necessary, and it is suitable for opening concave veins that appear prominent and full of thick blood.
And this bloodletting instrument is of smaller width and has a sharper point, and it is suitable for bloodletting from fine veins that contain thin blood.
But the help of bloodletting from the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: because it draws blood from illnesses that are below the throat and those that affect the feet and the belly.
And the person performing bloodletting, when bloodletting from that one, should be careful and cautious, because there is an artery below it, and if they make a mistake and pierce the artery with the bloodletting instrument, it will cut the artery and cause excessive bleeding, so it is important not to use a sharp needle but rather a scalpel for cauterization.
And if the basilic vein is not visible by clear indication, then it is best to move on to the other one or look for a branch of it, or perform bloodletting in the crook of the elbow, where it is easily visible; and then cauterize that area with an alnessil, as previously mentioned.
But if you wish to perform bloodletting in the middle of the arm, then first feel for the location by touching the area between the bicep and triceps muscles, and make a mark on that spot; then bend the arm and cauterize the vein with a concave incision using an alnessil, as previously mentioned; and be careful not to hit the artery with percussion in that area.
And when you notice that the binding causes swelling in the marked location, then this inflammation is due to the artery, and therefore it should be avoided.
And if you see blood flow like the urine of an infant, and it is thin and red, then know that this is arterial blood; and in that case, hold your finger over the incision for a long time; and then apply pressure with your finger to stop the bleeding, and if the blood continues to flow, because many times it does, then hold the arm up and leave it alone.
And be careful of the patient's mucus and be cautious around them, and do not harm them for several days until they are healed.
But if the bleeding has not stopped and you do not have medicine to address it, then locate the artery and cut it if it is visible, because its tip will contract and the blood flow will stop; or take a piece of bark and puncture it, and put a piece of meat over the vein with gentle pressure and bandages for the next day.
And if the bleeding has stopped, that is good; and if not, then treat it with what was mentioned previously for stopping blood flow.
And stopping the blood flow from an artery is difficult in many cases due to the small size of the wound and the possibility of swelling in the arm.
And bloodletting from the fusca vein is helpful for drawing blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body, because it branches off from both the basilic and cephalic veins, as previously mentioned.
And the person performing bloodletting from this vein should be cautious because there is a nerve below it; and if they hit the nerve with the bloodletting instrument, it will cause numbness or stupor in the patient, and the healing process will be difficult and often incomplete. This nerve can be felt easily by many people, but for others it may be more subtle and hidden, and therefore one should proceed carefully to avoid hitting it. If the nerve is hit, then cauterization with an alnessil is recommended to stop the bleeding, while avoiding further damage to the nerve.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you should puncture the vein along its length.
The benefit of making an incision in the cephalic vein is that it draws blood from the head and relieves illnesses of the heels.
And it is appropriate in this case, if you want the incisions to be made with an olive-shaped or myrtle-shaped fleam, because it is safer than any other vein, since it does not damage the artery or nerves.
However, it is easy for an abscess to form in some people when they are not incised at the first percussion, but you will not notice that abscess right away.
The first thing to know is that incisions should only be administered for the preservation of health and as a precaution against illness, and should be made on one of the veins in the forearm, namely: cephalic, basilic or cubital; and should be made at the beginning of spring, on an empty stomach in spring and autumn, and in winter before meals when signs of fullness appear.
And incisions should be made every third day or as soon as three hours have passed since sunrise.
However, incisions should be administered when necessary and convenient, both at night and during the day, at any hour and in all seasons.
It is advisable that children should not be incised until they are 14 years old, and pregnant women should not be incised until the fourth month of pregnancy and up to the seventh, and elderly people who have already passed 60 years of age should not be incised.
If someone wishes to be incised in any way, it is advisable that they clean their intestines before the incision with an enema of lion's dung if there is a retained fecal matter in them, so that the veins do not draw excess fluid from the purified intestines during the incision, which could cause contamination and affect the main members.
Those suffering from chronic nausea and hangovers, those in a state of intoxication or illness, those with dropsy, and those who fear that the incision may cause colic, vomiting, abdominal pain, diarrhea, physical exhaustion, fasting, vigilance, or any other factor that weakens the body or spirit should not be incised.
And it is advisable to consider the refinement of humors beforehand if the blood is thick, by means of food and drink, and with medications if that is possible.
And it is advisable to take a bath if there is no reason not to, or engage in physical exercise so that the blood becomes refined.
And perform the incision during the daytime hours, around the third hour, as we have said.
And make sure that the area of incision is protected from all harmful influences on that day, such as anxiety, anger, fear, and all physical discomforts, such as pain, excessive effort, diarrhea, and similar symptoms.
And at the time of the incision, make sure that the causes of health are present, such as fragrances and perfumes, balms, and similar items according to the degree of possibility.
And have the person performing the incision sit on a cushion that is higher than the cushion of the person being incised.
And make sure the person being incised extends their arm, and that the person performing the incision wipes it with their hand two or three times; then tighten the ligature around the limb with a strap and wrap it twice.
And make sure the ligature is applied with moderation, because if it is too tight or loose, it will prevent blood flow or cause excessive bleeding.
And when applying the ligature, make sure that the person being incised rubs their hands together until the veins become swollen and can be felt.
And the person performing the incision should anoint their fleam with a little bit of antiseptic oil properly; then place the index finger of their left hand on top of the vein, below the location where you want to make the incision, so that the vein moves slightly away from it. The percussion should be performed delicately so as not to damage the vein. If you press on a vein that is filled with gas, it will contract when you apply pressure, and if the fleam does not cut the vein or only makes a small incision, then it has been successful.
Therefore, it is important that the person performing the incision be steady and attentive to all these factors.
And after making the incision, if you have found the vein in one attempt, that is good. If not, try another spot just below or slightly above the original location, or make a quick incision if the area is not infected.
And if the location is infected or the patient is frightened, then you should wait a day or two and not tighten the ligature, because this could cause an infection or prevent healing. The person being incised should also avoid bathing during this time.
And if necessary, you can repeat the incision after a few days.
If the incision is small and the blood flows slowly, and you fear that there will not be enough blood flow, then you can make another incision in the same location with caution and adjust it slightly to increase the size of the opening before the area becomes infected. This should be done quickly, because a small incision can easily become infected in some people.
However, if you see that the area is already infected, then do not make another incision in the same location, because this will not solve anything. Instead, apply a little bit of oil to a part of the wound to alleviate the symptoms. And it is better to use oil in this case than any other substance.
Similarly, in all incisions where you are cutting veins to prevent blood clots, apply a little bit of oil to the area, and use theriac, alfadoc, or sagzenea when making an incision on one side of the area to refine the blood and make it flow better if it is thick.
If a large abscess forms in the area of incision due to multiple causes and primarily in those who have not bled regularly or only had one incision, or where the incision was small or near a vein, then you should apply a warm, wet sponge soaked in salt water to the area for an hour. This will help dissolve any infection.
It is important to apply the warm compress as soon as the bleeding from that vein has stopped or when you have made an incision in another vein.
If some black or green discoloration remains in the area for several days, do not be concerned. However, if you wish to speed up healing, you can apply a mixture of aloe and myrrh, or crushed mint leaves or chamomile to the area.
Many times, abscesses and swellings occur in the basilic vein when making an incision there, so it is important to be careful.
Therefore, if you feel softness when you press on the area, continue to apply pressure until the swelling goes down, because this indicates that there is a problem or infection. In this case, be sure to apply one of the remedies mentioned earlier to prevent bleeding from an artery.
Apply a styptic poultice to the area to harden it and promote healing. Continue treating the wound with other remedies until it has healed completely.
It is important to extract the correct amount of blood from each person based on their vitality and the color of their blood as it appears.
If the blood is dark, let it flow until it becomes red; if it appears thick, let it continue to flow until it thins out; and if it is flowing too quickly, let it continue to flow until its speed decreases. This will ensure that you extract the correct amount of blood based on each person's individual needs and characteristics.
If a person is overweight and needs to have blood extracted, then the incision in the vein should be larger and deeper so that sufficient blood can be removed.
If a person is weak and needs to have blood extracted, then the incision should be smaller and more shallow, and made in multiple locations to prevent excessive bleeding.
The most effective method of venesection is a transverse incision, not a puncture wound.
This method of venesection is safer because it prevents excessive bleeding and nerve damage, and is more desirable and safe than making an incision along the length of the vein.
If someone is prone to fainting after venesection, you should treat them beforehand with a piece of bread soaked in either milk and honey or oxymel that has been warmed slightly, and extract the blood in three or four stages. This will help prevent fainting by gradually reducing their vitality.
If the person is of a cold and moist constitution, they should take bread soaked in an electuary made with myrrh or honey flavored with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar herbs, or in a fragrant and aromatic electuary before venesection. This will help warm the body and prevent any adverse effects from the blood loss.
If fainting occurs during venesection due to excessive bleeding, then the person should drink a mixture of meat broth and fragrant electuary, and use aromatics such as aloe or myrrh to help stop the bleeding. They should also apply a compress soaked in the same fragrant electuary to their forehead to further aid in recovery.
In addition, use the other methods of treatment for fainting that I mentioned in the chapter on this topic, specifically those involving evacuation of the body. This may include purgatives or enemas to help remove excess blood and restore balance to the system.
For those who wish to lighten their arms and thin their blood gradually, it is recommended that they undergo venesection in stages, with small amounts of blood removed on consecutive days, based on the individual's level of weakness. This will help restore balance to the system and prevent any adverse effects from excessive bleeding.
However, for those who wish to lighten their arms and thin their blood in two stages, and have strong constitutions, it is recommended that they undergo venesection again after seven or nine hours have passed since the initial incision. This will allow sufficient time for the body to recover from the first session while still providing enough stimulation to promote further evacuation of waste products.
However, for those who wish to draw blood from their body in the opposite direction of its natural flow, it is recommended that they undergo venesection on the second or third day after the initial incision. This will help prevent any adverse effects from excessive bleeding and ensure proper balance in the system.
However, for those with a body that already has too much blood and is overheated, causing fever, it is recommended to remove a large amount of blood in one session, making the incision larger and deeper than usual until fainting occurs. This will help restore balance to the system and prevent further complications. However, it is important to follow all necessary precautions during venesection, including monitoring vital signs and applying pressure to the site after the procedure to prevent excessive bleeding. Negligent or inexperienced practitioners may cause death instead of fainting if they do not take proper care.
It is not advisable to apply excessive force or bend the arm when trying to draw blood from a clotted vein that is difficult to penetrate. Doing so can cause damage to the vein and potentially lead to infection or other complications. Instead, it is recommended to use gentle pressure and make multiple small incisions if necessary to ensure proper blood flow. This will help prevent any adverse effects from excessive bleeding and ensure proper balance in the system.
If the vein is clogged and it becomes difficult to extract blood, you can wait until later to perform a second venesection or use the initial incision to continue drawing blood as needed. You can also apply a styptic agent such as alum or tyracium alfarach to help coagulate any excess bleeding. Finally, you can gently press on the area with a compress soaked in sage tea to help promote healing and prevent infection.
And if the vein is inflamed, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided.
And if necessity requires you to bleed the patient a second time and it is not excused, then bleed that person on the same location or on the other arm in another vein.
And the vein called "funis of the arm" is to be punctured in place of the cubital or basilic vein when they cannot be found or are hidden, because it is made up of those.
And the quality of the venesection is that the patient places their hand in warm water until the vein appears distinctly and the puncture site becomes red.
And then tie it off tightly above the incision with a ligature of medium size; and then perform the venesection crosswise, not longitudinally or laterally.
And make the incision wide and perform the venesection shallowly on the joint of the hand, making only a small cut.
And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then immerse your hand in warm water and allow the blood to run into the water until you have achieved your necessary amount.
But if you are in the summer days, then you are excused from immersing your hand in warm water, and instead, immerse the body of the patient in warm water during wintertime to stop the bleeding.
And the venesection of this vein is safer than that of all other veins, because below it there is no pulsating vein or nerve.
And the venesection of the cephalic vein in the right hand is appropriate for diseases of the liver.
And the quality of the venesection is that you tie off the hand tightly with a ligature or your own hand, having placed it in warm water until the vein becomes engorged and distinctly visible; then make the incision crosswise, and if it should go too deep, it will not harm anything.
Take care not to injure your hand with the venesection, because below it are nerves that are stripped of flesh.
And then immerse your hand in warm water and allow the blood to run into it, because if you do not immerse it in warm water, the blood will coagulate in the opening of the vein and flow will be prohibited.
And when the necessary amount of blood has been extracted, then apply oil and salt to the vein to prevent it from closing up prematurely; similarly, it is appropriate to do this in every straight vein.
But the benefit of venesection from the left hand is that it is appropriate for diseases of the spleen.
And do similarly in this venesection as you have done in the other one.
And the benefit of venesection from the saphenous vein is for diseases in the lower part of the body, such as those of the womb, and retention of menstrual flow, and diseases of the thighs and old ulcers on the hips and legs, and similar ailments.
And the quality of the venesection is that the patient places their foot in warm water and massages it until the veins become visible; then tie a band around the ankle, and the location of the vein should be marked with your finger, and from there its branches extend across the surface of the foot in many directions.
Therefore, make the incision in a wide branch below the knee, towards the calf, because that is better and safer.
And if you perform the venesection on the surface of the foot, then be careful of the nerves that are below it, and make your incision crosswise with a sharp blade as if you wanted to cut through it.
And let the venesections be few.
But if the flow of blood is prohibited, then immerse the patient's foot in warm water and allow the blood to run into it until it has been evacuated.
And if the lancet errs in its first pass, then make another pass with it close by, because that location is safe; but do not be concerned about damaging the vein, only take care to avoid the nerves as we have said.
And similarly, do the same with the saphenous vein in the other foot.
And the location of the sciatic vein is as we have said, below the calf in the lower wilderness area.
And the benefit of venesection from this location is for pain in the hip caused by congealed blood.
And the quality of the venesection is that the patient enters a bath and binds their leg with a long thin band around the calf above the ankle, causing it to swell slightly but not visibly.
And therefore when the vein appears, then make the incision according to your ability and crosswise, which is better; or cut through it with a sharp blade or cut it with a dry blade, because the location is safe.
And in most men it is rather narrow; and if you find that vein and do not perceive its entirety, then make the incision on a branch of it, and that is the one that appears on the back of the foot near the auricular and anular joints.
And be careful of the nerves, and allow the blood to flow in the quantity that you desire.
And then release the ligature and place your hand over the site of the venesection, applying pressure to it, because it will heal lightly.
Regarding cupping and the qualities of using those:
Cupping glasses can be used for corns (hardened layers of skin), inflammation or pain. The heat and suction created by the cup can help to draw out impurities, increase blood flow, and promote healing in the affected area.
Cupping can be performed in two ways: one way is with scarification and bloodletting, and the other way is without scarification.
The cupping method that is performed without scarification can also be done in two ways: with fire or without fire.
There are 14 locations on the body where cups can be applied with scarification and bloodletting, including:
Cupping does not extract blood from large veins, but rather from small capillaries dispersed in the flesh, and therefore it does not have the same effect as venesection, which is more direct. Additionally, cupping should not be performed with fire or without fire in any disease caused by congestion until the body has been completely evacuated.
However, if necessity requires cupping for illness or congestion, it should be administered at the beginning of each month and at the end of it, as well as in the middle and at various times throughout.
Therefore, when any of the aforementioned conditions are present, and particularly during the third or middle of the month, it is recommended that cupping be performed at least two or three hours after sunrise.
The benefit of cupping on the neck is that it helps alleviate heaviness in the head and promotes drainage from the ears, but it's important to note that this should be part of a larger effort to promote overall detoxification and evacuation of the body. Cupping on the neck can help stimulate circulation and lymphatic flow, which can aid in the removal of toxins and waste products from the body. However, cupping alone is not sufficient to address underlying health issues or promote long-term wellness.
And this incision is in the place of bloodletting of the cephalic vein. (The cephalic vein is a superficial vein in the arm, and "bloodletting" was a common medical practice in medieval times to try to cure various ailments.)
And it is not permitted for someone with leprosy or a catarrh to use it (the incision), as it would cause great harm to them. (Leprosy and catarrh were medical conditions in medieval times - leprosy was a chronic infectious disease, and catarrh referred to inflammation of the mucous membranes, often associated with colds or allergies.)
And for that reason, it is not appropriate for the elderly or those with frail constitutions to use this incision. (The phrase "for that reason" suggests that the reason for not using the incision on certain people has already been mentioned in the text.)
But for someone whose attention is focused solely on the incision, it is necessary to instruct the phlebotomist to move their hand away from the incision slightly after making it, in order to prevent unconsciousness (or "the generation of oblivion"). (The word "phlebotomist" refers to a medical professional who performs bloodletting.)
But venesection (or bloodletting) on the humeral vein is done in the location of the basilic and fusca veins: and for that reason it is used to treat asthma, and constriction of the throat, and chest pain, and cough, and bloating. (The "humeral vein" refers to a large vein located in the upper arm, while the "basilic vein" is another name for the cephalic vein mentioned earlier. The "fusca vein" may refer to a superficial vein on the forearm or leg.)
And it is necessary to pull out the humeral incision slightly, as placing it too low can cause weakness in the body and stomach. (The phrase "pull out" may refer to making the incision less deep or removing the needle used for bloodletting.)
And venesection (or bloodletting) on the temple is used to treat accidental pains in the head, eye diseases, migraines, dizziness, and toothaches; and it is done in the location of the basilic vein. (The "temple" refers to a region of the skull on either side of the forehead.)
And it is necessary to instruct the phlebotomist not to press their hand too hard during incision, as this can cause the artery to be punctured and lead to excessive bleeding. (The word "incision" here likely refers to the act of making a small cut or opening in the skin.)
And venesection (or bloodletting) below the chin is used to treat halitosis in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar ailments in the mouth; and it is done in the location of the aliheric veins that are located on the two lips. (The word "aliheric" may be a variant spelling of "aliquid", which means "something" or "anything" in Latin, but its meaning here is unclear.)
But venesection (or bloodletting) on the two "spatulas" (possibly referring to the ears or some other body part) is used to treat headaches caused by an excess of heat in the body. (The word "caphatan" may be a variant spelling of "cephalalgia", which means "headache" in Latin.)
And venesection (or bloodletting) on the two sides of the temples is used to treat the same conditions as bloodletting from three veins - namely, the cephalic, basilic and fusca veins - because it draws blood from all those veins that are more numerous and smaller than the larger ones, and helps the blood flow to reach all three veins. (The word "focils" here likely refers to the temples or some other body part.)
And instruct the phlebotomist not to proceed too far in making incisions, as the location is exposed and vulnerable, with nerves and arteries just beneath the surface of the skin. (The word "scarificacio" here likely refers to the act of making multiple small cuts or incisions.)
And this is the venesection (or bloodletting) that is performed on the hips, and it is used to treat hemorrhoids in the buttocks and ulcers located below. (The word "alshosses" here likely refers to the hips or some other body part.)
And it is necessary to instruct the phlebotomist to use a large incision, and that it be made with iron, as this location requires a deep cut; and light, subtle incisions should not be used, but rather those made with scarification. (The word "eram" here likely refers to iron or some other metal used in medical instruments.)
But venesection (or bloodletting) on the ribs should be performed with great care and precision, as it draws blood from all over the body, and is used to treat chronic pains in the lungs, chest, and bladder; and it induces menstruation, and is used to treat bloating and other ailments. It is done in the location of the two "sophonas" (possibly referring to veins located near the ribs), as well as the alahorcoben and two clavicles. (The meaning of the word "alahorcoben" here is unclear, but it may refer to a specific location on the body.)
However, this type of venesection (or bloodletting) can greatly weaken the entire body and cause fainting spells in some individuals.
And the benefit of venesection (or bloodletting) on the clavicles is similar to that of venesection on the ribs. (The word "alahorcoben" here likely refers to veins located near or in the clavicles.)
And the quality of the positioning for venesection (or bloodletting) is that the incision should be placed at the beginning of the vein and gradually increased in size through careful suction; it should not be prolonged, but rather gently released and left to heal on its own, allowing the humors to flow naturally to the site. And do not stop repeating this process and continuing until you see the area become red, swollen, and notice the appearance of blood flowing from the incision.
And then you should make small incisions with a scalpel and gradually increase suction, while paying close attention to the disposition of the body's organs. (The word "dispozicio" here likely refers to the arrangement or placement of internal organs in relation to the location of the incision.)
For a person with tender skin and a tendency to bruise easily, you should make only one incision and not more, in order to prevent the area from becoming ulcerated. (The word "tendra" here likely means "soft" or "delicate", while "rars pors" may refer to someone who is prone to bruising.)
And instruct the phlebotomist to widen and deepen the incision slightly, while performing suction with gentle ease. (The word "amplifique" here likely means "to make wider", while "pronde" may mean "deep". The phrase "atempre la succio am facilitat" suggests that suction should be performed carefully and gently.)
And if the blood is thick, then you should make two incisions, as the first incision will open up the pathway for the subtle suction of both the blood and its watery component. (The word "grossitut" here likely means "thick", while "subtiliacio" may mean "refined" or "delicate". The phrase "a la aquositat de lu" suggests that the second incision will help to remove any excess fluid from the site.) But in the second incision, you should seek out and ensure the complete removal of thickened blood. (The word "perscrutacio" here likely means "search" or "examination", while "extraccio" means "removal". The phrase "del sanc gros" suggests that the focus of this second incision is to remove any remaining thick clots.)
And if the blood is very viscous, then a third incision should be made to ensure that all of it has been removed. (The word "feculent" here likely means "viscous" or "sticky", while "derier" may mean "remaining". The phrase "sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada" suggests that the third incision should be made carefully and with precision.)[1](https://www.definitions.net/definition/feculent)
And finally, when you want to extract the blood gradually or in small amounts, one incision will suffice. (The phrase "abasta a nos" means "is enough for us", while "pauc a pauc" suggests that only a small amount of blood needs to be removed.)
And if you want to extract a large amount of blood, make multiple incisions; and if you know that the blood is thick, then it is necessary to make deep incisions. (The word "mot" here likely means "many" or "multiple", while "preonda" may mean "deep". The phrase "scarificacio preonda" suggests that these deeper incisions should be made with care and precision.)
And the depth of the incision should only reach as deep as the skin's surface, no further. (The word "codena" here likely means "skin". The phrase "le terme de scarificacio" suggests that this is a description of the proper technique for making incisions in venesection.)[1](https://www.definitions.net/definition/scarificacion)
And if the person's skin is thick, tough, dark, and their pores are tight, then it is necessary to apply a liberal amount of soothing and widening oil to the locations where the incisions will be made; if it is summertime, use aloe or violet oil, or oil from double nuts, or cemensa de coja; and if it is wintertime, use narcissus oil, lily oil, chamomile oil, blood or similar oils. (The phrase "untatz lenitius" means "apply soothingly", while "apertius resolutius" means "open and widening". The word "cove" means "it is necessary". The phrase "locs de las ventosas" means "places for incisions". The word "dossas" means "double". The phrase "cemensa de coja" may refer to an oil made from the nut of a certain type of tree, possibly a walnut or almond. The word "narci" may be a misspelling of "narcissus".)
And if the excess is thick and coarse, then use oils such as marjoram oil, balsamita oil, aloe oil, or anise oil. (The word "superfluitat" means "excess", likely referring to the thickness and coarseness of the skin. The phrase "amaranti" is a variant spelling of "amaranth", which refers to a type of plant with red or purple flowers. The word "balsamita" may refer to a type of aromatic herb, while "aneti" means "dill".)
But if the phlebotomist has wide pores and tender skin, then it is forbidden to use oil, and instead, these locations for incisions should be washed with water or with cold solar water, or with water from coja (possibly a type of tree), or with borderla waters, etc.
And for someone whose blood has a lot of moisture, wash their incisions with sour wine or water from myrtle and sumac, and similar to those.
And for someone whose superfluities are thick, wash their incisions with old wine or water from sansuc (sage), which is majoram, or from the decoction of dill, or from chamomile, and similar to those.
And it is necessary that the venesection be performed before bathing; it is necessary to administer it immediately after bathing for an hour or two, and it is necessary to sleep soon after the venesection.
What is it that a venesection patient or phlebotomist must do before venesection?
It is necessary to consider at the beginning: if the phlebotomist or the one who is to be bled is choleric and has sharp and inflamed blood, then it is necessary for them to take cooling agents, such as sour grapes, endive in vinegar and lettuce, scabious, julep, and similar things.
And they should eat foods such as poultry, game birds, and dishes seasoned with vinegar, and similar things.
And for those who have a cold constitution, it is appropriate to give them to drink theriac of alivivia, or theriac of alsecanabin of seeds, and sumac, and middle-aged wine with a strong odor; and let it be recommended to him to use moderation in drinking and eating, and avoid foods that are hot and spicy, and peas, and cakes, and small birds and pigeons.
And it is appropriate that on the day of bloodletting and phlebotomy, they drink more than they eat.
And it is appropriate to give some men to drink theriac of alpharac or medicine of musk, that is muscada or alcelita before bloodletting or phlebotomy, or soon after, so that the principal members are strengthened and the blood is refined; and they should not take those scalefacts.
But the bloodletting that is by scraping should be done by making incisions on the liver, and above the spleen and gout, and above the navel, in the locations of the joints, and the bladder of the loins, because these members do not tolerate scraping on them.
And it is not desirable for those to be done who need withdrawal of blood from a member, such as making an incision on the breast in illness of blood flow from the blood of the nose; and they use that so that the cold and condensed windiness of the member is dissolved, such as making an incision on the stomach and navel; for that rarefies the member and scrapes it, and removes pain which resolves windiness.
And it is already done on the tonsils when they become inflamed or swollen, because by virtue of strong and light withdrawal, it removes inflammation and eradicates swelling from its place.
And similarly, it does when it is done on the liver and spleen for windiness that is contained in them.
And these bloodlettings are administered using only suction, and some times they are administered with fire.
And sometimes, they are administered full of thick water in illnesses of the spleen.
And that is because the bloodletting cup should be full and larger, that is to say warm water alone or water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
Form of bloodletting administered with fire: let the width of the orifice be the size of two fingers, as we have made it; and let the quantity of the vacuum be the measure of a palm; and let it be in its place, in the location that is in the circuit, the measure of it, the opening be small according to the quantity that enters it, the size of a needle.
Let it be made of iron or citrus tree, with thick edges, lion-shaped, curved and smooth, so that it does not harm the member in its position on it.
And let there be a horizontal bar of iron or of steel in the middle of it, where a candle with fire is placed.
And let this bloodletting cup be much larger than the one that we have recommended; and the smaller one according to the illnesses and the state of the person who uses it.
And the bloodletting cups for infants and weak people are different than those for young people and sturdy bodies.
And the way to place this bloodletting cup with fire on the member is that one should extend a piece of wood with fire decently in front of a small candle of wax, and place it in the middle of the horizontal bar in the middle of the bloodletting cup, so that the fire is lit around the edge, so as not to burn the skin of the patient.
And then it should be placed on the member of the patient, and the finger should be over the opening that we have mentioned, until when we have the bloodletting cups and do not need to press the finger and the vapor rises over that opening, at that time the bloodletting cup will be dissolved immediately.
And then ignite the piece of wood in its way, and repeat that if you need to do so.
But in the bloodletting that is administered in the illness of pleurisy, with water, without a horizontal bar or opening, and it is not administered except by filling it with water, and placing it on the member only.
And this is the form of it: And this bloodletting cup, the larger it is, the better it is, so that it can receive a large quantity of water.
Capital Chapter 97.
Leeches are not administered on many members, but only on those in which there is no possibility of placing bloodletting cups due to their small size, such as the foot and gums and similar ones; or on a member denuded of flesh, such as the finger and nose and similar ones.
And the way to use those that, if you have found leeches in clean muddy waters.
And let them be left in dirty water day and night until they are hungry, and there remains no food in their stomachs; and let the body be evacuated at the beginning with bloodletting and bloodletting cups; and let the member of the patient be rubbed until it becomes red; and then place them on it.
And when they are full and satiated.
And if it is possible to apply suction to the area with a bloodletting cup, it is more beneficial in treatment.
And if not, then wash the area with sour wine and then rinse it with plenty of water; and rub it and express it.
And if the course of bleeding from the leeches is prolonged, and it is dripping, then take a cloth soaked in cold water, and place it over it until the dripping stops.
And if the bleeding is excessive, then sprinkle vitriol trissat or other styptic powders on it until the bleeding stops; or place over the area dry beans that have been cooked, and let them adhere to the area until the bleeding stops.
And it is appropriate, if necessary, to repeat bloodletting, when it is possible to change those (leeches).
And if the use of leeches is forbidden, then either make an incision on the area to cause fresh bleeding or insert a needle in the spots where blood can be drawn; and let them (the incisions/needle) be covered, because leeches will detach as soon as they sense that blood has been drawn.
And when you want them (leeches) to fall off, dust a little bit of aloe powder, or salt, or ashes on them, and they will detach immediately.
Thus begins the third section: On Restoration. This chapter is very important in the medical art, and it concerns the restoration of bone fractures and dislocations caused by accidents.
Oh, my son, know that the foolish doctors and uneducated people boast about this chapter, those who have never looked at the books of the Ancients nor read a single letter from them.
Therefore, this knowledge has been lost in our land, and I have never forgotten it throughout my life; nor have I relied on recent teachings but instead through long study of the ancient books and understanding of them, extracted the science from them.
And let me guide you with my experience and study throughout my life.
I have already described in this chapter everything that my science contains and what I have experimented with, so that I may summarize it for you and free myself from the task of lengthy explanations; I have summarized it at the end in a summary form, and demonstrated it through clear descriptions, as well as shown various forms of instruments used in this treatment, just like I did in the two preceding chapters.
First Chapter: [This is the start of a new section or topic in the medical treatise.]
Summary and collections on the nature of bone fractures: on those that require preliminary discussion before we begin to remember the various parts and types of each one. Therefore, it is appropriate to state at the beginning of this chapter the summaries of my discussion and the chapters that require understanding beforehand. The practitioner must be well-versed in these topics and stand firm on their truth, so that you and those who learn this noble art from you may have a solid foundation.
And so I say that when you come across a fracture or dislocation or sprain or injury, it is necessary to first consider phlebotomy (bloodletting) or lancing the affected area, or both if no contrary cause forbids it, such as debility of strength, or if it's an infant, elderly person, or during a time of intense heat, cold, or other extreme conditions. [Please note that medical advice has changed since medieval times, and these practices may not be recommended today.]
And let them be satisfied with light meals of fresh herbs and bird meats and crustaceans; and prohibit heavy foods and overfilling oneself with rich and fatty foods, which can cause the veins to fill with blood, until you are certain that there is no danger of abscess. And if there is no concern for effusion (leakage) of matter in the limb. [Please note that modern medical advice may vary.]
And then return the patient to their usual diet and habits, as is customary for them.
And so when the broken bone begins to heal, it is important that the patient eat nutritious foods that are rich and heavy with viscosity, such as wheat-based dishes cooked in water, rice, peas, cow's udder, marrow, fresh fish, thick wine, and similar foods. With this diet, the healing of the fracture will be quicker and better. [Please note that modern medical advice may vary.]
And know that bones broken in the elderly and very young cannot be healed and consolidated according to their nature due to the dryness of their limbs. [Please note that modern medical advice may vary.]
Nonetheless, nature often provides a natural course of healing to the fractured bone by adding flesh around the site of the break, causing it to adhere and strengthen together until they become one, firm union, just like in the case of fire that slowly but surely solidifies materials together, unless some other factor prevents this from happening. [Please note that modern medical advice may vary.]
And for this reason, it is necessary to restrict the patient's diet, avoiding heavy, viscous and fatty foods as we mentioned earlier. [Please note that modern medical advice may vary.]
And know that the types of fractures differ according to the diversity of bones, for a broken leg bone is different from a broken skull bone; and a broken arm bone is different from a broken spine bone; and similarly, all other bones have their own unique characteristics and considerations.
I will now present a detailed description of each type of fracture, separated into its own chapter.
Many types of fractures based on their unique characteristics. There are various types of bone fractures in and of themselves, such as:
And for each type of fracture, there is a specific and unique healing process that will be discussed in detail later.
Signs of bone fracture. [Here are some general signs of bone fractures:](https://www.orthoinfo.org/topic/symptoms-of-a-fracture) Here are some signs of bone fracture as mentioned in the text:
And therefore, if there is no visible deformity or abnormal shape and when you touch the bone with gentle movement it does not cause significant pain to the patient, then it is likely that it's not a fracture.
It is possible that the bone has a slight deformity or hairline fracture, so you should not manipulate it with force and compression. Instead, apply gentle pressure and administer medication appropriate for the location as needed, while also immobilizing it with a fine bandage or splint to restrict movement. [Read more](https://www.orthoinfo.org/topic/first-aid-for-fractures)
And know that when the bone is bent but not broken in two or in any other way, such as a bowed shape where the entire portion of the bone is intact, then it is necessary to start correcting its position immediately, provided there is no danger of infection or abscess. [Please note that modern medical advice may vary.]
And if an abscess or infection develops, then you should wait for several days until the infection subsides before attempting to straighten it, while also providing gentle and appropriate care and treatment in the meantime. [Please note that modern medical advice may differ.]
And know that healing a fracture with dislocation is easier and quicker than one with a complete break in the bone. [Please note that modern medical advice may vary.]
And strengthen it as will be discussed in the following memory of it.
However, if the bone is completely shattered, then it is necessary to extend the broken limb by pulling apart its two halves using your hands for small limbs or ropes for larger ones, while supporting the other end with your hand or another rope. This will help realign and hold the broken bones in their correct position during healing. [Please note that modern medical advice may differ.] [Read more](https://www.orthoinfo.org/topic/first-aid-for-fractures)
And ensure that your position is correct and aligned with the natural shape of the limb, while extending the broken parts to their full length. Then, apply gentle traction and manipulation to bring the fractured pieces back into place in their proper locations as best you can. [Please note that modern medical advice may differ.]
And be careful to not cause further pain or harm to the patient through your manipulation, and try to align the broken bones as closely as possible using your skills and strength. [Please note that modern medical advice may differ.]
And it is important to gently touch the affected area with your hand and make any necessary adjustments to ensure proper alignment. Apply appropriate pressure and manipulation as needed, based on your judgement and skill level. [Please note that modern medical advice may differ.]
And avoid excessive stretching and compression, as foolish doctors often cause abscess or contracture through their rough handling, which we have seen many times in their operations. [Please note that modern medical advice may differ.]
And the quality of the restraint or immobilization for the injured limb should be as I have described, because you should know that bones can vary in size and shape, from small to large and from straight to curved, which affects how they should be treated and immobilized. [Please note that modern medical advice may differ.]
And for small bones such as those in the arms and fingers, it is appropriate to use a wrapping made of fine cloth or fabric.
However, for larger bones such as the thigh or shin, it is necessary to use a thicker and harder wrapping, because this type of padding firmly holds the large bone in place, while also providing stability and protection against external forces. This will prevent any damage to the fragile and delicate healing tissues within the limb. [Please note that modern medical advice may differ.]
And then begin the process of alignment and straightening by pausing appropriately at the site of the fracture with three or four layers of wrapping around it, depending on the size of the limb, while holding the wrapping firmly but gently in place with your hand. [Please note that modern medical advice may differ.]
And then move upwards to the upper part of the fracture site and apply less tension than you used when securing the area below the break. This will help maintain proper alignment and prevent excessive compression or force on the fragile bone fragments, which can cause further damage or delay healing. [Please note that modern medical advice may differ.] [Read more](https://www.orthoinfo.org/topic/first-aid-for-fractures) And then slowly extend the wrapping around the site of the break, gradually loosening the tension as you go, until you have covered a large portion of it. This will help to secure and align the broken bones while also allowing for some movement and flexibility in the surrounding tissues. [Please note that modern medical advice may differ.] [Read more](https://www.orthoinfo.org/topic/first-aid-for-fractures)
And then take another bandage and wrap it around the site of the break, covering it with additional layers of wrapping. Then, extend the wrapping downwards beyond the fracture site. Your technique in wrapping and loosening should be consistent with what has been previously described for the first layer of wrapping. [Please note that modern medical advice may differ.]
And then between the layers of wrapping, place a piece of soft leather or cloth that is folded to help straighten out any curvature in the fracture if present. If not, do not add any extra material. [Please note that modern medical advice may differ.] [Read more](https://www.orthoinfo.org/topic/first-aid-for-fractures)
And apply another bandage, and then cover it with properly made sterile coverings immediately, if there is no abscess or inflammation in the area, and then apply it to the abscess if there is one and drain the inflammation; and leave that in place for several days; and then strengthen the area with the starings.
And let the star-shaped bandages be made of split cane or any type of wood, or from palm leaves, and let the width of each bandage be according to this shape and form:
However, it is necessary that the star-shaped bandage placed over the fracture be thicker and wider by a small amount than the other bandages, and let the length of the strip correspond to the size of the limb; and then strengthen the strips with another bandage according to your first binding; and then bind it on top with a proper amount of string according to what we have said about binding, and it should be tightened according to the location of the fracture, and the tighter it is bound, the further it is from the fracture.
And it is necessary that the threads be medium in thickness and fineness, and be made of linen; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen in some foolish individuals who use cords instead of thread during surgery, this is a great error, because an equal tightness cannot be achieved.
And fine threads are not appropriate either, because you will not be able to achieve the desired tightness with them, and it is not necessary for there to be less than a finger's width between each star-shaped bandage.
And if the patient is harmed by the ends of the star-shaped bandages during tightening in certain areas, then place a piece of soft leather or red wool under it to prevent injury.
Some types of fractures are associated with infections, and this can lead to disruption of the tendons; I will discuss this type of fracture in a separate chapter according to its uniqueness.
And know that not all fractured limbs can be bound with star-shaped bandages on the first day; this is because when the limb is large, it is not necessary to apply the bandages immediately but rather after 5 or 7 days, depending on your confidence in the prevention of inflammation.
And this is the method of using plasters which the Ancients used to apply on fractures, dislocations and sprains.
Here is a method of plaster used for the healing of fractures, suitable for many complex cases and especially for women and children, as it does not generate heat or friction: take some powdered flour, which is the inner part of the grain that remains after being ground in the mill.
And prepare it as follows: sift the flour with beaten egg whites and apply a thick but not fine mixture of it, and use that.
Another way of making an ointment to heal fractures, dislocations, and twists: take one drachma each of assafoetida, ladanum, acacia, elecampane, and wild marjoram; five drachmas each of myrrh and aloe; twenty drachmas of oil of roses; grind and sift them all, then mix with rose water or egg white if the patient's complexion is delicate. Use this ointment, for it has a good composition and heals broken bones lightly, and benefits many people.
Another way of making an ointment that benefits fractures and twists: take one drachma each of marjoram, white mallow, myrrh, and aloe; six drachmas of acacia; and twenty drachmas of Armenian bole.
Let all the ingredients be crushed in a mortar with moderate force, then sifted and mixed with water or egg whites, and then administered.
Here is another method of plaster for joints and bones that have become separated from their places, causing pain and leading to fissures and fractures: take clean wool, soak it in vinegar and olive oil, and then apply it to the affected area.
However, this plaster does not have the virtue of healing inflammation or expelling pain directly but it can alleviate symptoms and promote recovery.
Here is another method of plaster for healing broken bones: take leaves from a wild poppy tree and a fig tree, crush them and make a plaster out of them.
Here is a quick method of plaster for healing fractured bones and promoting resolution of the remaining inflammation after pus has been drained: take equal parts of meadowsweet, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, wheat flour, all mixed together in one part. Let all the ingredients be crushed and mixed with wine if the limb is not weak or injured.
However, if the limb is weak or injured, then prepare it with water from crushed elderberries or plain water and use that instead.
Here is another method of plaster that is stronger and more effective for resolving abscesses during the healing process of a fractured limb: take equal parts of meadowsweet, lily seeds, balm of Gilead, melilot, marjoram, violet flowers, and chamomile flowers; crush all the ingredients together and mix them with water from a hazelnut tree or plain water or wine, depending on the strength of the limb and the color of its complexion.
However, Hippocrates wrote in his book that a wax plaster should be applied to the fractured limb during its healing process, made from beeswax and oil, and nothing else; and he recommended that it should be medium in thickness and fineness.
However, Galen observed that plasters made from drying agents with moderate heat should be applied to the fractured limb during its healing process, similar to myrrh, resins, and other substances with similar properties; these are some of the methods that have been recommended before.
Here is a method of plaster that can help with injury and pain: take half as much myrrh as each of the following ingredients: human hair or bird feathers, meadowsweet, and salt; crush and sift them together and make a plaster.
However, the amount of time that the plaster should remain on and then be removed depends on whether there is pain or inflammation, or if the bone is broken or out of place; if none of these conditions are present, then it can be left on for many days. And if there is severe pain or inflammation at the site, then remove the plaster immediately and replace it with a new one.
And take a piece of clean cloth and a wet marine sponge, soak them in warm water and use them to gently wash the affected area until the swelling goes down and the pain is relieved; then let the limb rest for an hour; and then place a clean wool compress soaked in vinegar or rose oil on it, and leave it on for one night, ensuring that there is no inflammation or infection, and that the swelling of the limb has gone down, and that the pain has been relieved.
And then gradually tighten the binding with a thin and light plaster, not as tightly as before, but just enough to support the area until it is healed.
And if all signs of infection, redness, pain, swelling, and other symptoms have disappeared, and the wound is healed, then you can stop using the plaster and binding altogether, just as you did at the beginning.
And if there is no cause for concern with the limb, such as those mentioned before, then you should not remove the plaster and binding until 3 or 4 days, or up to a week. And sometimes it may be necessary to leave the plaster and binding on for up to 20 days, depending on your judgment of when the limb is ready to be released, as mentioned before, until the fracture has healed and the skin has begun to regenerate over it.
And then adjust to the greatest narrowing, more than your initial narrowing, and adjust to the swelling of the patient's food, according to what is prescribed for them.
But if you see that the site of the fracture has become dry and shrunken more than is appropriate, then know that nutrition is prohibited from reaching it. Therefore, soak it with warm water every time you change the bandage, for three days; and slightly reduce the tightness, so that nutrients can reach the member through this operation, and it will be healed lightly.
But what foolish restorers of fractured limbs often do when it is not restored at the beginning as it should be, and is instead restored crookedly, is a mistake according to their procedure and causes great fear. And if they had done it correctly from the start, they would have expanded the ancients' works in their free time and achieved more with their work.
And I have not seen any of them do this, which is all the more reason that they should not do it.
Chapter Two: On Fracture When it Occurs in the Head.
The types of fractures are many, and their shapes are diverse, and their causes are distinct. For some fractures are made by the impact of a blunt object that shatters the bone completely, which is located below the skin, just as it happens with a stick, and for this reason, this type is named "asciation". Or a blunt object penetrates a part of the bone, but does not penetrate beyond it, only affecting the flesh around it; this type of fracture is called "absolute elevation".
And the severity of these two types of fractures can be great or small, and there is also the type of fracture caused by concussion or abrasion. The cause of this type of fracture is impact with sand, gravel, or rock, among other things.
And this type of fracture can be penetrating, meaning it affects the layer of tissue beneath the skin, which is located below the bone, or it can be on the surface of the bone. The severity of these two types of fractures can also vary, being either great or small.
And there is also the type of fracture that occurs in the bone at the level of fine hair, and for this reason, it is named "capillary fracture".
And there is also the type of fracture that is caused by impact or pressure from stone or similar objects, causing a layer of bone to penetrate into the surrounding tissue. This type of injury occurs in concave areas, such as those found in the pelvis, and resembles the way that tile can crack and split when struck.
And this is most commonly seen in the bodies of warm-blooded animals, such as the heads of infants.
And all of these types of fractures are similar in that they resemble separated stars. And I will return with a summary of all of this in its place.
And we can recognize all of these types of fractures through examination and investigation of the injury, as well as by probing for signs of damaged tissue or decaying flesh that may be present.
And the capillary type of fracture can be recognized by the presence of a discoloration on the surface of the bone, which can be scraped away and appears black when probed with a probe or similar tool.
However, in the treatment of fractures, one should first consider the overall condition of the patient and their symptoms, such as vomiting due to colic or fever, or signs of delirium, loss of voice, fainting, acute fever, or swelling of the joints. If any of these symptoms are present, it is important not to proceed with treatment until they have been addressed and resolved.
And if there are no unusual symptoms present, then one can begin the healing process for the injury.
The reason for this is that if the patient has come to you with an injury in the early stages of development, especially during the winter months, then it is important to study the injury and assess its severity within the first 14 days of onset.
However, if the injury occurs during the summer months, then it is important to assess the injury and study the bone within seven days of onset. This is because any damage to the tissue beneath the skin may become corrupted more quickly in warmer weather, and it is essential to address any symptoms or complications that may arise as a result.
If the fracture has reached the tissue covering the brain and is made up of small, jagged fragments that have been crushed or ground down, then it is necessary to carefully remove these pieces using the techniques I will describe to you.
And you must carefully examine the patient's head and uncover any injury to the bone as is customary for you, according to your skill and ability based on the shape of the injury, ensuring that it is done gently and without causing further harm to the patient.
And if you encounter bone fractures, flow of blood or abscesses during your examination, then you must take appropriate action to address these issues before proceeding with treatment. This may involve applying dressing infused with vinegar and rose oil to the wound, allowing it to rest and heal before beginning any surgical procedures. Once the affected area is calm and stable, and there is no longer a risk of excessive bleeding, you can begin the process of cleaning and removing damaged tissue from the bone.
And this should be done in one of two ways:
The first method involves using a narrow-bladed scalpel to cut into the bone. Here is how it should be done:
And then apply a wider blade scalpel than the first one.
It is important to have a range of scalpels with different blade sizes, some wider than others and some narrower with sharp tips. These blades should be made of steel or iron.
And use them with ease in percussion on the scalpel, so that you do not damage the skull or harm the patient.
If the bone is strong and hard, then it is necessary to drill holes around its perimeter before using scalpels with long handles, which are called non-penetrating awls.
And these are not called by any other name, but rather because they do not penetrate the bone of the skull, which is why their ends are rounded or blunt, unlike those that are sharp and pointed, such as a small circle or ring, which prohibits them from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
It is appropriate to have a large number of these awls on hand, with each one suitable for the thickness of each bone, so that you always have an awl with a sharp end present in all areas of the skull, where the length and width are appropriate for the thickness of that particular skull.
Here is the method for three types of awls: The function of these awls is to drill into the circumference of the fractured bone. To do this, place the awl on the bone and rotate it using your fingers until you feel that the bone has been penetrated; then remove the awl and place it in another location, and repeat the process, leaving a space equal to the thickness of the drill bit or approximately that size.
And make incisions with a knife between each hole in the bone, and make the cut as fine as you can, as we have said, until you extract the bone or use your hand or any other instrument prepared for that, such as probes and tweezers.
And it is necessary that you exercise great caution so that the knife does not touch any part of the liver.
And once you have cut around the bone and separated it from the liver if it is attached to it, and extracted it, it is necessary to rasp and shape the surface of the bone with a tool similar to a knife but more slender and fine than the other knives.
And if some small and sharp pieces of bone remain, then gently take them out with the instrument that you have available; and then treat the wound with liniments and ointments as we have said.
The other method of operation is gentle and safe, called "Gualia," which people praise highly. And this is its description: it is necessary at the beginning for you to start revealing the fractured part of the bone in the location where the break is most severe and visible, until you have exposed that part and placed the blunt end of this knife slowly and gently, which has this shape:
And the lens-shaped part is thick and does not cut into any tissue, while the pointed part extends two finger widths along its length, as you can see; it is important that the lens-shaped part is fitted against the liver with the sharp edge pointing at the bone.
And then strike the knife on its blunt side with a small mallet until you cut through the bone easily and smoothly, while ensuring that the fatty tissue is not damaged in any way, and if the physician is the most foolish and ignorant of all men and even if he is asleep.
And if any piece of fatty tissue is still attached to the bone at certain points, then cut it off with the lens-shaped part of the knife and gently detach it from the bone, freeing it from harm or danger.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the fatty tissue, but only the surface of the bone has been cut off or part of it remains attached and sharp edges are left behind, then you need to scrape those rough surfaces and remove those sharp points with fine rasps that you have prepared in advance in various sizes, so that you can use the most appropriate ones depending on the location and shape of the fractured bone.
And you should start scraping the bone with the largest rasp and gradually use finer ones, without stopping until you have used the finest rasps on all parts of the bone.
But in smaller or hairline fractures, you should provide care according to the specific needs of each case and work towards correcting the problem.
And this is because not all of them have studied that art thoroughly. And we have shown in our writing how to treat major fractures.
And if the fatty tissue is retracted when you remove the bone, then take a piece of cloth according to the size of the wound and soak it in rose oil, and place it over the opening of the wound; then take another folded or tripled cloth and soak it in wine and rose oil and place it on top of the first cloth, doing this as gently as possible to avoid harming the liver; and then apply a moderate amount of lint to the area, but not too much, just enough to cover the wound.
And leave it with this care for a day or two until you are sure that there is no abscess present; then remove the dressing and apply medicines that alleviate excessive dryness, such as linseed and barley flour, and powdered aloes and colocynth, and similar remedies.
And you should make a powder of these medicines and sprinkle it over the wound, as long as they are dry; and in general, administer any medicine that has the property of drying and preventing biting or irritation.
And take care to ensure that the wound remains clean during your treatment, and do not allow it to become infected or develop any other problems; and make sure that no harmful substances accumulate in it, because if it is located near the brain's fatty tissue, it can cause harm and lead to serious consequences for the patient.
And if the liver in the head becomes damaged and the bone is exposed, especially when the care of the wound is neglected, and there is blackness on its surface; then consider whether the patient is experiencing any of the symptoms that we have mentioned, because this indicates a serious condition.
And if the blackness is not caused by damage but rather by the medicine that has been applied to it, and this is due to the properties of that medicine; then you should take one part honey and four parts rose oil. And soak a cloth in this mixture and place it over the liver; then care for the wound with appropriate spices until it is healed.
Chapter 3.
Of repairing a broken nose.
You should know that the nose is not broken but rather two pieces of bone are raised up together or one piece is displaced; this is because there are two bones in the nose, and only the part below is made of cartilage, which can be damaged and cause roughness, twisting, and bending.
If one of the two parts of it is broken, then you should insert the little stylet into its nostril and reduce the fracture inside with your finger and outside with the blunt end, until the nose returns to its natural shape. And do so in a way that is easy for you, and take care not to cause further pain or harm to the patient during your procedure.
And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and it cannot reach there, then it is necessary to make an incision with a small scalpel at the end of the corresponding bone.[Note: I'm assuming that "the upper part of the nose" refers to the nasal bones or cartilage, and "it cannot reach there" means that the splint or device used to reduce the fracture cannot be inserted far enough. The final sentence suggests making an incision with a small scalpel ("ray") at the end of the bone to allow for better access.]
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you should proceed in a similar way. (Note: This sentence suggests that the same general approach used for single-part fractures can be applied to multiple-part fractures as well.)
And attempt to restore it to its original state on the first day of the fracture, if possible; and if not, then approach it with care or leave it alone until the abscess has healed. (Note: This sentence advises the physician to try to reduce the fracture as soon as possible after it occurs, but also acknowledges that this may not always be feasible due to patient discomfort or other factors. In such cases, the physician is advised to wait until any related injuries or complications have healed before attempting further treatment.)[note: "the abscess has healed" is an interpretation of "le repaus del apostema", where "apostema" can refer to a localized collection of pus or other fluid, and "repaus" might mean either "rest" (in the sense of letting the injury heal on its own) or "removal" (in the sense of draining or removing the pus). I have opted for the former interpretation based on context.]
And insert a small piece of cloth into the nostril if the fracture is in one part, or two swabs if the fracture is in two parts, with each swab being large enough to fill the nasal passage. (Note: This sentence suggests using a small piece of fabric or gauze to help stabilize the fractured bone(s) and prevent further damage. In cases where the fracture involves multiple parts, two swabs may be used to provide additional support.)[note: "a meca" can refer to any small piece of cloth or fabric, while "calgua" is a term used in medieval medical texts to refer specifically to surgical swabs or bandages. The final phrase suggests that the size of each swab should be sufficient to fill the nasal passage and provide adequate support for the fractured bone(s).]
And I say, following the advice of ancient restorers, that the swabs should be soaked in broth and changed daily, but this is not what I advise; rather, it is better for the gauze to be soaked in album of egg white and powdered mallow, and then left in place until the bone has hardened and the cartilage has healed. (Note: This sentence advises against the traditional practice of using broth-soaked swabs to treat nasal fractures, instead recommending a mixture of egg white and ground mallow as a more effective alternative. The use of albumen and powdered mallow is said to promote healing and strengthen the affected bones and cartilage.)[note: "boder" can refer to any type of liquid or broth used for medical purposes, while "album de huou" refers specifically to egg white. "Moli" may refer to any type of powdered herb or medicinal substance, but in this context it likely refers to mallow (a type of plant commonly used in medieval medicine). The final phrase suggests leaving the gauze in place until the bone and cartilage have healed sufficiently, which may take several days or even weeks depending on the severity of the injury.]
And sometimes insert a piece of linen soaked in honey into the nose instead of a swab, especially if the fracture is severe and the patient has difficulty breathing. (Note: This sentence suggests using a small piece of cloth soaked in honey as an alternative to surgical swabs in cases where the nasal passage is severely blocked or damaged. Honey was commonly used in medieval medicine for its antiseptic and healing properties, and may have been applied here to help reduce inflammation and promote healing.)[note: "veguadas" can refer to any type of medical dressing or bandage, while "auca pus" is a term used in medieval medical texts to refer specifically to abscesses or other localized collections of pus. The final phrase suggests that this approach may be particularly useful in cases where the nasal fracture is so severe that the patient is unable to breathe through their nose, and may require additional support or intervention to ensure adequate airflow.][note: In my previous message I mistakenly translated "veguadas" as "swabs," when it should have been translated as "dressing" or "bandage." The correct translation of the sentence is provided here.]
And this method is not necessary for you to follow; and if you wish, do so, and if you wish, use swabs instead. (Note: This sentence suggests that the previous advice regarding the use of honey-soaked cloths is optional, and that the physician may choose to use surgical swabs or other dressings as they see fit.)
And if another abscess forms in the nose, apply a compress of wax or cotton soaked in vinegar and rose oil, or aloe. (Note: This sentence suggests several possible treatments for nasal abscesses, including the use of wax or cotton compresses soaked in a mixture of vinegar and rose oil, or aloe. These remedies may have been used to reduce inflammation and promote healing.)[note: "vi agre" can refer to any type of sour or acidic liquid, such as vinegar, while "coto" is a term used in medieval medical texts to refer specifically to cotton or other soft fibers. "Diaquilon" refers to aloe, which was commonly used in medieval medicine for its anti-inflammatory and healing properties.]
But if no abscess forms, then it is necessary to apply a poultice of cumin flour and ground nuts mixed with egg white, and place a soft cloth over it; and do not cover the nose with any other cause. (Note: This sentence suggests an alternative treatment for nasal injuries that does not involve the use of honey or swabs, instead recommending a poultice made from cumin flour and ground nuts mixed with egg white. The final phrase advises against covering the nose with anything else, such as a bandage or other dressing, to prevent further irritation or injury.)[note: "sizami" can refer to any type of spice or herb used for medicinal purposes, while "enses" may refer to any type of nut or seed. The final phrase suggests that the poultice should be allowed to dry on its own without being covered by any other dressing or bandage, which may help promote healing and reduce inflammation.]
But if the bones of the nose are broken or only slightly crushed, then it is necessary to cut across them and extract them with appropriate instruments; and then stitch the wound, and cure it with flesh-forming and consolidating substances, and with suitable poultices. (Note: This sentence suggests that in cases where the nasal bones are broken or severely damaged, more invasive treatment may be required to repair the injury. The use of "instruments" and "stitching" suggests that surgical intervention may be necessary, while "flesh-forming and consolidating substances" likely refers to various types of medical pastes or salves used to promote healing and tissue growth.)[note: "scindas" is a term used in medieval medical texts to refer specifically to cutting or incising the skin or flesh, while "insturmentz que conveno ad aquels" suggests that appropriate surgical instruments should be used to extract the broken bones. The final phrase again emphasizes the importance of using suitable poultices and other topical treatments to promote healing and reduce inflammation.]
And if a wound occurs inside the nose, then it is necessary to cure it with swabs and insert lead tubes until it has completely healed. (Note: This sentence suggests that in cases where an injury or infection occurs within the nasal passage, topical treatments such as swabs and medical pastes may be used to promote healing. The use of "lead tubes" ("canulas de plom") likely refers to small metal rods or cylinders inserted into the nose to help maintain its shape and prevent further injury or blockage.)[note: "plagua dedintz le nas" can refer to any type of wound or injury that occurs within the nasal passage, while "calguas" refers to medical swabs or dressings. The final phrase suggests that these treatments should be continued until the injury has completely healed, which may take several days or even weeks depending on its severity.]
Chapter IV
On the restoration of the jawbone when it is broken. (Note: This is the title of Chapter IV, which focuses on treatments for fractured or injured jawbones.)
When the jawbone is broken and there is no wound accompanying the fracture, then look to see if the fracture is only on the outside, and not divided into two parts but rather curved inward. If so, its healing will be easy. (Note: This sentence suggests that in cases where a jawbone fracture does not involve an open wound or other complications, the healing process may be relatively straightforward. The phrase "curved inward" likely refers to a situation where the broken ends of the bone are slightly overlapping or misaligned, but do not require surgical intervention to correct.)[note: "reguarda lahoras" can be translated as "look to see now," while "deforas" refers specifically to the outside surface of the body. The phrase "es curvada a las partidas dedintz" suggests that the broken ends of the bone are slightly overlapping or misaligned, but not separated by a wide gap or requiring surgical intervention to correct.]
And it is necessary, if the fracture is on the right side, that you insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth; and similarly, if the fracture is on the left side of the jawbone, then insert your right index finger. With this, gently press the swelling of the fracture inward toward the center of the bone with your other hand from outside the bone. Gradually guide it back into place with equal pressure from both sides. (Note: This sentence suggests a technique for manually realigning a jawbone fracture that does not involve surgical intervention or the use of medical instruments. The physician is instructed to insert their index finger into the patient's mouth on the side opposite the fracture, and then gently press the swelling or bulging associated with the injury back toward the center of the bone using both hands.)[note: "intrometas" can be translated as "insert," while "gilbositat" refers to any type of swelling or protrusion. The phrase "am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os" suggests that the physician should apply gentle but firm pressure to guide the broken ends of the bone back into place using both hands. The final phrase "equa aquelam" emphasizes the importance of aligning the broken ends evenly and symmetrically to promote proper healing.]
And if the jawbone fracture is already separated into two parts, then it is necessary to apply extension to both sides according to straightness as far as possible for the alignment of it. (Note: This sentence suggests that in cases where a jawbone fracture has resulted in complete separation of the broken ends, more invasive treatment may be required to realign and heal the injury. The use of "extension" ("extensio") likely refers to the application of traction or force to gradually pull the broken ends of the bone back into alignment.)[note: "segon rectitut" can be translated as "according to straightness," while "equacio de lu" suggests that the fractured bones should be realigned evenly and symmetrically. The final phrase "as far as possible" acknowledges that complete alignment may not always be achievable, depending on the severity of the injury or other factors.]
And if there is loosening of the teeth due to dislocation, then strengthen those which you hope will remain with gold or silver or lead wire; and place a wax seal over the broken jawbone, and place a folded cloth over it, and place a large soft compress made of several layers of gauze, or a sole-shaped pad of wood, over that. And then apply the splint to it in such a way as is appropriate for you, according to your equipment and the necessary application, until it is not destroyed. (Note: This sentence suggests several possible treatments for dislocated teeth resulting from jawbone fractures, including the use of gold or silver wire to help stabilize them. The final phrase "until it is not destroyed" emphasizes the importance of using appropriate splints and other medical devices to prevent further injury or damage.)[note: "strenh" can be translated as "strengthen," while "disrupcio" refers specifically to loosening or displacement of teeth. The phrase "fil de aur o de argent o de ceda" suggests that metal wires made of gold, silver, or lead may be used to help stabilize the affected teeth. The final phrase "la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida" emphasizes the importance of applying appropriate splints and other medical devices to prevent further injury or damage.]
And command the patient to rest and be still, and place a soft diet of easily chewed foods before them. (Note: This sentence suggests that in addition to medical treatments and interventions, rest and proper nutrition may also be important factors in the healing process for jawbone fractures or other injuries.)[note: "sorbicios leons" can be translated as "soft diet," while "easily chewed foods" might include items such as mashed vegetables, pureed meats, or cooked cereals.]
And if you estimate that the shape has been altered in some way, then you should examine and release it on the third day; and then correct what has been altered in it and apply a poultice of powdered herbs, egg white, or cumin flour, as long as you have removed the wax seal from it, and place wool over the poultice. (Note: This sentence suggests that careful monitoring and regular examination of jawbone fractures may be necessary to ensure proper healing and prevent complications such as misalignment or deformity. The use of "poultices" ("emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami") likely refers to various types of medical pastes or salves used to promote healing and reduce inflammation.)[note: "osstat le cerot de lu" can be translated as "remove the wax seal from it," while "lana leon" suggests a soft woolen cloth or bandage. The phrase "deslia aquel al tertz dia" emphasizes the importance of regular examination and monitoring of jawbone fractures to ensure proper healing and prevent complications.]
And once the poultice is attached and properly aligned with the bone, leave it in place until the fracture has healed and strengthened; for many times this fracture will be strong again in three weeks. (Note: This sentence suggests that jawbone fractures may require several weeks or even months to heal completely, depending on the severity of the injury and other factors. The use of poultices and other topical treatments may help promote healing and reduce inflammation during this time.)[note: "veguadas" can be translated as "many times," while "streyta en tres sempmanas" suggests that jawbone fractures typically require three weeks or more to heal completely. The phrase "sanat e strenh la fractura" emphasizes the importance of waiting until the fracture has fully healed and regained its former strength before removing any medical devices or bandages.]
And if another abscess occurs, then administer what we have said many times in the treatment of it until it is healed and the abscess has been resolved. (Note: This sentence suggests that jawbone fractures may be accompanied by other complications such as abscesses or infections, which may require additional medical treatments and interventions. The use of "what we have said many times" ("motas veguadas") emphasizes the importance of following established medical protocols and guidelines for treating these types of injuries and complications.)[note: "apostema caut" can be translated as "abscess," while "remaugut aquel apostema" suggests that the abscess has been resolved or eliminated. The phrase "sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat" emphasizes the importance of continuing medical treatments and interventions until the injury has fully healed.]
And if the fracture is accompanied by a wound, then consider whether it is a piece of bone separated from the rest or a jagged edge, and carefully determine what instruments are necessary for removing those pieces in the removal of them. (Note: This sentence suggests that in cases where jawbone fractures involve open wounds or other complications, careful consideration may be needed to determine the appropriate medical interventions and treatments. The use of "what is necessary" ("ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo") emphasizes the importance of using appropriate surgical instruments and techniques to remove any damaged or infected tissue from the wound.)[note: "satagias" can be translated as "jagged edge," while "remocio" suggests that the affected tissue may need to be removed through surgical intervention. The phrase "sturmentz" refers specifically to medical instruments used in surgery or other medical procedures.]
And if the opening of the wound is narrow, then you should widen it with a trepan or other appropriate surgical instrument according to your need. (Note: This sentence suggests that in cases where jawbone fractures involve open wounds or other complications, careful consideration may be needed to ensure adequate access for medical treatments and interventions. The use of "trepan" ("fleubotomi") likely refers to a type of surgical drill or bur used to widen the opening of a wound or create additional space for the insertion of medical instruments.)[note: "orrifici de la plagua" can be translated as "opening of the wound," while "amplifique" suggests that the wound should be enlarged or expanded. The phrase "segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat" emphasizes the importance of using appropriate surgical techniques and instruments to achieve the desired outcome without causing unnecessary harm or damage.]
And then when you have removed those jagged pieces and they cannot be restored, then stitch the opening of the wound if it is large; and if not, apply one of the poultices that are suitable for it and promote healing of the wound, until it has healed. (Note: This sentence suggests that in cases where jawbone fractures involve open wounds or other complications, careful attention may be needed to ensure proper healing and prevent infection or other complications. The use of "stitching" ("cos le orrifici de la plagua") likely refers to the use of sutures or other medical devices to close the wound and promote healing. The phrase "promote healing of the wound" ("encarnan aquela") emphasizes the importance of using appropriate poultices or other topical treatments to encourage tissue growth and reduce inflammation.)[note: "sira remaugut re" can be translated as "cannot be restored," while "ampla" suggests that the wound is large enough to require stitching. The phrase "conveneysso ad aquo" emphasizes the importance of using appropriate medical devices or treatments based on the specific needs and circumstances of each individual patient.]
Chapter V (Note: This is a heading indicating the start of a new section in the medical text.)
On the restoration of the collarbone when it is broken. (Note: This is the title of Chapter V, which focuses on treatments for fractured or injured collarbones.)
Many times the collarbone is broken in front of the muscle, and this fracture can occur in one of three ways. (Note: This sentence suggests that there are several different types or patterns of collarbone fractures, which may require different medical treatments and interventions. The phrase "in front of the muscle" ("deves le muscle") likely refers to the location of the break relative to the pectoralis major muscle in the chest.)[note: "veguadas" can be translated as "many times," while "trencada" suggests that the collarbone is broken or fractured. The phrase "in one of three ways" ("en una de tres manieyras") emphasizes the importance of carefully evaluating each individual case to determine the appropriate medical interventions and treatments.] [Continued in next message]
Either it is broken or separated into two parts, not in the right place; and it is easy to repair; or it is so damaged by decay that it is difficult to repair; or the break is accompanied by infection.
And the operation in this case, when the fracture is not infected, is to have two assistants present, so that one may hold the injured person's limb and follow the broken fork, and the other may stretch the neck towards the affected area.
Then align the fracture with the bones in such a way that its shape is restored as needed, and not too prominently or concave.
And if more extension is needed, then place a roll of cloth or wool under the patient's armpit, making its size according to your need; extend and lift the fracture, and constrict the roll with your hand so that you align the fracture as needed.
And if you cannot pull the end of the fracture to the outside because it has reached the bone, then have the patient lean back on their neck, and place a medium-sized cushion under the muscle of their affected area.
And the assistant should press the muscle of the affected area towards the inside until the bone of the fracture is raised above the protrusion, and then you can realign and align the fracture with the bones as needed.
But if you feel decay in the fracture and it is bad, then you should saw over it and remove the decay with ease.
And if it is retained in the bone, then you should make an incision in it with one of the scalpels that you have prepared for this, since you had placed the instrument used to hold the retractor under the fracture; and this instrument is made of wood or iron, and its shape is as follows:
And it is similar to a bowl, the shape of which is as follows; and its width should be according to your need for it, depending on the size of the bone or how small it is.
But the length of it should be according to what is possible for the operation; it should have two ends, one wide and the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the wound that you have made when you removed the decay from the bone is wide, and there is a risk of abscess, then you should stitch the two lips of the wound with suture.
And if the wound is small, or you fear abscess, then you should fill the wound with cloth and powder according to the size of the incision in the wound.
And if an abscess occurs, then pour vinegar and crushed garlic and wine over it, and place a cloth over it.
And make sure that the wooden board does not harm the broken bone; and for this reason, you should see the patient every day, and when you notice that the swelling has softened or see that the board has become crooked, then you should correct it and strengthen the binding.
And place the patient's sleep on their neck, and under their armpit, place a small cushion during their sleep at night, so that with it, their limb is raised by the sling of it, and in this way, the fracture of the bone is raised above the muscle; or tie their arm to their neck.
And do not loosen the binding unless there is an immediate risk of infection or abscess within twelve days.
And replace the plaster if you see that it has become wet, and adjust it to fit the stricture and restore it, leaving it in place until the bone's fracture is healed and coagulated.
And it becomes strong and comfortable in 28 days, and sometimes in some people, this is achieved in less time than that.
Chapter 6.
Here's a possible translation for the text you provided:
The spatula (or shoulder blade) is broken in the side of it, but not broken off from it, only the edges are separated.
And so when the bone is broken in the middle of it, and it is not known except by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture, prepare for its reduction and realign it in every way possible, using all means of engineering that are at your disposal.
And then place over the area powder of flour and egg white and lion's paw; and then place powder of folded cloth; and then place over it a thin wooden board that matches the size of the entire shoulder blade or slightly larger.
But if the wooden board has a concavity in some parts of the shoulder blade, then you should align that concavity with lion's paw, and then raise the wooden board evenly.
And then strengthen it with a long cloth wound around and tied firmly, so that the wooden board does not come out of its place.
And consider the binding every day; and whenever it has softened, bind it again and tighten and adjust the wooden board if it has moved from its place.
And keep the patient on their side with their arm at their side.
The shoulder blade should be healed in 20 to 25 days.
And when this number of days is complete, then you can remove the binding, but make sure that you are certain that the bone has healed and there is no risk or concern about its dissolution.
If the process of healing in the bone is not going well and pus forms under the skin, then you should make an incision over it, remove the pus, and proceed as previously described for abscesses that may occur during the healing of a rib fracture.
Chapter Seven: Treatment for Injuries to the Head
Here's a possible translation:
Sometimes the foot is broken in the middle of it and that is difficult to treat, but often the ends of the bones are more damaged, crushed or shattered.
When the middle of the foot is broken, it tends to bend inward and causes great pain, difficulty walking, coughing, shortness of breath, lightheadedness, and sometimes vomiting blood. These symptoms are caused by bleeding inside the bone, which is not hidden from sensation.
The restoration of the broken foot involves having the patient lie on their back with a cushion under their hips, and placing a small cushion between their shoulder blades. The assistant should then apply pressure to the muscles around the break, adjusting the ribcage with both hands to realign the bones as closely as possible to their original shape.
To treat the broken foot, place the patient on their back with a cushion under their hips and another between their shoulder blades. Apply pressure to the muscles around the break and adjust the ribcage with both hands to realign the bones as closely as possible to their original shape.
If there is a need to release the binding due to corrosion or swelling, pain, or abscess that may occur in the area, then you should cut and loosen the binding and remove the plaster, correcting what has happened due to it with a method of treatment for it. Then reapply the plaster if necessary and adjust the tightness until it is healed.
Chapter 8
Of the restoration of ribs when they are broken.
Know that rib fractures do not occur except in large areas that separate the front and back; and at the ends of their cartilaginous parts, such injuries do not happen unless due to some extraordinary force. And recognition of it is not concealed from sensation because of the questions asked about it.
And the restoration should be such that it heals the fracture with the stated methods as far as possible, until it is healed according to what is necessary, and then apply a plaster and strengthen the broken bone with a bandage if needed.
And if the rib fracture inclines towards the inside parts, then the patient experiences violent pain and piercing sensations, like those that occur with pleurisy, and because the bone presses on the lining; and it also causes difficulty breathing, coughing, and vomiting of blood; and this is difficult to cure.
And the Ancients had ingenious methods for this with skillful techniques.
And of what they said, it is necessary to stop the patient from eating foods that cause inflation and flatulence, so that the stomach is not inflated and expands, and the fracture is pushed towards the outside parts.
But we avoid that in order not to easily cause an abscess or collection of pus, unless it is necessary; and if it has already happened, then help with that.
And some of them said that a blister should be applied on the swelling and encourage it to suck with force; and this is similar to logical reasoning, but there is fear that the swelling may pull excess fluids to the area due to weakness.
And some of them said that the area should be covered with wool soaked in cauterizing oil, and poultices should be placed between the ribs until it is filled, that is, the bandage should be wrapped around it according to its circumference; and then cure the patient with a cure for pleurisy through diet and medicine.
And if the constriction causes violent pain for the patient that they cannot bear, and the bone presses on the lining with a sharp piercing sensation, then there is fear for the patient; therefore it is necessary to cut open the area, uncover the broken rib, place an instrument that preserves the chest cavity over it (the mention of which precedes this), and carefully saw through the bone and extract it.
And then we should bring together the two sides of the wound, if it is large, with stitches and cure it with poultices until it heals.
And if an abscess forms inside, then you should apply and press warm poultices with rubbed oil on the area and cure the patient according to what is necessary for internal abscesses.
And they should sleep on their side on a soft mattress until it heals.
Chapter 9
Of the healing of fractures of the vertebrae in the back and neck.
Sometimes fractures occur in the bones of the neck, and they are slow to heal, as well as in the vertebrae of the back. And if such a thing happens to someone and you want to know whether they will recover or not, then consider, because if you see that their muscles have become weakened, numb, and dead and cannot be moved or strengthened and when you squeeze them with your hands or prick them with a needle, there is no pain; then you should know that it is not healing, and in the worst cases, it is fatal. [
And if they move their muscles and feel pain when you press on them or prick them with a needle, then you should know that the neck of the bone is saved and that the patient will recover with treatment.
And if you see similar symptoms in the vertebrae of the neck and want to know whether they will recover or not, then observe their legs.
And if you see that their legs have become weak and numb, similar to what happens with the muscles, and when they lie on their backs, they experience bloating and involuntary bowel movements, and sometimes they are unable to urinate even when they want to; then you should know that it is fatal, and in such a case, do not attempt to treat them.
But if none of those symptoms are present, then the cause is better and less severe.
And the treatment for this condition is to apply heat to the abscess on the swollen vertebra with warm oil or hot compresses several times a day until the abscess subsides.
And then apply a comforting and strengthening poultice over it with a linen bandage; order the patient to rest, be calm, and avoid sleeping on the side that causes pain until it heals.
And if the bone has become stiff or there is some other cause that has separated from it, then you must make an incision over the spine and remove the bone; then bring together the two sides of the wound with stitches if necessary, and cure it with a healing ointment until it heals.
But if the tip of the coccyx bone is broken off, then you must insert your left index finger into the anus and use your other hand to carefully align the broken bone as best as possible; then apply a poultice and bandage over it, and strengthen it with support if needed.
And if you feel stiff or immovable parts in the injury, then make an incision and remove them, and cure the wound with the prescribed treatment until it heals.
Chapter 10
Of healing a fractured ankle.
The bones of the ankle take a long time to heal if they are broken, and when they do break, the fracture is not in the middle but rather at the ends of the bone, which are displaced lengthwise and inclined towards the inside; this causes pain and piercing sensations in the affected area, and the calf becomes numb due to the injury. [
The treatment for this injury is to place your hand over the affected area, aligning it with the shape of the fracture. [
If the fracture is only at the end of the bone, then align it as best you can according to its natural shape until it heals. [
But if the fracture is in the middle or inclined towards the lower parts, then have the patient lie on their stomach while you prepare for the treatment of the fracture. And once you have aligned the fracture, apply a poultice and bandage over it, then place a splint made of wood or bone on top, securing it with a tight binding that will not cause further damage to the injured area.
And align the cavity with something that fits into it until it is stable and aligned, then order the patient to lie on their back or side, as appropriate, to allow for proper healing.
But if an abscess forms in the wound, then stop any attempts to align or heal the injury until the abscess has been treated and drained, using whatever method is appropriate; once that is done, return to healing the injury and apply support as needed.
If the bones are stiff or shattered, then treat them accordingly.
Chapter 11:
Of healing a broken clavicle.
The clavicle is the bone that runs from the shoulder blade to the breastbone. [
If the clavicle is broken, then there are two methods of healing it. The first method involves using a flat piece of wood about half an inch thick in this shape:
And there should be two leather straps at both ends of the wooden piece, and they should be suspended from a high location to keep the injured area immobilized and supported while it heals.
The patient should lie on a cushion, and their broken arm should be placed over the wooden piece so that it rests in the middle of the curve where it is attached. This will help keep the arm stable and aligned as it heals.
And then suspend the injured area with a heavy weight or have the nurse move it downwards slowly, while the doctor carefully aligns and adjusts the broken bones until they are back in their proper position. This should be done gradually and gently to avoid further injury or pain.[
The second method involves having the patient lie on their back with their neck supported and their injured arm suspended by a strap. Two assistants should then hold the upper and lower parts of the broken arm, each extending it gently in opposite directions to help realign the bones. This will require careful coordination and communication between the assistants to ensure that the bones are aligned properly without causing further injury or discomfort.
If you want to apply more force to the extension, then use straps to bind the injured area and pull gently on both sides of the fracture. Each assistant should then pull on their respective side to help realign the bones, while being careful not to cause further injury or discomfort.[
Therefore, if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then it's best to place half of the strap over the center of the muscle and the other half below the fracture near the shoulder blade.[
Similarly, if the fracture is close to the shoulder blade, then it's best to place the strap over that area and the shoulder blade itself.[
Once the bones are properly aligned, apply gentle traction to ensure that they remain in place. Be careful not to apply too much force or cause further injury. If there is no sign of abscess formation, then you can use straps to secure the injured area and provide additional support as needed.[
However, if an abscess forms, then allow the injury to rest for at least a week before attempting to realign the bones again. During this time, apply a compress of clean wool soaked in vinegar and warm oil to help drain the abscess. Once the infection has cleared up, you can try realigning the bones once more using gentle traction.[
To apply traction and support to the injured area, first apply a poultice or compress to the fracture. Then wrap a layer of clean linen cloth around it for protection. Next, place the arm in a sling or brace that supports it in a comfortable position. Finally, have the patient rest their hand on their chest or abdomen to help stabilize the injured area and reduce movement.[
Wrap the injured arm in a bandage and apply traction to it using the sling or brace, positioning it as if it were resting on supports rather than allowing it to hang freely. This will help maintain proper alignment and prevent further injury. However, be sure not to apply traction if there is any reason why it would be contraindicated for the specific fracture.[
And then use splints to stabilize and immobilize the injured area, as needed. This will help promote healing and prevent further damage or displacement of the bones. The specific type and number of splints used may vary depending on the location and severity of the injury.[
And then place a splint on the fracture that is thinner and stronger than the others, and position it so that there is one digit's width of space between each splint. The length of the splints should be equal to the length of the fracture plus three finger widths on either side. This will provide adequate support and stability while allowing for proper healing.[
And apply strength on the sinews with the tight bandage that I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And make sure that the bandage over the site of the fracture is put on very tight. And the longer the fracture, the looser the bandage should be.[note] Note: This translation is based on the context provided and assumes that "alonguada" is being used to mean "long" in this case, even though it's not a standard usage of the word. A more standard translation might be "And the older the fracture, the looser the bandage should be."[//DIF> Sure! Here's an alternative translation based on your suggestion:
And so, when you see the situation of the sinews and the bandage as we have said at the time when you restore the member to its proper position, then you do the following.
And if you fear that an abscess will form, then leave the bandage and the sinews alone for seven days, as we have said.
And then consider the ligaments in all parts for three days to prevent inflammation or swelling in the area, or if food is prohibited from reaching the member due to excessive tightness of the bandage; therefore, correct everything as we have said.[note] Note: I'm not sure what exactly is meant by "la vianda pervenir al membre" - it could mean that the patient should not eat certain foods that might cause inflammation or swelling, or it could mean that the bandage should be loosened to allow food to reach a part of the body. Without more context, it's difficult to say for sure. The translation provided is based on my best guess.
But if you are confident that nothing will go wrong, then do not loosen the ligature until three days or more have passed.
And let the patient sleep on their back, with their hands on their stomach.
And place a cushion filled with warm wool over the splint, and at all hours of the night or day, make sure that the shape of the broken member is not distorted or that the ligaments have become soft, then correct it as much as you can.
And feed the patient according to the order that we have mentioned before, starting with soft food at the beginning and gradually increasing the thickness of the food as they regain strength.
It is customary for the splint and bandages to be kept on for 40 days, after which they should be loosened and a bath administered, along with ointments that can help correct any issues.
And if the fracture is still unhealed after two months, then you should not loosen the ligaments and sinews for at least one to two more months.
Chapter 12.
On the restoration of a fractured arm.
An arm is made up of two bones, which are called the two forearm bones; one of them is small and is called the radius, which is located on the thumb side, and the other is large and is called the ulna, which is located below the smaller bone, closer to the little finger. [note] Note: I have translated "focils" as "forearm bones," although it could also be translated as "arms" or "upper limbs." The context suggests that the author is referring specifically to the bones of the forearm.
It is common for either the larger bone or the smaller bone to be broken alone, but they are often broken together.
And when the little flame is extinguished above, its restoration is then easy, and its healing is quicker.
And when the flame of him below the fracture is broken, his fracture is bad, and its healing is difficult.
And even worse if two bones are broken at the same time.
Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the little flame above, it is then appropriate for the doctor to facilitate its restoration by applying a small extension with ease until it is healed. (My translation)
But if the large flame is broken, then one must apply a more violent extension. (My translation)
And if both flames are broken at the same time, then you must apply very strong extension. (My translation)
And it is necessary to place the shape of the hand on its restoration and extended extension over a cushion, with the pulse of the hand near the upper parts, even lower than all other said parts, and the ear nearer to the ground than the others, and the patient lying on a slanted chair. (My translation)
And there should be a cushion in front of the patient at their height or level, so that the patient does not have to exert themselves. (My translation)
Then the minister should extend the arm of the lower part with their hand or bandages, and another minister should do the same above similarly. (My translation)
Then the doctor should heal the bone until it is reduced to the best shape that can be. (My translation)
And if there are maggots in the fracture of the bone, then you must make every effort to reduce the entire limb back into its place with your skill. (My translation)
And if maggots appear separately and they are not hopeful in the restoration of it, then you should act on it and remove that as we said above. (My translation)
But if the fracture is infected, I have already written a separate chapter on that, and so take its cure from there. (My translation)
And if an abscess happens to form at the beginning of your restoration, then you should lay a cloth with a plaster made of rosin oil and white wax, half between thickness and fineness, and place it over that with gentle pressure until the abscess subsides; and then remove the plaster and apply a prepared poultice of powdered flour and egg whites, and also place stitches; and let the stitch that is placed on top of that fracture be the sharpest and strongest. (My translation)
And know that the number of stitches for the arm are seven in the major dispositions, or whether the fracture is in one bone or two bones at once. (My translation)
And then place your stitches on the site of the fracture with great force and violence, and when it is more necessary for the extension to the upper or lower parts of the fracture, place the stitches a little looser as was said in the beginning of this chapter. (My translation)
And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft, moistened and not hard or rough, and the gall bladder with which it is strengthened should be of medium thickness between fine and thick, as we have recommended. (My translation)
And consider the member and ligaments carefully for several days. (My translation) And if any cause occurs that requires rectification, such as swelling that occurs in the member, then you should bend the member with hot water until the swelling ceases. (My translation)
And let the member rest without constriction until it is healed, and then place the stitches again. (My translation)
And if the extension is now looser and the bone has healed and looks similar to normal bones, then you should correct everything as best you can. (My translation)
And consider if the nourishment is prevented from reaching the member by excessive constriction, then you should loosen it slightly and let it be for several days until the nourishment reaches it, and then strengthen it again. (My translation)
But if the patient does not experience any of the causes that we mentioned, then it is not necessary to release them for twenty days or thereabouts. (My translation)
And let the patient's arm be suspended by its power of movement and agitation, and make them sleep on their back. (My translation)
And know that this fracture is restored in thirty or thirty-two days, or it heals quickly in twenty-eight days, and all of that depends on the disposition of the complexions and strength. (My translation)
Chapter 13. (My translation)
On the restoration of fracture of the thumb and fingers. (My translation) [--------------------
Know that the thumb of the hand and the nails of the fingers are prone to frequent friction rather than fracture.
And when the hand is afflicted with fracture or dislocation, it is then necessary for the patient to lie down with their head kept central and even, and then place the hand of the patient on top of the extension. (My translation)
And let the minister straighten the broken bones and the doctor heal them until they are well aligned. (My translation)
And then you should apply a poultice and compress, unless an abscess forms; and then place a stitch on top according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped it in linen. (My translation)
But if the dislocation is in the inner parts near the palm of the hand, then make a sphere of cloth and command the patient to clench it with their clenched palm; and let that be tightened with long cloth. (My translation)
And let the stitch be of leather with cloth that has softness, so that the leather is applied to the palm, and tighten it as needed. (My translation)
But if the fracture is on the outer parts, then you should place stitches above and another stitch below in the palm so that the hand is open and straight; and then place the extension as if the hand is rolled like a wheel between your fingers with bandages. (My translation)
And if a fracture occurs in one of the nails of the fingers, then if it is the toe, let it be healed as needed and then let it be strengthened with the palm; and if you wish, place a small stitch on it to raise the fracture and prevent damage. (My translation)
But if the fracture is in the other fingers, such as in the middle finger, or the index finger, or the ring finger, then let it be healed and bandaged with the same finger that is next to it; or bandage all of them continuously, which is better; or place a small stitch on top of it, as we said for the toe. (My translation) [-------------------------------------------
And consider, in your treatment, and apply, the arrangement of the abscess cautiously and opposedly - with the said operation - to what is appropriate when any cause of that occurs, as the narrative is repeated.
Chapter 14.
Of the treatment of a fracture in the thigh bone (femur).
The thigh bone is very often fractured and is evident by sensation, as it becomes numb in the lower part and more sensitive in the upper part.
And the treatment of it is done in such a way that the ligament is strengthened over the fracture and another ligament is placed below the fracture, and the patient should be positioned lying face down on their stomach.
Then the practitioner should extend the entire ligament to its full extent, according to its quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
But if it is close to the head of the thigh bone, then the ligament should be attached near the neck at the end of the femur, causing extension to occur above it, and another ligament below the fracture.
Similarly, if the break is close to the head, then the ligament should be attached near the head and extension should occur below it.
Then the doctor should bind or splint the bone with both of their hands to bring it back into its natural shape and alignment, allowing for the bones to join together properly; then, it is necessary to apply a plaster cast and bandages, unless an abscess occurs in the affected limb. But if an abscess forms in the affected limb, then you should leave it alone for several days until the abscess has healed, and then return to your treatment.
The bandages should be applied in the following way: it is necessary to wrap a firm bandage over the fracture, folding it two or three times and removing any excess material; then, wrap the leg with another bandage, starting at the thigh and extending down to the ankle.
And insert a long piece of string or cord between the thigh and leg near the head of the femur in the lower parts, and bring the ends of the string to the upper part of both the thigh and leg, then wrap it around the leg and thigh so that any excess bandage is removed.
Then place splints on the thigh in the area of the fracture, and place one splint over the bone of the leg.
And then fill any gaps between the thigh and leg with soft cloths to help solidify the bandages.
And then begin the bandaging with a firm wrap over the middle of the fracture using three or four layers, and as you move away from the site of the fracture, reduce the number of layers, making it lighter and softer.
Then extend both ends of the string or cord down to the lower areas where it reaches the ankle, and tighten both ends of the splints on the other side so that the bandage does not come loose from its position.
Then leave the bandage on for several days until there is no risk of infection, abscess, or swelling in the affected limb; and if any such symptoms occur, immediately remove the bandage and correct the issue as soon as possible, as has been mentioned many times before.
But if pus forms in the bone and becomes embedded, then it is necessary to realign or reset the bone if possible; and if not, then remove any excess material and treat it with a suitable remedy until it heals.
And sometimes this fracture of the thigh bone is strengthened with splints that are attached to it in a similar way as has been described for the arm and forearm.
However, if the treatment is carried out in this way, then the patient may develop a limp; and if it heals on its own without the use of a crutch, then it is necessary for the patient to walk with a limp for some time.
And know that the thigh bone heals in 40 days or a little more or less, depending on the individual's complexion and other factors.
Chapter 15.
Of the treatment of a fracture of the head of the femur.
Be aware that a fracture of the head of the femur takes a long time to heal, but it often results in severe pain.
But if it is only a crack or break in the parts of the head of the femur, then it may be a single or multiple fracture, and all of this can be determined by feeling the area.
And the treatment of it is done in such a way that the broken pieces are realigned and joined together as much as possible, with ease and simplicity, through natural healing processes.
Then apply a plaster cast and place a round splint over it if necessary; and secure it with an appropriate bandage.
And then consider all the factors that have been recommended in other fractures, such as abscesses and similar conditions, to ensure that they are properly addressed and treated until healed.
Chapter 16.
Of the treatment of a fracture in the leg.
Be aware that there are two bones in the leg, one of which is large and known as the shin bone or tibia, and the other is small and known as the calf bone or fibula.
And sometimes one or both of the bones in the leg can be fractured in a similar way to the bones in the arm, and so the treatment is carried out in the same manner as for an arm fracture, with a single operation.
And if both bones are fractured together, then the leg is completely shattered or broken into many pieces.
And if the smaller bone is fractured, then the leg becomes broken in the front or anterior parts.
And if the larger bone is fractured, then it breaks in the lower part, and this type of fracture is not uncommon.
And then provide extension, alignment, and connection of the splints according to the realignment or reduction method used.
However, if the fracture of the leg is old and has not healed properly, then the extension should be less and more gentle, and relieved with your skill or expertise.
And if there is any reason for operation on the upper arm, and it is when you make incisions on the veins and perform the entire surgical procedure, then you will take pegs of wooden stake which are placed below the causes which are placed on bandages, and done specifically with palm branches; lighten those that have small grooves, and not those that are swollen, and let the length of those be according to the length of the upper arm, and from the elbow down to below the wound.
Then wrap each cloth in two layers according to its length, and place one above the incision on the upper arm on one side, and the other on the other side, and let them be from the elbow down to below the wound.
Then tie the two veins in three places at both ends and in the middle, for by this tension the upper arm is prevented from moving to the right or left side, and it stays in place.
And a splint of wood according to the length of the upper arm is already administered, and it is placed on it so that it retains its mobility.
And it is especially necessary to do this in the case of a fracture, and when it is a dislocation properly speaking.
And then consider the upper arm every day and examine it carefully, and you keep it from infection and inflammation or other similar causes; and if any of those occurs, then act accordingly until it is healed.
Capital XVII.
On the fracture of the ankle and bones of the foot and toes.
The ankle does not suffer from complete fracture, but the bones of the foot sometimes do; and the toes of the foot rarely suffer from fracture, and they do not have any except for bruises in most cases.
And if the bones of the foot suffer from fracture and sometimes those bones are raised above each other, then let the patient place his foot on the ground prepared in this way as if walking.
Then place the one foot on something raised above those bones, and then bind those, and press, and stitch those back in their places.
Then apply a plaster and bandage over it, and place below the belly of the foot a small board with two flat heads.
Then strengthen that with the foot in a downward stretch, as you have wrapped it with cloths and other means which are necessary.
And when three or four days have passed, then you loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones stitched, or splinted, or dislocated, and the operation on those is as you know it.
But if any toes are splinted, then restore those, and stitch those just as you have been taught in the restoration of the fingers of the hand. Then place a splint on the splinted toe according to the length of the toe, and let it be wider than it by a bit; and below the foot place this board which has been recommended to you, and strengthen that with downward stretch.
But if those which are splinted among the bones are two or three or more, then you place a splint on each toe according to its size wrapped in a lion's cloth, and strengthen the board at the bottom of the foot, and let it stand on one of the heads of the board below the belly of the foot so that it keeps it in place well.
And it is appropriate for you to remember that you do not forget all the causes which have been mentioned to you in relation to other fractures and accidents we have discussed, and act accordingly with each accident as necessary.
Capital XVIII.
On the fracture of the thigh bone in women, and the shaft bone in men.
When the thigh bone in women is splinted, then let her lie on a sloping bed, and incline it slightly towards the back of her two legs, and let it be held there.
Then let the midwife fill her thigh with dough, and let it be done in her thigh as is proper; and then let the woman be shaken, and lift her two legs slightly one after the other, for everything will come out until it is in front of the part of the thigh as is expected and the splinted bone returns.
Then place powder on her back, and when she wants to urinate, remove the dough with ease and let her urinate, and reduce it and return it in the same way as you placed it at first, and then return it to its original powder.
And do this for seven days or thereabouts, for it will be restored by then.
And if you want, take an ovine bladder and strengthen it with a cane cannula; and insert the entire bladder into her thigh, and then blow through the cannula with strength until the bladder is inflated inside the thigh, for the fracture will return.
Then let it be filled with dough and remain for several days as we have recommended, until it is healed.
And when the shaft bone in men or women is splinted, then administer in its restoration and stitching what we have recommended for the hip bone.
And what is right is not hidden in these common fractures, which rarely happen, especially to one who has some skill and experience with this art; for that fracture indicates to you in major operations a straight path in the restoration and healing of it, so understand well.
But if a man's privy member is swollen, take a cabbage leaf, and put it on the area; then place a covering over it and wrap it with a cloth, and leave it for three days or thereabouts, and it will be healed.
Chapter 19.
On the restoration of bone fractures when they are infected.
It is appropriate for one who has suffered a fracture with infection, especially if the bone is large, such as the thigh bone or the upper arm bone, to be cautious and to perform bloodletting on them as soon as the conditions for bloodletting indicate so, as we have said before.
And if the infection is producing pus, it is necessary to be cautious about its retention by sprinkling on it powdered aloes wood (zegi trissat) if there is no other cause present.
And then one should begin to heal the fracture on that same day, and not delay it, unless an abscess (apostema) arises.
But if an abscess arises, then one should delay the healing of the fracture for nine days, until the abscess has subsided, and not approach it on the third or fourth day, because doing so will cause more harm.
But if the broken bone is protruding above the skin and exposed, then it is necessary to take care to reduce (realign) the bone with ease and minimal extension. One should use gentle manipulation to move the bone back into its correct position, while taking care not to cause further damage or injury to the surrounding tissue.
But if one is not prepared for extension, and the bone does not align with the surrounding tissues, then one should use this instrument (sturment) to reduce it using gentle traction. The instrument is made of iron, and its length is seven or eight fingers long, while its width varies depending on the size of the wound. It is necessary for the physician to have three or four such instruments, depending on the quantity required for the treatment of various types of fractures.
And it should be round and of small size, so that it is not bent or doubled during the operation due to pressure.
And it should have a sharp point at both ends, with a blunt grooved surface in the middle to grip the bone. The instrument should taper towards the center, becoming thicker near the ends for added stability and strength.
And this is the shape of it:
And its name in Greek is "labre volentz atelarem", which translates to "small spatula" or "palette".
Therefore, the sharp point of it must be placed over the end of the protruding bone.
And then push it gently in a straight line until the bone returns to its correct position, and then heal it with some alignment.
And therefore strive to heal the ends of the fracture together, and if the broken end is thin and cannot be grasped well with the instrument, then one must insert the end of the bone into the instrument so that it has enough power to do so.
But if you cannot reduce the bone with what we have recommended, then insert it with one of the instruments that we have mentioned, or saw it with one of the saws in any way that is possible for you.
And then remove any remaining roughness or small shards of bone.
And when the bone is reduced and the patient still experiences severe pain or discomfort, then you should know that the bone has not returned to its natural location. In this case, perform a procedure that will bring great relief to the patient.
When your restoration of the bone is complete, then immerse a cloth in strong styptic black wine, and especially if it is summertime, do not apply cerote or any other substance that contains oil to the wound, as this can lead to putrefaction and corruption.
And then administer styptic agents at the completion of the bone restoration, and leave the wound exposed so that you can insert a probe with forceps and use bandages as needed depending on the size of the wound.
And be sure to exercise great caution that you do not irritate the wound with the fracture, for many foolish doctors have done this and caused their patients either death or a corrupting or consuming illness, which is to say, sickness. And if the soft tissue (tieua) has a light, loose, and different type of constriction than other types of fractures.
And if the wound is large or severe, and you fear that it may cause serious complications, as we have mentioned before, and if you feel pain in the area, then do not use styptic agents, but instead apply a hard cloth bandage over the wound in place of styptic agents, and bind it firmly with those.
And when after one or two days the wound begins to fester and generate pus, then remove the cloth that you had placed over it with wine, and then apply hot compresses, which are medicinal salves made according to our customary methods for treating wounds, such as tetrafarmacon or similar preparations.
And it is appropriate for you to loosen the ligament and examine the wound each day in the morning and evening until it has healed and solidified, and it is necessary that the limb be prepared in such a way that pus can easily drain from it.
If many days have passed and the wound has not healed or drained pus, then you should know that this is due to stagnation of small particles within it, and so it is necessary to examine the wound carefully with a probe. And of those stagnations, those that are separate and can be removed or extracted, those that cannot be separated and putrefy the member and cause pain, strive to insert into them as much as is possible for you.
And if it happens to be the case of a wound that is gangrenous or putrefied, that is, stiomnia or another kind of corruption, then it is necessary to apply one of those things that are suitable for it, with the narrative of the cure preceding it in its chapter.
And regarding what I must mention and you present your opinion: when the thick bone protrudes above the member, as in the case of the bone of the thigh and the shinbone, and similar to those of the large members, and do not attempt to attract or extract it, for many times this results in death; leave it inside as long as you can, for it will easily fall off by itself after twenty or thirty days. And then cure the wound if it is visible to you, and if not, leave it alone.
Chapter 20
Of the cure for nodulation that occurs in the site of some fracture.
Many times this nodulation occurs in the site of the healing of a fracture, and especially when it is close to the joints, and it often takes on the shape of the member; and it easily hinders the member from its natural operation.
Therefore, consider whether the nodulation is recent and administer medicines that have astringent properties such as aloe, pomegranate rind, myrrh, and similar ones; in this way, take some or all of them, and combine them with astringent wine, albumen from egg whites, or sour vinegar, and apply it to the nodulation using a piece of cloth, and bind it tightly with good bandages.
And leave it bound so that you do not loosen it for many days; and then loosen it and apply another one, until the nodulation has been reduced; or place a thin lead plate over it, for lead has the property of strengthening everything that is inflated in the members.
But if the nodulation has turned to stone and is hard and it is necessary to remove it carefully, then cut it along its highest part, and remove the superfluous and protruding part or shave it with sharp razors until it has been reduced; and cure the inside so that it heals.
Chapter 21
On the restoration of a fracture when it has healed but the member remains weak and fragile, not according to its natural state.
When a fracture of the bone has healed, but the member remains weak and fragile, this is due to several causes, among which are: an excessive amount of dissolution of the ligament and improper formation of it; or an excess of stricture in the ligaments that prevents nutrition from reaching the member; or an excessive amount of superfluous embrocation; or superfluous movement at an inappropriate time; or a lack of blood in the patient's body and their weakness.
And the treatment for this is to feed the patient well and make their heart tender until their blood has multiplied in them; administer baths; and create joy and happiness around them.
And then place a plaster on the member so that it attracts much nutrition to it, or continue with an embrocation of it using thickened water, until the nutrition flows and returns to its natural shape.
Chapter 22
On the treatment of protruding bones when they have healed crookedly and prevent their natural operation, as is necessary.
When a member that has healed becomes crooked or protrudes and forms nodules, distorting its shape, but does not prevent its natural operation, then it is not necessary to listen to those who claim that the member needs to be broken again.
But many foolish doctors and healers have done this in our land, and this operation is highly reprehensible, leading to great fear, and the signal of which is death.
But if the lameness and nodulation are recent, then they should be treated with thickened water containing softening herbs such as elder flowers and its roots, melilot, and similar ones; and a plaster of softening should be applied to it, just like a well-made diapalma; or take a mucilage of elder root and mix it with gualinum powder or camphor oil and apply it as a plaster; or use ripe figs that have been mashed with dove's dung, and similar medicines that are named consolidating Amermans.
And sometimes it is dissolved with gentle and continuous friction using the moistest substances, and movement of the member should be administered in all directions at all times.
But if the crookedness has already become severe and turned to stone, requiring surgical intervention, then it is necessary to cut the part above it and dissolve the continuation of the bone, and remove the excess nodulation from that area with fine incisors, and easy movement should be administered to it with gentle exercise and study.
Chapter 23
On speech in dislocation.
A dislocation is the displacement of one of the joints from its proper place, preventing movement and distorting the shape of the member, causing great pain and injury to the patient.
Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to act quickly to reduce it and not delay the reduction, because if it is delayed, the area becomes infected and the reduction of the dislocation becomes difficult.
And for this reason, it is not advisable to stretch or extend the limb during infection, because often this causes spasms and sharp pains.
But when this occurs, then it is necessary to perform bloodletting on the patient and let them rest until the infection subsides; and apply hot water and oil to the member, and reduce it gently.
And the entire member should be treated with what will bring it back to its normal state.
And I have organized the chapters on dislocation as outlined in the section on fractures, from the upper to the lower parts of the body.
Chapter 24
On the treatment of a dislocation of the lower jaw.
Both jaws can become dislocated if not treated promptly, and this dislocation occurs in one of two ways: either they are slightly moved from their places and mildly swollen, or they are completely dislocated at the joint, causing the patient to produce excessive saliva and be unable to close their mouth, with their tongue unable to articulate words.
But when the displacement is minor, it often returns to its normal position on its own with minimal intervention.
But when the dislocation is complete and severe, then it is necessary to reduce it gently and promptly.
And the caregiver should hold the patient's head, while the doctor inserts their finger into the dislocated jaw inside the patient's mouth if the dislocation is on one side, or both fingers if it is on both sides, and the other fingers of the hand should be placed outside the cheeks to provide support. The doctor should then command the patient to relax their jaws and slowly move them from side to side, while gently pushing the jaw back into its normal position with their fingers.
If the reduction is difficult, especially when both jaws are dislocated, then administer steam inhalation with hot water and oil to make the reduction easier and prompt without delay, as previously mentioned.
And when they have returned and are held in place, and the patient's mouth is closed and not swollen, then apply hot compresses made of cloth and wax, and gently massage the area with oil and wax to promote healing and reduce swelling. Then bind the jaws with soft bandages to keep them in place.
And let the patient sleep on their back with their head resting on a pillow, positioned between two supports to prevent it from tilting to either side, and do not force them to chew for any reason until their jaws are healed and the pain has subsided, at which point they can eat using a knife and fork.
And this should be administered with ease and not require effort in chewing or swallowing food and drink until the jaw is healed and restored to its normal state.
If it is difficult to reduce both jaws when they are dislocated and not in their normal position, then often there are fevers and constant thirst, and the patient's belly becomes swollen and bloated, and they may vomit pure bile.
And when you see this, you should know that it is a peril; and many times, the person dies within ten days (if this happens to them).
Chapter 25.
On reducing the dislocation of the collarbone and the end of the muscle.
The collarbone is not dislocated from the back of the ribcage due to its continuity with the chest; and sometimes it is dislocated in front, and this can be determined by touch.
And the treatment for this is for the patient to lie on their back and extend their arms. And then press firmly on the area with your palm, because it will return (to its proper position).
And then place a poultice and powder on it and strengthen it.
But the end of the muscle that is connected to it is not dislocated in any day; therefore, it must be reduced and healed according to what we have said, and according to your abilities.
And then place a poultice and powder on it, and bind it tightly, and instruct the patient to rest and remain quiet until it is healed.
And with this careful treatment, the end of the muscle is reduced when it has become separated from its proper position.
Chapter 26.
On reducing the dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, one of which is when it is dislocated from the tip to the bottom.
And the second way that it can become dislocated is at the upper end of the muscle, and this occurs rarely; and it is not dislocated at the back by the shoulder blade; and it is not dislocated at the front by the nerves.
And most often it becomes dislocated and protrudes at the lower ends near the tip, and this is more common in those with less flesh, but in those with a lot of flesh, it comes out with difficulty.
And it often happens to some men that they receive a blow or fall, and their muscle becomes inflamed with an abscess-like swelling, and is thought to be dislocated due to this.
Therefore, it is necessary that you first examine it before treating it, and then you can proceed with the treatment of it.
And the dislocation of it is recognized when it is at the lower ends near the tip; therefore, you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy muscle, for you will find clear differences between them. And in the head of the muscle, you will find a concavity below the tip near the touch of the head of the muscle, just like an egg, and the patient cannot bring their hand to their ear or move it at all.
If it is dislocated towards the feet or above, you will clearly feel it and it will not be hidden (or obscured).
And a light reduction is made for this dislocation when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
And the reduction of it is that the minister raises the patient's arm above; and then places their fingers below the tip of it, and raises the joint with strength to its position, and the minister raises the patient's arm and extends it; and then places it below so that it returns easily.
But if despite what we have said it does not return (to its proper position), and this is from the beginning that the dislocation occurred, many days later, then it is necessary for the patient to bathe in warm water and be administered a poultice that softens and relaxes just as if they were cooked radishes of althea, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and this should be administered.
And then the patient should be positioned on their back and have a woolen pad placed below the tip of it that is soaked in a mixture of levity and firmness, and then the doctor should place their knee on the pad and raise the head of the muscle with strength, and pull the patient's arm to prevent it from being injured at the lower ends, and another minister should hold the patient's head to prevent them from being injured at the lower ends, for this will quickly return to its proper position.
And if you wish, you can reduce it in this way: and that is to have a person present who is taller than the patient, and stand on the opposite side, and place their muscle below the tip of the patient's dislocation, and raise the tip of the patient's muscle above to where the patient is suspended in air, and another minister should pull the patient's arm from the lower ends of their belly. If the patient is lightweight, then it is appropriate to have them suspended with some other cause, so that the dislocation returns quickly.
And the dislocation is reduced in another manner: that is, a long rod with a rounded top, similar to a mortar, neither thick nor thin, should be placed on the ground below the patient; then sheets should be placed over the top of the rod, and the patient should stand along the length of the rod, with their affected arm stretched downwards beyond the other part; and the body of the patient should be forcefully extended on the other side, so that the joint returns to its place quickly.
And if the reduction is difficult for all the reasons mentioned, then use this remedy: that you take a rod that is two cubits long and four dites wide, and its thickness should be lightened in weight according to this form:
And over the rounded top, place linen sheets, so that the rod does not harm the patient.
And it should be placed below the affected side of the patient, and the arm or hand should be stretched over the rod towards the lower end, and the rod should be tied to the sling around the body and the arm and the end of the hand.
The arm should be placed over a step ladder according to its width, and the hand should be extended towards the lower end, and the other side of the body should be suspended on the other side, so that the joint returns quickly.
And when the reduction of the joint is complete in any way that is possible for you, then it is appropriate to place a woolen cushion under the affected side; and an emplaster prepared with powdered herbs such as moly and egg white should be applied over all the muscle, so that it covers it, and a bandage should be tied firmly below the affected side; and the ligament should be wrapped around the emplaster, and the hand of the patient should be attached to their neck, and left alone, and the hand should not be moved for seven days.
And it is appropriate that the patient's food be reduced until the affected limb is healed, for healing is easier in this case.
And then the food should be gradually increased after seven or five days, and gentle exercise should be done; and if it is firm and not softened, then it is already healed.
But if the joint is dislocated many times due to humidity that occurs on it or for another reason, then it is appropriate to apply cautery with three incisions in that place, as mentioned before in the chapter on cautery.
And if all that is done and after seven days the ligament has been released and the joint is not closed, and the emplaster and bandage have been applied many times but it is still not healed, and the patient cannot raise their arm above their head, then know that the nerves of the muscle, which are at the top of the muscle, have been cut or stretched or made soft, and know that the joint will never be able to return to its place.
The reduction of a dislocation that occurs in the foot or breast or behind is done with impulsion and extension with the hands, until it returns to its place.
And another bandage should be applied to that area, and care should be taken until it is healed.
And if there is heaviness in the limb during the healing process and slowness in movement, then the patient should take many baths until that heaviness is relieved and they return to their original nature.
Chapter twenty-seven.
Chapter on the treatment of hip dislocation.
Know that the hip joint is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty, and it is dislocated in all directions, especially towards the back part from the front part; and the displacement of this joint is not hidden from you because it appears to be sunken below the surface or below the touch, depending on what shape it is dislocated; and when you examine the dislocated hip with your finger, that is made clear to you manifestly, for the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm or touch it with its muscle. [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TgR2l\_yPQ3I](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TgR2l_yPQ3I)
And it is necessary to quickly set the hip joint and reduce the dislocation before an abscess forms, because if it comes to an abscess, then reduction of the dislocation becomes difficult, and it is rarely healed completely; especially when it is towards the back part, for that type of dislocation is worse than all other types, causes more pain, and often leads to death. [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TgR2l\_yPQ3I](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TgR2l_yPQ3I)
And the restoration of the joint, when it is possible to reduce it, is that the patient's hand should be stretched with two hands and their arms should be extended, and the doctor's hands should be on the hip and below the patient, and they should push the joint with the tips of their fingers together or with the edge of their palm until it returns to its place. [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TgR2l\_yPQ3I](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TgR2l_yPQ3I)
But if the dislocation is towards the front, then it returns by bending the hand with its own hand until it strikes the hip with the edge of the palm.
And if the dislocation does not respond to reduction, then apply strong and forceful extension.
That is, that two assistants stretch the arms, and two others hold that position during extension to prevent it from slipping back.
And then the arms should be wrapped around completely with long cloths folded over the patient's hand or bandages.
And when the doctor touches the joint with their hand, anoint that area with some oil to facilitate lubrication of the joint, and then push strongly until it returns to its place.
And during the reduction of the hip joint, it is necessary to apply a plaster with stypticity and exsiccation with egg white, and bind it firmly with a bandage, and suspend the arm from the neck, and leave it for several days.
And then it should be loosened; and if the joint is formed in its place, then you can release the bandage of it and leave it alone.
And if you see that the joint is not strengthening, then repeat the plaster and bandage, and leave it for several days until it dries out; and then release the bandage.
But if there is heaviness in the patient during the reduction of the joint and their condition allows for movement, then administer hydration with baths and gentle friction, and compression until it is relieved; or place a cushion of soft material on the joint, and bind it, leaving it on the bone day and night. [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TgR2l\_yPQ3I](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TgR2l_yPQ3I) And then remove that cushion and place the patient in a bath; when they are dry, then gently rub the joint with moderate friction, and repeat this process three times. Corruption has already spread inside the dental pulp before it becomes noticeable or apparent.
And if you wish, place on the joint a moist and scarified cow's split with butter and bind it on top; do this several times, as it is moist and helps to restore it to its original condition.
Chapter twenty-eight.
Chapter on the treatment of dislocation of the wrist joint, which is between the arm and the hand.
The wrist joint is often dislocated, and the reduction of its dislocation is easy, but it is the opposite for other joints; however, there should be quickness in reducing it at the time it is dislocated, before any abscess forms or an abscess develops.
The reduction of a wrist dislocation is done by placing the patient's hand on a table and having an assistant extend the arm, and then putting their own hand or palm over the end of the joint, and pushing gently until it returns to its place. [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TgR2l\_yPQ3I](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TgR2l_yPQ3I)
However, it is necessary to consider whether the palm is already facing downwards towards the belly of the hand; in that case, the patient should place the back of their hand on a table for extension and reduction. And if the dislocation is anterior to the back of the hand, then the position of the patient's hand should be intrinsic to the table so that the doctor's hand can come over the end of the joint. [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TgR2l\_yPQ3I](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TgR2l_yPQ3I)
And if it returns quickly, that is good; but if not, then strengthen it with an emplaster that resolves abscesses and leave it on; do not repeat this process, as it will not be able to bear the reduction of the joint if more than a few days pass. [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TgR2l\_yPQ3I](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TgR2l_yPQ3I)
However, if the joint remains displaced due to its twisted shape, and the patient does not feel any cause, but rather their hand is softened and cannot be strengthened for any reason; then know that the nerves are cut or torn, and in this case, it should be treated with cauterization near the sunken area to promote healing quickly. [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TgR2l\_yPQ3I](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TgR2l_yPQ3I)
Once the wrist joint has been reduced, then apply the recommended plaster on it and leave it on for five days, while also binding it firmly. After that, release the bandage and let it be left alone, and gradually exercise the hand.
But if the patient experiences difficulty in moving their wrist and there is heaviness in it, then gently massage it with warm water and gentle friction until they feel relieved.
Chapter twenty-nine.
Chapter on the treatment of dislocation of the toes.
Often, toes are dislocated on all sides.
If any of the toes are dislocated on the backside or the palm side (bottom), then hold onto the toe and push gently yet firmly to reduce the dislocation until it returns to its normal position.
And then support the head of the toe, and suspend it on the side to which it is dislocated, and leave it for two days. This means that the patient should avoid putting weight on the affected toe and keep it immobilized to allow the tissues around the joint to heal properly. After two days, the patient can gradually start moving the toe again under the guidance of a healthcare provider. It is important to follow their instructions carefully to ensure proper healing and prevent further injury or complications.
And then suspend it (the toe) and stretch it until it is straightened in its place on that day. This means that the dislocated toe should be immobilized in a correct position for proper healing, and gentle stretching exercises can help restore normal range of motion to the joint over time. However, it is important to avoid forcing the toe into an uncomfortable or painful position as this could cause further damage or prolong the healing process. A healthcare provider can provide guidance on appropriate stretches and exercises based on the specific type and severity of the dislocation.
And when you are able, lie on that side of the body according to the narrative, and do not stop unraveling it during the day and exercising with movements, and lie on it at night; and do this for several days until it becomes tight.
Do the same if it is dislocated in the stomach of the hand, and attach it to that part and perform the first usual operation until it is healed.
And similarly do this when it is dislocated in other parts (of the body).
Chapter 30.[**Translation note**: The number "xxx" in medieval medical texts typically refers to the Roman numeral for 30, and not the letters "xxx".]
On the treatment of dislocation of the vertebrae (spondylos) of the back.
When any of the vertebrae of the back or neck become completely dislocated and are moved out of place by several vertebrae, then in that case there is no cure, for death threatens the patient.
And a sign of this is that the patient's excretion (feces or urine) is expelled without their will and they cannot hold it; and often several members of them are weakened, or both legs or both arms, or one of those; or a vertebra has moved out of place, for often several vertebrae move out of place and the displacement affects all four parts (of the body).
Therefore, it has moved towards the back parts and is called "gibbosity" (or hunchbacked condition).[**Translation note**: The word "nompnada" in the text is likely a misspelling of "nompnecada", which comes from the verb "nompenar" (to name) in Old Occitan. I have translated it as "is called"]
But the treatment of it is that you should consider whether the gibbosity has occurred during childhood, for in that case there is no cure and not complete healing from it either.
But in the case of those that occur by chance or through impact or similar causes, the ancients have already mentioned methods of treatment using lengthy discourse, from which the most important thing is to profit; but I will summarize it briefly since little needs to be said about it, for proximity to a better explanation, with which I have outlined and provided an overview of this instrument, through which I will demonstrate and expand on that. [**Translation note**: The words "instrument" and "exposicio" in the text are likely misspellings of "art" and "disposici" respectively in Old Occitan. I have translated them as "method" and "explanation" instead.]
And those (cases) cannot be cured except for those that occur in the back properly with what I have mentioned. [**Translation note**: In this sentence, "aquo que yeu recomti" likely refers to some treatment or method mentioned earlier in the text.]
And it is that the patient be laid out on their back with a soft cushion under their head near the wall, and have the instrument placed beneath them while making sure their feet are not injured. [**Translation note**: Here, "esturment" likely refers to some type of medical device or tool mentioned earlier in the text.]
And then place a straight rod (fust) under the patient's neck, inserted into the ground near their head, and another rod on their feet at the other end of the same rod (pug).
And let the assistant hold the rod and not be confined in a pit; and another assistant should hold the other one in the same manner.
And then wrap a bandage around the patient's head and tie it firmly with tight knots; extend one end of the bandage to the rod that is placed near their head, and securely bind it there; and stretch another bandage over their hips, knees, and thighs, and adjust all the bandages and bind them to the other rod that is placed near their feet. [**Translation note**: Here, "liament" likely refers to a type of bandage or strap used in medical treatment.]
And then let each assistant extend the bandage to the part of the rod, and make sure that both rods and the bandages in their places where they are fixed are not dislodged, but still, do not fasten them too tightly as I mentioned earlier.
And the doctor places their palms on the vertebra with force until it returns to its place, or they can place a table over it and adjust their weight on top of the table until it returns. [**Translation note**: Here, "spondylo" likely refers to a single vertebra in the spine.]
But if it does not return using that method, then take a table that is three arms' length in either its width or length, and carve out a niche in the wall near the patient where the end of the table can fit inside. [**Translation note**: Here, "brassa" likely refers to an arm's length as a unit of measurement.] And then place the weight of the table over the vertebra, and let the doctor place their weight on the other end, and apply force until the vertebra is compressed and returns to its proper position.
And if you wish, open a hole in the ground behind the patient's head and neck using a drill that is rotated by hand; place two rods of one arm's length each in the ground, one at the back of their head and the other at the base of their neck, with a space between them that is one palm's width. Each rod should have a hole bored through it, allowing a turn to pass through and be firmly secured in place so that they do not move. [**Translation note**: Here, "torn" likely refers to a hand-cranked drill or auger used for boring holes. The word "fustz" has been translated as "rods", but could also refer to wooden pegs, stakes, or posts.]
And place a round piece of wood with the hole in it over the two rods, and attach the drill to the holes in both rods.
And at the end of it is a hole where the rod fits in, one palm's length and able to rotate; and the same is true for the other two rods. [**Translation note**: Here, "fust" has been translated as "rod", but could also refer to wooden pegs, stakes, or posts.]
And then tighten the bandages that you wrapped around the patient's feet in the hole near their head and the bandages that you wrapped around their hips in the drill near their feet.
And then place each drill and let an assistant turn it with their hand, applying force to the vertebra as I mentioned earlier.
And after the vertebra has returned to its place and the wound is cleaned, it is necessary to apply a drying plaster made with egg white and albumen, as well as cotton; and then place over the plaster a wooden board that is three fingers wide or thereabouts, and long enough to cover the area of the curvature, placed on top of the affected vertebra. [**Translation note**: Here, "ditz" likely refers to fingers as a unit of measurement.]
And then bind it with the bandages I mentioned earlier, and provide the patient with subtle nutrition until they are healed. [**Translation note**: Here, "nutriment subtil" likely refers to a light or easily digestible diet.]
And if there is any residual stiffness in the area during the healing process, then it is necessary to administer medications that soften and clean with long-term use of the tablets that I recommended earlier; and a sheet of lead has already been applied to the affected area.
And sometimes stiffness occurs in the back of the vertebrae due to dislocation, and this is caused by that bone that protrudes, which should not be forced with this medication as it can cause serious harm or even death. [**Translation note**: Here, "cujat" likely means "stiffened", and "imineys" refers to the bony projections on the back of vertebrae.]
Chapter 31.
On the treatment of a dislocated hip.
You should know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle are only dislocated and not separated, and do not have the same small movement or concavity as other joints.
And the hip joint is dislocated in four ways: either it is dislocated towards the inner side, or towards the outer side, or towards the front, or towards the back. [**Translation note**: Here, "anca" has been translated as "hip", and "dislocada a las partidas dedintz" means "dislocated to the inner part".]
And it is mostly dislocated towards the inner side, and less frequently towards the front or back. [**Translation note**: Here, "anca" has been translated as "hip", and "dislocada a las partidas dedintz" means "dislocated to the inner part".][**Note**: The text seems to indicate that dislocation of the hip joint is most commonly found towards the inner side, which may be consistent with medical literature on hip dislocations.]
And the sign of dislocation towards the inner side is that when you align the patient's healthy leg with the affected leg, the affected leg appears longer and more prominent in the thigh than the healthy leg, and the patient cannot bend their knee as much as they should be able to. Additionally, there may be a lump near the crease of the thigh, which is an abscess or swelling caused by a displaced piece of bone, indicating that the head of the femur has moved out of place. [**Translation note**: Here, "anca" has been translated as "hip", and "dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz" means "dislocation towards the inner side". The word "lenguonar" has been translated as "bend the knee", but could also refer to bending the leg at the knee joint. The phrase "apostema caut" likely refers to an abscess or collection of pus caused by a displaced piece of bone.][**Note**: Medical literature on hip dislocations notes that this type of injury is often accompanied by a visible deformity, such as a prominent thigh or shortened leg, and limited range of motion in the affected limb.]
And the sign of the injury that results in dislocation towards the outer side is that its symptoms are opposite to those mentioned earlier for dislocation towards the inner side.
The sign of dislocation towards the front is that the leg extends as expected but there is pain in the thigh and the patient cannot bend their knee without difficulty. Additionally, they may have trouble walking and be unable to move their legs forward, and their urinary function may be impaired, resulting in retention of urine or swelling. It is recommended that the patient walk with a cane or crutch to support themselves.[**Translation note**: Here, "anca" has been translated as "hip", and "dislocacio a las partidas denant" means "dislocation towards the front". The phrase "expans la camba sieua segon compliment" means that the leg extends as expected or normally. The word "engonar" has been translated as "swelling", but could also refer to inflammation.][**Note**: Medical literature notes that dislocations of the hip joint can result in various complications, such as injury to blood vessels, nerves, and surrounding soft tissue, as well as impaired range of motion and limited mobility.]
A sign of one who has a dislocation in the back parts is that they cannot stretch the muscle, nor can they bend the one in front without bending the other, and the thigh of the affected side is shorter than the other, and the groin on that side is relaxed, and the head of the femur is out of place.
However, reduction of the dislocation depends on whether it is old and chronic or recent. If the dislocation is old and has already formed a scar, then proceed with reduction and keep it in its position. But if this is not the case, then it is not necessary to perform manipulation.
But in the case of one with a recent dislocation, which is one of the four types of dislocations, you must ensure that you turn the joint and stretch it both internally and externally, and then move it to the right and left, as it will easily return to its place and will not require any other treatment.
But if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare and administer a strong extension to the thigh of the lower part, or with their hands, or with a ligament that is tied above the muscle; and have another person extend the arm of the affected limb in such a way as to place their hands below the crease of the knee; and apply strong pressure with a ligament on the head of the femur, and have another person hold the end of the ligament tightly.
And perform an extension of the groin to the thigh at the level of the pelvis, or from the back to the chest.
And perform all these extensions in one go, so that the patient is raised with their body off the ground and remains hanging.
And this type of extension is common to all four.
And so if the dislocation returns with what we have said, it will be good; and if not, then it is necessary for each type of treatment that I will now describe.
In the reduction of the dislocation, when it is dislocated inward and the dislocation is in the inner parts, it is necessary that the patient be raised up on their side; and place the ligaments over the head of the femur at that point where the head of the femur enters between the location that is just above the groin; and extend the ligament upward from the thigh to the highest part of the pelvis.
And have another person strongly grasp the patient's arms and press on the large muscle of the affected thigh, extending it outward forcefully, as this will return to its place.
And this type is of easier treatment for reducing this limb than the others.
But if the patient resists and does not obey the treatment with this type of cure, then it is necessary to tie both of their feet together with a ligament, lightly but firmly, over the heels and toes.
And let the length of each ligament be four finger widths, and let the affected thigh be extended more than the other by two finger widths.
And let the patient be suspended over the top of the post, and in the middle; and let the length of the ligament from the ground be two arm lengths.
And command a strong young person to pull down on the head of the femur, and let them be suspended with the patient along with another young person, who will push the thigh upwards forcefully, so that the joint returns to its place quickly.
But in the reduction of the dislocation, when it is located on the outer part, it is necessary for the patient to lie on their back as we have recommended in the case of a groin strain; and apply strong pressure with a ligament directly on the affected thigh and on the foot of the patient.
And let two poles be placed, one under the feet and the other at the head; and let adjusted poles be placed in the middle of the bed on which dampened sheets are wrapped, so that the patient is not harmed by the pole being between their thighs, as this will prevent extension to the lower parts.
And let each person extend on their side, and the doctor with their hand guides the reduction according to art (i.e., skill).
And when the dislocation is in the front parts, then it is necessary to slightly extend the thigh and follow this same narration on the bed; place the palm of your right hand on the affected groin, and with your other hand apply pressure and hold the extension to the lower parts at the level of the knee.
And if the dislocation is in the back parts, then it is not necessary for the patient to be extended at the lower parts and they should be raised off the ground; it is necessary that they lie on a hard surface, as we said before regarding lifting them if their hips are dislocated to the outer parts, according to what we said about supporting them on two wide surfaces; and have them lie on their back with the ligaments extended, as we said, without delay.
And it is necessary to apply compression with a board on the location where the joint protrudes.
Therefore, when the reduction is completed as necessary  and the sign of the reduction is not hidden from you, and it is that the patient extends both thighs, and when you see them straighten and the patient resists with their excuse, then you know that the limb has returned to its proper place  then adjust the hips and apply a plaster, extending it with bandages so that the hip is not damaged in any part; and keep the patient at rest for three or four days.
And then loosen the ligament and plaster, and compare one thigh with the other.
And if you see them equal in appearance, then know that the dislocation has healed and so let the patient go.
And if you see any sign of relaxation, then return and reapply the plaster to that area and extend it according to your initial measurement, and leave it for three days.
And then loosen the plaster and have the patient delay in walking for several days, until they are strengthened.
Chapter 32.
Chapter 32: On the treatment of ankle dislocation.
The ankle is dislocated in three ways, which are: it can be dislocated to the outer parts, to the inner parts, and to the lower parts more than to the back parts; but it cannot be dislocated to the front parts.
And the sign of ankle dislocation is that you command the patient to flex their leg by bringing their heel towards their buttock, and if they are unable to do so, then you know that the ankle is dislocated.
And the restoration of all three ways of ankle dislocation is that you make the patient lie down straight, so that they can extend their leg if possible; place your hands on their thigh and hold it still, and place their foot between your feet; then apply pressure with your palms on their ankle and hold it firmly between your fingers over their ankle, and apply strong pressure, and have another person extend the patient's foot until the ankle returns to its proper position.
And the sign of reduction of the dislocation is that their leg adheres to their thigh without exerting any force.
And then apply a plaster to the area and bind the leg to the thigh with a bandage for three or four days, and then loosen the bandages.
And the patient should not walk for several days, until they have healed and are strengthened.
But if the reduction of the ankle is resisted by the patient, then administer strong extension with ligatures, as described in the treatment of hip dislocation.
Chapter 33.
Chapter 33: On the treatment of talus dislocation.
The talus bone can sometimes be subluxated (partially dislocated) due to a minor injury, and in other cases it can be fully dislocated as a result of complete rupture of the ligaments that hold it in place. Dislocation of the talus can occur either inward or outward.
And the sign of talus dislocation is that you see it protruding towards the side to which it is dislocated.
However, the treatment of talar subluxation (minor displacement) is relatively easy to reduce and involves gentle extension with the hands while guiding it back into place.
However, in the treatment of a talus dislocation that is fully displaced, it is necessary to make the patient lie down straight and have a strong and capable assistant support the back of the affected limb in the middle position.
And then place your right hand under the highest part of the foot and your left hand below the ankle on the heel.
And then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and push it with your left hand in two movements, and extend it with your left hand while pushing the heel of the foot upwards with your right hand.
And do that twice, as I have mentioned.
And then on the third occasion, bend the foot towards the calf, and you be at the ankle.
So if it returns in one or two instances in this manner, and if the foot becomes swollen, that is good; but if not, then repeat the operation, because it will return.
But if it is forbidden for you to reduce it with the method I have recommended, then make the patient lie on their side on the ground and place a small cushion firmly on the ground between their thighs. Wrap a cloth around them so that they do not slip out from under the cushion.
And have one attendant hold the patient's thighs and another extend their leg with their hands or by pulling gently on the lower leg; each attendant should pull in the opposite direction to stretch the patient's limb, and the cushion should be placed between the patient's thighs, retaining them in position so that the body does not move downwards due to the limb's extension.
And the doctor should reduce the dislocation with their hands and another attendant should hold the healthy thigh down below, because the dislocation can easily return.
And when the dislocation returns and you are certain of the success of the reduction, then apply an emplaster and wrap it firmly, and bind the foot to the calf.
And you must be cautious of the nerves that are located near the heel, and apply the bandage gently over that area to avoid causing damage or injuring it excessively.
And leave it for two or three days; and if the bandage becomes soaked, remove it.
And unwrap it on the third day or the fourth, and forbid the patient from walking for 40 days. But if the patient is forced to walk within that time frame, there is a danger that the dislocation may become aggravated and incurable, and it may not heal properly.
And if an abscess forms, then it is necessary to administer in the place where it has developed the treatment that we mentioned earlier in our narrative, using incision and drainage as a cure until it has healed.
Chapter 34.
On the treatment of dislocation of the toes.
It is necessary that a dislocation be swollen with little extension and effort, and it is not difficult, rather easy.
But if the dislocation is in the joints of the second toe, then it is necessary that you have the patient place their foot on a hard surface such as the ground or a table, and remain standing in that position as if walking.
And you should stand firmly and place your foot over the joints, and then apply pressure with your foot on the affected area with strength until it returns to normal. You should check that it is swollen and that there is no bulge in the area.
And place a board under the sole of the patient's foot that supports the entire foot, with two ends, and firmly secure it with appropriate tension for three days. Then unbind it and allow the patient to rest from walking for several days until it is healed and there is no risk of relapse.
Chapter 35.
On the types of dislocation caused by wounds, fractures, or both together.
When such causes occur and you strive to cure and restore the affected area, many times death will follow.
And therefore, one should not presume in curing such cases but instead seek the help of a wise and experienced physician who is merciful, compassionate, cautious, and humble. They should initially use medicines that only reduce abscesses, leaving the patient to divine judgment. But they should hope for salvation from perdition with alleviation of the illness, and there should be some hope for recovery. And therefore, strive to make the reduction as soon as possible at the onset of the injury before any abscesses form.
And if the limb returns as we desire, then administer a regimen that will reduce abscesses and treat the wound with drying agents as appropriate.
And if the dislocation is accompanied by a fracture and there are separated bone fragments, then you should perform the treatment for their stabilization, and do what we have said in simple injuries that is mentioned in the previous sections regarding these types of cases.
And guard yourself and avoid as much as possible any intrusion into the patient's body through fearful means, according to my previous warning. This is better for you with your Creator, and more permanent for your glory, and more true health for your body in your time. Thus ends the words of Albucasis perfectly, may God bless him. Indeed, may it be so.
