After I have finished this book with you, my sons, which is in the aftermath of medicine's science and complete, having reached its end by examining it from his explanations and his declarations; thus has been given to me that I may finish reading it along with you as a part of surgery, namely, hand surgery.
Since the operation has been completed in our region and at our time, unless knowledge of it was lost by mistake or a deliberate act; unless descriptions have not been recorded in ancient books that were copied out by hand: and thus there was an error and a waste until the intentions of him were set forth; and prolonged thereafter. It is given to me so that I may execute her along with this Treatise according to its terms, as described above from positions, declarations, and abbreviations: and so you will come back in forms of tools for Cautery, and the remaining instruments of works: until it is clear by declaration addition or by his proper statement what should be necessary.
On the other hand, because the art of medicine is long and requires its author to exercise before that in knowledge of anatomy is described by Galenus; until he knows how members are connected together, and their forms, and their connection, and separation, and has knowledge of bones, nerves, veins, and vessels, and numbers of them, and their exit from it, and pulsations of the arteries, quietness, and places where they go out.
And Hippocrates said that a name with its name is much; but the hand of art is small and especially in the art of surgery.
We have already spoken about it when entering into this book.
Since he who is not known what we spoke about anatomy does not enter and falls into an error from which men suffer; just as I have heard many of those who are formed in this science, but do not practice it without knowledge or experience.
"That happened because a medical student cut through the veins of a woman's neck and caused blood to flow from her; this ultimately led to her death.
"I saw another medical student who took pride in extracting a stone from the bladder of an old woman; after that, the stone was large. "Therefore he punished him by removing his beard with scissors. "This is why the man died on the third day.
"And I too had spoken to him about removing it; and I saw that there was a large stone in his bladder, which would lead to death.
"And I saw another medical student who was treating a man from Ducum terrae nostrae propter medicam; and he injured the eunuch with black hands (possibly due to anger), which were near his heels; after that, the doctor bound up the fracture on top of them using rope, sticks, and strong cloth. But they did not release his breath.
"Then he was relieved by his desire to get away. "After that he released him on several days and said to him, 'Don't let the rope out,' and he stayed there until his wrists were loose, and then he led him to destruction.
"I therefore spoke to him about removing the rope; after that there was tranquility, and he experienced relief from his suffering.
"However, already corruption had been confirmed in his member; I couldn't stop it.
"Therefore the corruption ceased to walk around in his member until it ended.
"And I saw another medical student who cut off the cancerous tumor; and he was infected after some days, until great malice came with its lord.
"That is because when the cancer is pure due to melancholy at that time it does not need to be burned with iron entirely unless there's something inside of him that allows him to live.
Because of this the sons need to know that a surgical operation is performed with two divisions; for one it associates health and the other has peril associated with many divisions
I have already explained this in another chapter of this book where there is terror and fear involved
Therefore it's necessary for you to remember this so that they don't get confused and may not fall into the trap of speaking or being dishonest
Take care of yourselves with diligence and security; support the weak and the infirm with kindness and firmness so that you may be guided to a better inheritance through grace from God towards salvation and blessed succession: remove terrible anxieties and difficult healings, and let go off your souls when they fear it, so that the desire for conversion may come upon you in trust and comfort.
It will be more beneficial to your glory and higher in this world as well as ultimately on the quantities of yours.
Galen has already said it in certain his own statements. Do not cause harm to yourself, for you are the best doctors of your bodies.
I am about to divide this Treatise into three Chapters
Chapter one
Chapter one on the treatment of burns and acute medicine
Chapter two
Chapter two on the topic of sections and perforations, phlebotomy and venography, ulcers: extraction arrows, similar to those: and all that is in chapter one, ordered by forms of instruments.
Chapter three
Chapter three on the topic of restoration and dislocations, and the care of twists: similar to what was in chapter two, ordered by forms of instruments.
Before starting an operation concerning the cutting of flesh and bone, it is necessary to mention (the quality) of the instruments used; this should be noted down. And what kind of incision reveals the complexion?
Therefore, I will say that regarding the quality of instruments used in cutting flesh and bone, this is a long, short, knowledgeable, and hidden
Having spoken on the quality of instruments used for cutting flesh and bone, they have made their decisions; to me, however, only a few things from what was said are sufficient.
Therefore, I will say that cautery is universally applied to all kinds of flesh where there is no material substance; and for the two types mentioned earlier: one which is hot without any material substance and another which is dry without any material substance.
But regarding the cold type and the dry type with a material substance, they have spoken. And someone said that cautery is useful (in this situation). And others said the opposite of this, namely that cautery is not useful for cutting into a cold substance which is both hot and dry; because nature is (hotness) is heat.
The one who said the opposite of this mentioned that cautery can be useful for cutting into all cold substances which are both hot and dry; because when you compare a human body to its moisture, and you look at the complexion of fire on it, then the body becomes (cold).
I will say this through his words because from my experience that has already happened to me a certain number of times.
Nevertheless do not let him enter here until he is already tried and practiced (in the art of cautery), has exercised himself thoroughly at that point, and knows about the variety in complexion among people, their disposition towards heat, causes them to occur, accidents they cause, and time periods during which they happen.
Other veins have no fear of you: especially those of cold and moist All the physicians have used them, but did not fail when Cautery was applied to them.
And it is known by the sons that from Cautery secret treatment with fire and kindness to him when accompanied with medicine burns well because fire alone action not succeeded unless the part burned: and does not hurt another member with it, except painer.
The action of physicians was done to that which grows from the members: and sometimes it causes to strike in the difficult recovery member, and sometimes it weakens.
Fire because of his subtlety and substance goodness does not do that, unless excessive.
We did not discover that by experience, for the length of services and study with art and position over integrity people's: and because of this excuse out of the sermon in length.
And if not for this book of mine, we would reveal to you the secret hidden by fire and the quality of its operations in removing its own body, which expelled the fears through a philosophical demonstration speech that agreed with your minds.
And it is known by the sons that these dissent at a time when Cautery was agreed to be done, and they consider it as better than any other time of yours.
And I say that Cautery is agreed at all times: therefore the pain caused by time is overcome when brought with Cautery. And especially if Cautery is for the pains from necessary pain, strong, winter, who does not tolerate delay: therefore because of it, it is feared by those, that caused malice greater than what was previously called as a result of time.
And it does not remain in the minds of your sons except the ignorant and foolish physicians who consider that by Cautery healed is not a remedy always: and they consider it as a result, but are not like them; therefore because Cautery is not, unless on medicine's place which changes complexion, and dries the moisture that causes pain.
However, it is necessary to apply cautery over medicine for the benefit of its own application and effectiveness, as well as that of his master. It is possible that he may find a shortage at some time due to the lack of one or another ingredient from which he prepares the operation; therefore, we must provide him with this lack in order to be able to administer cautery.
Subtile deficiency of the member (or limb) from which there is a lack of excess moisture and humidity, such as with dental cautery for pain relief, it is possible that he will not experience any pain in this area. However, this would only happen over time.
The correct sequence of the utterance is as follows: "After the application of medicine comes a speech which should be made once (immediately after) - this one refers to the treatment itself and what was intended in that person; because they believe that the treatment does not confer benefits with medicines or post-cautery.
However, this is contrary to the correct sequence of events - when we apply the cures in a specific ingredient, they do not confer the benefits of medicine; after that, we administer the treatment at the end and provide it: then, from that point on, the application of cautery after medicine no longer follows the intended order as understood by most people.
They have said that cautery with gold is better than cautery using iron; they did not say this however, unless the reason for their preference was equal in quality and value of gold; they have stated that it does not make a bad place for cautery. This is not absolutely true because I have already tried this and tested it; however, what that thing does to some bodies but not others cannot be determined.
Cautery with him is a benefit, better than using iron as they say. However when you apply cautery to fire within fire without declaring it as such and the amount of heat is unknown because of the burn on the skin; and if added fire above that point ignites and causes great pain, and results in burns.
Because of this injury to the craftsman in his craft; and because of that there should be Cautery (a surgical technique) performed using fire near us as soon as possible and close by for performing an operation.
And I too have ordered this chapter on Cautery according to the chapters; and ordered it from the head down to the feet so that those seeking what is done by him may find it.
The head, part 2
This Cautery causes the control of moisture and cold on the brain: which two are caused by; and abundance of flux from the head to the parts of the eyes and ears, and abundance of sleep, and pain in teeth, and pain in the throat: and universally all injuries caused by cold as paralyze, epilepsy, apoplexy, and similar ones.
The Cautery method is to perform it quickly; so that the remedy with a solution of fire may first be applied three times during the night or four if needed by virtue and his age, and by custom
Then tell him to wash it off immediately. After that have him sit between your hands flat so that his hand has already been placed on top of the chest.
Then place the base of your palm on the base of his nose between his eyes. Whenever your middle finger reaches that point, mark it with ink.
Then Cautery of Oliver should be applied whose shape is this one.
After that place it on the marked spot slowly with ink so that your hand can be drawn back gently and you remove it. "Firstly, take your knife and put it aside.
"After that, if you have already cut off a head or the back of your hand, then take away your knife. "If not, put the knife back and wait for them to show you your bones which I have given you.
"Then pour something from the sale and place it into water, drink it yourself, put on your head and leave after three days.
"Then pour something from the sale onto your head and remove it after three days until the charcoal is burned away. "After that, take care of yourself with the ointment and apply it often enough to heal.
"They said this is better because more pus comes out when the wound is opened and emitted by it.
"They said some people do this to the skin up to the mouth and hold a cautery until the bones of the spit are gone.
"After that is applied to the wound then it is cured.
"Others say that it is necessary to cauterize with a cautery until the end so that there will be no impression of blood in your mouth and the mouth will die as if cut off by a knife or an instrument made for women which are dipped into alpha-betic parum: they also say, when you exhale from this place, you lose hair on the head and it must heal after opening for a long time.
"After that, then it is cured until it becomes solid.
"But I do not see two kinds of cauteries universally except among some people based on fear.
"I remove it and it is better with the health of them.
"This weakness of the head from a natural solution is continuous and consistent with our experience on other parts of the body especially when it is weak by nature and the species cautery are best and better among us to use them.
The third book
Chronic pain affects the entire head when an injury occurs to it; and prolonged this in weakness, is used by the elderly, the disabled, the young, and the middle-aged. And particularly if one has already been cauterized with a cautery, we do not apply anything to him from these; but then consider this. If the head is naturally strong and not weak, but rather has a good constitution; then we cauterize it with another cautery beneath that one. Then we cauterize his head with all the veins of his own head with another cautery, so that no wound shall pass over the skin and an estimate is made of the quantity from the bone which we mentioned earlier. And we cauterize him with a single cautery at the place where that one is mentioned; and it is the site to which he was bound up before, and take your oath on this, and do not disclose his mouth. Weak then was affected by that chronic pain of the head because its cautery is not as strong as those of all heads.
And I tell this Cautery at its place; and it must be the Cautery which is used to cauterize the veins of the head, and done gently with a Cautery beneath that one for the middle aged.
The fourth book
When pain occurs to part of the head and also extends it to the eye; or when prolonged until it reaches an exhausted state, and is treated with medical substances on the head, and additional care is given to it for its treatment, which I mentioned earlier in the division into stages of exhaustion: then cauterization in him takes place according to two ways.
Cauterization with a hot implement is necessary if there's an acute infection, to remove one tooth at the same time and cut off its roots, also amputate both of his limbs from two sides Once the location of pain is found while holding a needle, let them make that spot underneath where you can catch hold of it
After that, hold him down underneath the oil with a sponge and cure it from there
And if you want to do that using some of the medicines I wrote about in the 12th book on remedies for hemorrhoids.
Cauterization with iron is necessary, as well as any other hot implement. The shape of the cautery tool used for this purpose is a cone
The shape of it's called the Claw because its form is like a claw with an eminence in the middle.
After that, hold him down on the spot and keep your hand steady: also heat iron gently with a wick and make its quantity as you would give out skin fat, just like his endurance. And take hold of your hand to prevent the artery from being damaged and to stop the bleeding.
After that, put him under water with salt and hold down on the spot: later on cure it using oil; after that, cure it gently using an ointment.
And if you want to do this for a stroke with the help of a second cautery tool. And when doing so on an artery during a stroke, it's not just an ordinary task.
Cauterization for this purpose is different from the one used before.
When you cure a stroke, as for the treatment of that ailment before and regarding the divisions of blood vessels, except in cures; do not forget to cure it: and if you find out from pain lines that are above the spot with the length of your fingers or like this: also hold his hand down until you hit an artery and pull it right up to his mouth.
However, it is necessary for you to cut off the continuation of the jaw that moves forward during chewing so as not to obstruct its passage or get stuck in its way and cause a spasm.
And this is with caution and care for the flow of blood in arteries that has been cut off. For the cutting of it (the artery) is frightening for him who did not know what he was doing or was not diligent and experienced enough, so that the surgical procedure with him should be performed first.
And I am remembering the regulation of blood flow from an artery according to its own way and at its place in this book.
Which if you do not see through a hemorrhage (bleeding), that which is not enough for him to the cautery and you see the body of the nurse to tolerate the cautery in the middle of the head as we did with care, until it is healed.
And if you are given a cautery, which we mentioned in the chapter on the extraction of arteries with a pair of tweezers holding it. The cautery is therefore better and more useful for this purpose.
Regarding the way of cautering with the ears of a person.
When an earache occurs with cold and is treated with solutions of herbs as we said it would be done in the previous part, and does not disappear, then use the cautery; this thing which is called a dot (puncture) has its shape like that one.
Then the dot with it after its ignition is applied to the whole circumference of the ears as we have mentioned; or else apply it in both sides if the pain occurs on both sides at once. And after you have used the tweezers to the root of the ears as much as possible, when you have marked out its location with wax; and there are ten dots on every ear, or nearly so.
Then cure the places until they are healed.
Regarding the way of cautery for torture
On the head
Torture that is treated by cauterization only occurs when the burns are caused by contact with fluids, as stated earlier in the division of burning injuries.
And if there is no application of cautery, it will happen due to burns caused by friction or from a spasm in the nerves.
When you treat this kind of torture with honey and burnings on the head and neck, and gargling, but if your cure does not come to pass, then it is necessary that cautery be applied by three Cauteries: one at the root of the ear, another below in time from its own height, and thirdly at the junction of two arms.
And place your Cautery on the opposite side of a weak person. Although the soothing does not happen unless it is applied to the healthy part.
And the form of cautery is that you apply Cautery directly to the top of the ear, as it was described earlier. Place your hand with the Cautery until a medium amount of fire has burned off the skin.
And this is the form of Cautery, and it is species by contact with a thing that has been described earlier. However, although not inferior to others in subtlety, but it should be placed so as to burn off excessive fat only.
Then, cure the sick person with what preceded it until they recover completely.
The manner of Cautery for ancient apoplexy
When ancient apoplexy occurs and your cure does not come to pass, but the patient has no fever, then apply Cautery by four Cauteries on each of his headcorns, Cautery in the middle of the head, as stated earlier, Cautery at the occiput of the head, according to what preceded it.
"The cautery is applied over the stomach with a cautery.
"Then it was cured, as before
"Head number nine
"It is intended to puncture the water bag on its belly with a large syringe and to release the brain's fluid.
"Then he will remove the head completely and place it on a cloth described in the treatise on cloth placement; then he places him (the head) once.
"The method of cautery is as follows: and do it according to the order mentioned there.
"If so, it is good "If not, he applies the third cautery to the back of his head, which is descent from the top of the head down to the bottom of the eye; and puts between every large cautery a certain amount of digit.
"Then it was cured, as before
"If you add an increase to him and he is tolerant of that; then do the cautery in the middle. "Then if you add more, it will cauterize over two ears
"Then cure him; and the cautery should be applied according to its form which was previously mentioned.
"The cautery is applied in paralysis, with mollification.
"Head number ten
"It was intended that you proceed to the brain's fluid with your syringe and as before.
"Then he will remove the head and apply a cautery to its middle part; and a cautery above every ear, over all of his ears, over three on the spine of his neck.
"If you are weakened by many and excessive bodily pains; and if he is tolerant of it but has great strength in his fearfulness: then apply him four cauteries to the back of his spine; and last with a cautery until all the most extreme pain is consumed, and release your hand. Therefore take care of it, so that it may be healed; and with Oil of Olive
The manner of cauterizing during Epilepsy
During an attack (Epilepsy) do not use fire; except for those whose Epilepsy is caused by discharge of phlegm.
And let it be done for the brain of him primarily with water and with other treatment as we have prescribed in the last chapter; when he is in a state to be treated gently or if he is to accept medical care.
If the child does not tolerate medicines, then apply a mixture of water and emetic to cleanse his brain in advance over several days along with nourishing food.
Then treat his head after that manner of cauterizing as described before; and another cautery is applied to the upper part of his head, and over every hair of his head there will be a cautery. If he is weak and still tolerates it, then cauterize him with the cauteries that I prescribed in his having paralysis; and soothing to the body over the collarbones and shoulders; and also on the back of the spine: And let there be Oil of Olive as before.
If he is a child who does not tolerate medicines, then apply it gently according to this manner.
The manner of cauterizing during Melancholia
When the causes of Melancholia are damp and thick phlegm; then cauterize him with the cauteries that I prescribed in his having paralysis.
And if the causes of Melancholia are an excess of declivity to Melancholia and his body is wet with moisture; then give him in a pot what will cleanse his brain as before: then treat his head gently after that; and make afterwards a tortellini from linen, like a ring.
Then hold the same on top of his head; and if he is lying down to treat him all over
Indeed, present ointment. It is worthy of use from ancient butter. And warm it with heated oil according to a moderate measure that allows the finger when it is inserted into it. Indeed, wash him gently from head to toe and let him dry off after rinsing well.
Do this treatment every week with the best of your ability until you are cured.
Or if he is a non-smoker, burn him with small holes as many times as possible in order to avoid holding the hand while burning it gently; so that it will smell of smoke.
This indeed makes the brain moist from a blow when quality is great.
Indeed put on top of him some butter or chicken fat.
In the manner of a cautery descending from head to eye
Head 13
When it is declared to you the beginning of water through a sign that I showed you previously, then start and let him dry with his head first, after rinsing well with what he made wet it.
And protect him from all liquids, and let him stay in the bath for a certain number of days.
Indeed prepare it so that he can remove his own head, and burn him gently from head to toe. Indeed burn him with two fire-makers or two hooks, if the descent of water into both eyes is simultaneous; or from one side if it descends into only one eye; and cease all veins and arteries that are under the skin, which are short in latitude; and make the cauterization long through the flow of blood.
Which if you see something from it, then cease him immediately with whatever medicine is possible; and I always when wisdom that is in the extraction of arteries, and their removal, and caution to the flow of blood.
Indeed sometimes a burn occurs on the ear under two ears; from two last makers of hooks.
"Of the burning of the eyes.
When tears of the eyes are ancient and dried up: and are located above the ears, and arteries that are external to the head, it is necessary to burn this with cold fluids; then you must burn using a cautery in the middle of the scalp: and two cauteries over the two temples: and two cauteries below each ear. And if there are additional wounds, then you must burn it with a cautery on all sides of the eyes, above the eyebrows using another cautery.
"Of the burning for the nose.
When you treat this one, along with what we said in the previous section and do not give a treatment; then immediately afterward, provide three nights' rest to him: afterwards shave his head and burn it using a cautery on both sides of the nose. Afterwards burn him with two cauteries over the two eyebrows under the hair.
And be careful of the artery to prevent piercing it.
This is how the burning of Claudius works.
"Of the burning for the softening of the palm.
When the palm of the eyes is softened by dust or humidity: then burn it with a cautery using one, along with another one for the moon.
And if there is another wound, burn it above two of the eyebrows and spread out by two blows; and the length of all the cauteries will be according to their height: and you may not cut off your hand using a cautery unless there is something that has been applied on the third palm.
"With the palm with hairs prickled on the eyes.
In this [the seventeenth head] there are two ways to apply a cautery, either with fire or with a burning medicine.
When applying the cautery with fire, before doing so, take care to cleanse [the body part] beforehand in order that any hairs it may contain are burned off, unless those hairs are growing and thus prolonging their duration until they become equalized. If one is cauterizing the body part around its own location [the area where it was applied], then hold his eyes with a clamp or something similar so that they do not move until they are born [i.e., burned].
After they are born and equalized [i.e., after the cautery has burned off their hairs], then place the head of your instrument gently in its own place. Next, apply a wax seal to his eyelids with a seal that corresponds to the shape of dead leaves, so as to indicate when it is time to remove them. And let this be the first sign [in removing the hairs] towards the roots.
After that you place the head of your instrument soaked in alum or mucilage over his eye.
And after a while when another cautery is needed it will be used to remove any remaining hairs.
And when you have finished applying this seal over the figure that you marked out just now on his eyelids until the surface of the skin has been burned like a shape made from dead leaves completely and entirely.
And this is the seal of your work on medicine so that if you have already marked out the eyelid with a seal and it is time to remove the hairs from around the point of the eye, then let the hairs be removed at the point of the eye itself.
And then you use your hand in that moment and remove it after three days.
After this place the head of your instrument soaked in butter over him until all trace has been removed. And after that care for him with unguent so that he may be cured.
If anything is released after the hairs have been burned off at this time and he becomes calm [i.e., relaxed], then apply another cautery to that place again as you did originally.
If hair is found below, then it should be cauterized immediately until it reaches its proper place; and it will equal to not itch the eye.
It is that the sick person may cease hair until they are prolonged and equal to each other. From an inscription on a piece of linen, "I made myself like the wings of a bird.
Afterwards he took soap in his knowledge, and from the water not taken once or any other load of a penny weight, until then he takes good grace with it, so that it would be avoided. Afterwards from the hand of a cloth as you made the shape of wings like bird feathers and puts it on the eye socket one or two. And put under his eye drink, the albumen, yes; and sick head is in your neck.
And puts your finger pointing above medicine, and makes it jump higher. And you might say to him the number of times sense was sick and biting medical treatment: because his bite as fire had hit.
When therefore he persisted this which itself has bitten off, then dismiss the medicine and move her with your finger. And when you stop biting, then remove the medicine, and wipe the eye with water.
Then consider if you want to rub the eyelid with a stroke like fire or a cut: and then it is good; but if not, then again above from medicine on the place where did not medicine print, and does not tarnish, until it becomes equal operation your hand, and contraction of the eye.
Afterwards puts with butter over him, until eradicate skin burns. Afterwards cure it with a treatment of honey or another, until it is cured.
And you must be there at the end of an operation to keep your last hold of a place that nothing from medicine does not fall into his eye.
"If the eyelid is swollen after a day and scratches something into the eye from its hairs, then apply medicine to that place where the swelling originates from the eyelid itself just as you did at first. After this care for him until he recovers.
And this is the shape of a man's death.
You know that men's eyes differ in size and proportion. Therefore, given this consideration by you - and not to be concealed the way of rectitude for him who pursues this art with diligence.
Of burning a fistula of tears
When you treat a fistula as we described in divisions of tears and do not make your care complete - then when cauterizing it is required that you do so according to this manner.
Support him until he places his head on your arm and holds it with his own head resting between your hands so that it does not move or cause any disturbance by the head itself.
After placing a small glass on his eye, or over his eyelid with saliva - then burn the cautery whose shape is this one.
Hold it tightly, as if the shape of a pen's quill bound by one end and held tight with both ends - just like how the cautery fits in: and if you push it forward until the other edge is reached and if you hold it tightly from above then do so.
However, this concauum is better for your work.
After expressing the fistula if it is open and take out what you have taken - then put him back in immediately if not opened; take from his hand and put her there.
Then place over it the cautery that is heated on fire.
And hold with your hand tightly near the cautery on his eye to prevent it from being pulled out or agitated by him - and place over that the cautery in a groove of the eyelid and burn it.
If you perform an operation from your own cautery until it reaches a good result And if not, then make another cautery at once or after some time, depending on the extent of the injury; and discard this tool in three days.
Then apply a bandage soaked with butter, and treat him with oil until he is cured.
If after 40 days he does not get better, then apply a hot corrosive medicine to him until the disease is cured; and repeat this application as many times as needed within its chapter.
Another method of cautery was mentioned by some people. Cauterize the place where the fistula is found; and then apply a subtle tool called a Canna subtilis, which has this form. And when you have found this in him and measured out a drachma of the liquefied lead, hold your hand with the good Canna, so that he does not lose his strength and should not be moved from any direction, lest it flow down to his eye.
And you must apply the injured man's lead with either egg white or water.
Lead is cauterized to the place of the fistula and is cured by a marvelous treatment.
If the fistula is healed as we have described from the cautery and care, it is beneficial (good). If not, then you must administer a nasal tube to the fistula and narrow it down towards its own course as much as possible at that place itself.
By this method of cautery for the veins (Labi).
There are many tears in the veins of the lips which are called Pila, and especially in the mouths of children.
If you have many tears to cure; as we described it by the burning of small bits of lead and without care for the treatment, then burn the narrow tool with fire in this manner.
His skill is measured as how much he can subdue her (the patient)
Then he shall apply a flame to the wounds so that it may cauterize them and prevent any further bleeding from deep wounds.
And then he will treat him with the cautery until he is cured.
By means of the cautery applied to the fistula of the nose.
When the abscess is in the root of the gums or in the palate or in the roots of teeth - then he makes pus and it runs; subsequently it hardens, it flows, it forms a fistula; then the same cure is applied, but not put into her treatment, then it is necessary to apply fire to the fistula according to the amount that fits within the fistula. Then he shall apply the flame to a fistula of the nostrils and hold your hand until it cauterizes deeply into him; afterwards you do this same thing once or twice more often.
And then he cures him after that as we have said in the treatment until it is cured completely.
If therefore his health improves and heals, this will be a good thing. And if not, then it is necessary to remove the corrupted place and cure his mouth according to what did not occur at the top of his head.
By means of the cautery applied to the gums, and the teeth are softened up
When the gums are softened due to moisture and teeth are moved by them, and cure her with medicines, do not put it - then he puts his head on your shoulder.
Then the flame is applied to cauterize it; which shape cannot follow these - so that you put a bandage on top of the tooth and then apply fire in it until he feels the heat already from the teeth: hold your hand firmly while doing this.
And afterwards you repeat cautery a number of times according to what is being done with them.
"Then [the sick person] puts his mouth under a warm stream of salty water and holds it for one hour; then spits out the same.
The hardness of the throat [is] softened by means of the application of a warm stream of salty water and stretching [of the tongue], and thus moisture is restored to that which has been corrupted through dryness.
"The manner for cauterizing teeth.
When the pain [in teeth] is due to coldness or there is a chill present; when they are numb and not restored by treatment with medicines, then use a Cautery in this way - either as a Cautery with butter or a Cautery with fire.
The Cautery [is used] when it is employed together with butter - as you gently place the butter upon its surface and press it down into the ear canal or the nose. Then take hold of it [the Cautery] and apply pressure to both sides. Then plunge the Cautery into butter and press it onto a painful tooth; hold it there until the pain subsides; then repeatedly apply pressure to gradually extinguish the fire in the teeth.
"And if you wish - plunge the Cautery into a cold butter or onto a painful tooth; and then press it down with hot iron until the fire is extinguished in the deepest part of the teeth.
The Cautery [is used] when it is employed together with fire - either to the air passage or onto a metal object such as a piece of iron. And there should be some bodily substance within it so that it cannot extinguish the heat [of fire] towards your mouth when you are ill.
Then apply the Cautery to it [the fire] and place it onto that tooth; hold your hand while you do this until the Cautery is extinguished.
Repeat this several times as necessary - either on that same day or another day.
"And apply pressure to it [the Cautery] as you gently place the warm butter upon its surface and hold it for one hour; then spit out the same.
This is the cauterizing instrument
Cauterize with whatever extremity you have at your disposal, and this is the form of a needle
To cauterize through a straw.
When the straw is full of phlegm and surrounded by cold fluids that do not facilitate digestion through the mechanical means with which they are supplied, you light the cautery, whose form this is.
Having two open extremities to allow smoke from one to pass through to the cautery by another, and setting it on fire above the other immediately until a hole is burned all the way through, or if you need to go further into that hole, then after the second time when you light it up again.
If the hole has become small, then set another smaller needle in the hole to cauterize further.
Then remove it after three days and put fat over it until what was burned away by the fire is removed.
Then cure him with oil of cloves to heal the needle's shape.
To cauterize through a straw and constriction.
When fluids come over the lungs' straw and especially when that is accompanied by cold complexion, it should be encouraged to first help with medical solutions.
Then cauterize him into a knot at the base of his throat on both sides, and after that do not continue with the cautery, unless something else is needed.
Then cauterize him into a knot with the cautery above his knee joints, and after that put another smaller one on for later use.
Then cure him with it until he is healed.
To cauterize through the lungs and also.
When cough and lung stiffness are caused by cold dampness and weakness does not have fever or phthisis (scrofula) and ancient cough; at that time cautery should be applied with two skewers above the navel in depressed positions, gently And another one in between the breasts; and set a second catheter according to its shape that precedes it.
If your cautery is done with a needle called Point whose shape proceeds from the pain of the ear; and there are thirty points ranging up to nearly as many others.
Then you should take care of him when it precedes, until he is cured
And then a catheter with three rams in this shape. Because the application of cautery is done when you do it with one tria catheters.
The twenty-seventh chapter.
When the arm causes dislocation by dampness and does not fit into place at the time of its own discharge until it becomes accustomed to its customarily correct position; then after a little movement which happened just as we have testified this is necessary that you decrease the dislocation first. Then he will be supported over his back, or over both shoulders And then use the left hand's finger to touch gently the inner Titillation towards the top; and if dislocation happens there.
And then a catheter with two rams is made. Whose shape this is.
Then the catheter should be applied until it penetrates to another side of the ribs and does not change form with four catheters.
And sometimes when the application of cautery is done with three catheters whose shape proceeds; then six catheters are necessary; and the rams should be set according to the subtlety of the thrusting.
"This is a three-pronged lancet used for cautery.
"And sometimes it is added over this way one, which are eight cauteries.
"Then you put a sponge soaked in salt above the cautery to hold onto it securely. "And then gently remove the affected part of tranquility so that it doesn't move in time and when it is ready to be comfortable.
"If the dislocation is on higher up, that is rare and then cauterize it with a large clamp over the arm or by puncturing many cauteries.
"The application of the ointment makes it firm and removes moisture: And the sick is cured.
"About cauterizing the stomach.
"When there are cold and moist conditions in the stomach until it is extracted with its own skin and many catapults are added to him and they apply various methods of cauterization, but do not confer: Then he should be stretched out on his back and extend his limbs and hands. "And then he cautorizes with three cauteries and below the lower part of the shoulder is done with one clamp and under two laterals of one clamp until the figure of triangular cauteries are formed. "And they lengthen between them so that they do not connect when they make pus.
"The depth of the cauterization is related to the size of three third ones in terms of surface.
"And the shape of the cauteries should be according to this figure without adding: And if you cautorize with a large clamp in the middle of the stomach according to this figure: and there is a cauterization that fits into one according to the circle's shape.
"The stomach is cautorized with a clamp that holds onto it from this clamp and there are signs above the stomach marked point by quantity as you do with encaustic: Then he cautorizes him with punctures then cure him with a treatment until he is cured.
On cold objects
When frostbite, severe pain is caused by it and moisture or a big swelling, until the excess flow of natural skin, and then treatment of sick people, as we said earlier, should not be profice in this: you need to bring the patient up on their own chest with three signs cauterization at once, and this amount same below the hypodermis where he touched the human figure. And space is between all cautery according to the size of the fingers: and a cautery according to the length of the right side of the body: do not compress your hand too much with excessive cautery.
And there is a quantity that comes from the hardness of the skin, and not an increase in amount; and should be standing still on their own feet.
If he is not standing still, then let him fall to the ground, who has extended his limbs and hands himself.
This is the form of cautery.
And to you it's possible that you cauterize this cautery with a cauterizer when you are skilled and have prudence in your art.
And protect yourself that you do not go to cauterization last and harden the whole body, so that it is hardened throughout the body, but also to prevent from the intestines: because skin there is soft, therefore beware of this.
On the cautery of the Epar's ears
When the exit wound occurs and you know that this is on the ear of Epar or inside his tunic, then if it's in the skin of Epar, there was pain for the sick person, and hardness without heat: and if it's inside the tunic of Epar with pain from the heat of others. And you already realize because the treatment has become exhausted by the doctors to him.
"Let him lie down upon his own bed. After that, apply the heated cautery with encaustic plaster to the figure and after that burn away what has been coagulated (or coagulated flesh). That is his form or shape. Then he applies the cautery once with him until his whole skin is burned away and then cleans himself thoroughly from the wounds until all of his senses are recovered; after that, care for him in order to recover.
It is not necessary to apply the cautery form so that it may be done, unless his study in the art of medicine has been prolonged; and with whom hands have accompanied these illnesses for some time now; then he dares to perform this kind of operation.
Better it would be that I remove her from there (i.e., the sick person's bedside).
Cautery of the pleurectomy.
The ancients applied the cautery with the roots of the Aristolochia to the pleurectomy cold as follows: And it is that you take the root of the Aristolochia as a longer one, which comes from there and sits like the size of your fingers. After that immerse her in oil; then ignite or burn her with fire. Then he applies the cautery once into him where there is a connection between the head and neck, with two cauteries to a lesser extent guided by guides under the beard.
And with two more cauteries into him where there is a connection between the fifth and sixth ribs to the back; and another one into the middle of the chest; and another one above the abdomen. And three more cauteries to the back; one into him where there is between two spoons; and two more with both of the lateral ribs, below a cautery which is between two spoons.
It's not necessary to squeeze your hand with the cautery, let it be displayed on the skin smelling.
"Some of the surgeons," they said, "are like those who are cauterized with a hot iron and burned; inside them [the patient] is introduced by fire until it reaches its proper destination within the back so that it may be discharged when needed, unless there's an obstruction: just as we described in the previous chapter for Epatis.
"But with this incision and cautery there is fear, either the patient may die quickly or a fistula occurs at that place where no remedy is.
How to perform splenasection
When you cure the spleen by splenasection, as we described in our previous chapter regarding the treatment of jaundice, and if your care does not help, then the cautery is used according to three ways [described below].
One of the three methods is as follows: Cauterize in a manner that cuts transversely across the spleen's length according to the shape of the cautery [Epatis].
And for each cautery there is quantity of fingerbreadths, either many or few.
The method [of cautery] that we described regarding Epatis's cautery was equal to both methods and one more.
And do not press your hand with the cautery; let the patient exhale into their back.
Another method of cauterization is as follows: When holding the cautery with two fingers according to our description in the chapter on dislocations [of the arm], let it be released when the left cubit falls down, and you release it according to the width of the body so that they fall according to the length of the body.
After that you should hold two ignited fingers until they penetrate the other [hand]. Afterwards take it out of there; thus four cauteries are done.
And if another person holds a third finger along with you, then cautery is performed according to three methods.
After releasing it after many days, the cure is more effective than what preceded it from care.
Cautery is performed with the aid of a syringe/needle and fire.
A cautery does not fail when applied properly
When you cure the Hydropicum using our prescribed methods and do not administer error correction, then it is necessary to apply cautery on four areas around the navel, one above the stomach, another above the buttocks, a third over the wound, two behind the back between the spine points, one directly at the chest, and another directly at the belly. And let the depth of the cautery be proportionate to the sharpness of the pain
After the cautery is applied, it will release a quantity of pus over an extended period of time.
And after the application, you should add two intentions to it. It will heal with the help of God.
With the form used for applying a cautery to the belly, it should be sharp like that one. And with the form used for the back, it should be broad as that one.
Cautery is performed on the feet and hands.
When you apply the Hydropic (a preparation to remove excess skin or fat), and replenish with a citrus water, then apply cautery over the back of the feet between the ear and the anus. And take your hand holding the cautery and do not twist it. Then take your other hand and don't touch it at all.
The water will soften and the cautery should be according to this shape.
After that, apply two cauteries on each of the limbs and set it with a sharp point to cautery. And make the cautery according to the length of the thigh; one below the knee, another below, surrounding around the middle of the thigh. And make two cauteries over all the joints. After releasing the cautery without correction for a long time, let some water be released from it. Then cure it with what we have mentioned.
Cauterizing solution of the Ventricle
The 35th head
When the solution from the stomach is cooled by ice or moisture, until the stomach's strength and digestion weaken, which are in the stomach and intestines; then, cure this with care using appropriate methods, but not heal: when you encounter a patient whose body has become inflamed due to too much cautery, at that time cauterize it with a large cautery over his own stomach. In the same way as before for the stomach, use four cauteries around the umbilicus (umbilicus), and two cauteries; or cautery over the diaphragm above the ribs if there are two of them
And if you encounter excessive moisture and the patient is more tolerant of the illness at that time, then cauterize it with a large cautery over the pecten (pharyngeal tonsil) as well as all other areas; and in addition add two smaller cauteries above the stomach near its great one.
It is a beneficial treatment, whose outcome cannot go wrong.
Cauterizing hemorrhoids
The 36th head
When hemorrhoids are present in the anus and many of them or just one, and they come from excessive humor, coldness, or moisture corruption; then cure this with it as we said before for the uterus, but do not give a benefit to treatment: at that time cauterize three cauteries above the inferior spine of the back below slightly curved triangles, and a cautery under the umbilicus (umbilicus) almost by two fingers.
If you think his stomach is frozen and he can't digest food or face turns sour, then cauterize him with a large cautery over his stomach as before; and a cautery above the epiglottis (glottis) of his throat, another above the spleen of his abdomen, using the same method: give an open cure after a while to let it heal until he is healed.
[This chapter is missing in the text]
When you excisions wounds, then ignite the cautery that has been applied with a flame. Then introduce the ignited cautery into the cut wound; and finally your hand, until it is removed from the opening of the vein by which blood flows out: this should be done once or twice.
If there are multiple wounds, then cautery each one separately with the same instrument as we used before. Then cure them by applying the ointment until they heal.
And if you cautery him with a large cautery over the bandage, then it will be even more of an extreme.
How to cauterize the anus.
This chapter is missing in the text.
When you do not succeed to perform the incision and operation on its own place, then it will be cautery with cautery to heal.
With this happened to a fistula, he was healed and the discharge from that occurred and corrupted moisture. It is right that one should try gently with tweezers to extract it. Then determine the depth of his fistula by gently pulling on it.
Then ignite the cautery that is similar to a flame. Then introduce you into the ignited fistula and determine how deeply it was pulled by tweezers.
Then apply additional cautery until all the corrupted bodies are healed once or twice or three times depending on how deeply you pulled them out by tweezers.
And protect you from the flame of a fire, if it is there or on another body part, until the fistula is directed to the corresponding body cavity: either to the body's surface, or to the intestines' body, then protect you at those locations all around.
Do not do this unless the fistula is in a fatty location and you try to penetrate it.
Until the place is healed
If a seal was placed on the location and the materials are removed from it, then in time there is no need to worry as by that time he has already healed completely
If the materials are not removed from it then you know that he is attempting to get through it or he has a perforated mouth and/or has swallowed something which may come out of his throat. In either case, the memory of these events should be noted at its own location.
Of cauterizing Renes
When he has suffered from frostbite or a great cold and/or had a severe shivering fit which makes him lose consciousness, it is necessary that he be cauterized over the snow-covered Renes in front of them all with an eye dropper to put on every single Renes who had received treatment. The memory of these events should then be noted at their own location.
And we may cauterize him again once within the same location as his first. Why three lines? Therefore more were needed at the end of the treatment.
Of cauterizing Vesicam
When he has become weak from Vesica and the cold has caused a softening of urine due to its moisture and frigidity, unless his strength is retained until urination starts, then we must cauterize him in the lower part of his back towards Vesica where the pectine hairs begin. And also in front of both sides of his body with an eye dropper: this way he may be treated on one side or two sides depending on how many doctors are available to do it and what treatment has been applied before.
Of cauterizing Matricem.
When he is struck with cold and moisture from Matrice where impregnation was prohibited and menstruation occurred to him, unless the cause of this condition had already been established when they arrived in front of each other (i.e., they were not brought there on purpose), then it is necessary that three cauterizers be used around his belly button as we mentioned before for Vesica's cautery, but also on the inferior back or by two cauters depending on how many doctors are available and what treatment had been applied before. The memory of this event should be noted at its own location.
Dislocation of the Anchis
If the mucosa becomes humid and causes the Anchises to be drawn out of place, causing his death at that location; its sign is that it extends from one side to another when brought together with a finger; upon dislocation, this area becomes swollen.
Therefore it is recommended to cauterize the sick person above the Anchises' dislocation with a cautery similar in shape; after you have marked him with encaustic paint as described earlier: until he falls into the center of the circle.
If that cautery is not present at the time you are using it, then cauterize him with three cauteries as described earlier; after that cauterize him again with a large cautery: and let there be depth in proportion to the amount of skin being burned throughout the whole body.
After this treatment he will recover (be cured).
Dislocation of the twelfth cranial nerve causes sciatica.
When a pain arises from the Anchises' dislocation and causes chills or humidity; and when you treat him as we described in the previous division but do not apply curative treatment either, let that happen: then it is recommended to cure the sick person with bitter pills of the fetus, or with artificial ones, similar After this, cauterize him.
The method of cautery is as follows; either by using the cautery with medicines applied to it or by using fire.
Cautery by fire is done in many ways
One way is to cauterize above the Anchises' dislocation using three triangular shaped cauteries with this shape. And make sure that the depth of burn is good or bad. The space between all the cauteries should equal to the quantity of flesh burned on each hand, and there be one big cautery.
When a cautery is applied over the top of the arrowhead There are four types of cauteries
When using a circular cautery, the shape should be such that it encircles and holds the arrowhead firmly.
It is to cut through all of the skin completely
This is a method for cautery used on sciatica when the pain touches the arrowhead itself and does not reach to the hips or thighs.
If the pain reaches to the hips and thighs, then you apply two cauteries simultaneously on each hip at the location where the pain occurs until it subsides, and your cautery is placed on top of four fingers touching a part of it (so as to avoid any damage), making sure that the cautery is in place.
The depth of the cautery should be determined by the depth of the skin incision.
If the pain reaches towards the toes, then apply a cautery at that location with one or two or three or four or more, as it may be necessary to do so.
If the pain is below the knee and above the foot, then apply a cautery at that location with one of those placed on top of it.
Always remember to prevent the cautery from causing harm or cutting through major blood vessels and arteries while aiming for what lies above it on a patient with pain, either in order to stop the bleeding or to contract their muscles.
I also heard that someone was burned to death after cauterizing above the foot and causing it to inflate with blood until a tumor formed on their leg, then perforating everything completely and corrupting all of their weight; from there came heart failure and death afterwards.
If the pain is in both parts simultaneously, apply a cautery to each as per this manner.
Some wise people said that there was a method for cautering an arrowhead. A small hole is made with a tool whose diameter equals the size of your little finger. And it must be inserted into its own orifice according to the length of the third digit from each hand, either as large or smaller than that; and in this hole you should insert a third stick similar to the first two.
And it is the space between all sticks measured by the length of each finger's nails; and the sticks should be opened at both ends; and their height will be like a single stick, or two sticks; and you should bind them securely with an iron tool to those sticks.
Then it is burned in fire until it becomes red and emits flashes; then it should be placed over a sick person gently supported on the healthy limb. Therefore, you will burn him with three round irons simultaneously one at a time.
Then remove it for three days. Afterwards, you apply the plaster with butter; and then after opening the wound, bathe in water several times. Then care for him with ointment until he recovers
To Albucasis (the author), a caution regarding the sons of Cautes; for he is very useful, because of his appearance, and therefore many are expected by him.
However it should be noted that from good irons to him who suffered; he will come with him the place of his suffering.
Cauterium however with the help of medicines is used when you make two sticks perforated through an armlet; and this stick descends from the door of his heart either by air or iron according to their height, whose height will be like a single stick, or two sticks.
And it is the space between both quantities of fingers' breadth; and they are opened below and above; and what holds them to each other according to this form.
Then you place it over a sick person gently supported on the healthy limb. And press your hand tightly over the plaster of the sick person very much. When heated with a hot iron, and held for a time of the hour, it is tolerated by the afflicted one both against his own wound as well as that which has inflicted him; thus he himself inflicts a burning wound on himself like fire until the treatment stops
With your hand holding the instrument and cleanse it with hot water all over until it is completely clean; then let it rest for three days.
And put butter over it until the blackness is removed; then let it rest for a while and take out some of its pus This indeed marks the final stage in the illness.
And treat it with ointments until it is cured.
If the pain extends to the shoulder or arm, have him place it where you retained water from the previous treatment with equal force.
This is how heated water should be used; and I have already written about that in my book on medical treatments Take the alkali and calcis separately one part each; place them in new vessels whose lower parts are perforated through a small hole by equal quantity to which you will feed with your hand's radius; place another vessel below it containing hot water, and squeeze out of both of them using your hands until you have compressed as much as possible. Then let go of the vessels after you have squeezed their contents good enough, so that the sharp water may descend into the lower part of the vessels.
Finally, pour all the water onto another vessel and squeeze it over the other alkali; and repeat until you can continue no more.
This one will be of great assistance to the physician during many operations and in cauterizing the remains of members. Because it is effective for treating wounds with fire.
And from the medical substances there are others, to be used for cauterizing a large area of flesh as well as this one; and they also include Melanconium and Calcarea with soap in equal portions.
"Galen reported that he had cured certain diseases of the bones and nerves through which he was a physician. "Galen reported that he had not been able to treat any other disease, but was cured by the waters of a particular place and became healthy thereafter.
"It is necessary to administer the water of a certain place for healing, and if it does not succeed from the physician, then the patient should be given dry food until he has become accustomed to eating: and after becoming accustomed, he should be put on a table at which there was pain in his feet or thighs. Then bind him up with thongs, so that no matter how long or short they are, for three hours. "After that he brought the patient into the water of a certain place.
"Since his body was exhausted after entering the water, he carried him to a bed. "The pain subsided and he became healthy.
"And you know that it is not necessary to use someone else's remedies until after the body has been cleansed of them.
"Dioscorides reported that when he cautorized a sheep for its sciatica, it was cured in the same way. "The patient should be given a sheepskin, and drink old oil; and put on a deep place between the thumb and toe, between the fingers and toes.
"Then he should take a dry sheepskin and burn it in fire until it is consumed.
"Then put him back on the sheep skin, and let him go down until he is extinguished. "And repeat this process. "Do not stop doing this until the pain goes away and he is at rest on the table.
"This method of cautery is called the Vaccine Cautery.
"Of Cauterizing for Pain Relief by Dorsie.
If the pain arises from a blow to the back of the head or as a result of a fall, or through an incision, evacuation of excess moisture is performed for these cases just like others and with the same method: by applying a cold wet compress, but not a burn-producing one; if it doesn't work, then only this type of bandage will do.
After evacuating the baby's back with its own umbilical cord and for these cases as well, let them lie on their backs until the pain subsides, making sure to apply wax in all lines of the treatment every 5 cauteries or more frequently depending on how much excess moisture was removed from the nurse; and make sure to cauterize it using cautery points.
And if so, cauterize with two or four cauteries and with the middle cautery as a second method.
The method of cauterization for cases involving the back of the head
Many a time this headache is inflicted on infants by blows or falls.
The sign of the injury is on their heads and consists of a cut that happened near the fall or blow, and also an unusual movement towards the back: and in these cases the back of the head gets stiff and numb from the rest of them.
After that happens to you, do this: Cauterize him with a circle cautery as the second method.
And place the cautery evenly over all parts of the spine; and if you are cauterizing through a bandage around the back of the head, do it with two or three points close together; and there should be points nearby to use as needed.
Then give him rest until he is cured as we said.
And do not apply the cautery to a headache, which occurs through spasms of the nervous system.
The method for cauterization in gout and joint pain.
When the pain from compression by cold and dampness affects any part of the body, then when the pain occurs in the feet due to custom among physicians, they are called Podagrom properly.
Thus cure for podagra caused by cold and dampness with appropriate treatment methods, and the pains are not alleviated, it will be cured by cautery (burning).
And it is that cautery should be done after evacuation of the affected part of the foot, with many applications and a burning oil (oleum).
And if there are blisters over the face of the feet, then you apply cautery to those blisters. If the pain goes up to the knees or is accompanied by wounds and many times occurs, then you burn him over all four joints with three or four applications of the same cautery (clavius).
If it's necessary for you to have more than one application of this cautery, then burn him. And don't cover your hand with the cautery, just make a small incision in the skin to release pressure from it.
If the pain reaches up to the buttocks and back as well, then apply what we said about cautery on his head.
If there are pain only in the hands up to here (the wrist), then make incisions into blisters with a burning thread as they would heal by two lines.
If there is relief from pain only in the fingers, then make incisions into them above all the joints of the hand and above the palm of the hand as well.
If there are pain after a day up to the elbows or shoulders, then burn him over all parts.
And don't make use of a foolish remedy from doing things badly by doctors who know little about medicine. If there is good regimen and it will release the phlegm, God's help with that cautery will make him well.
Cauterizing wounds
When a tear occurs to the anus and descends into the intestine or perineum, it is approaching; then one should immediately stop eating on that day And if he passes feces through his own opening.
Then you should hold him by the back of his neck and encourage to bring it out until he has passed stool or urine.
Then you should reduce him by your fingers and bind his upper lip to the tear with a hot iron; thus he will be prevented from moving towards the top of the face, unless it is possible that urine or stool passes out before this happens.
Then you should burn a small piece of iron and tie it to his upper lip; thus he will not be able to move towards the top of the face until he has passed urine or stool. Then reduce the intestine by your fingers, or bring the anus closer to your body Then place one of your hands on his head so that the intestine does not come out; and you have already placed another under the anus, and a third above it to hold its position.
Then place a small piece of iron over his upper lip with your hand holding tight the iron; so that he will not be able to move towards the top of the face until he has passed urine or stool. And hold him there so that his mouth does not open up further; unless you have succeeded with the iron to close its mouth at first until the anus comes out.
And carefully observe when he passes stool after your cauterizing; so that you do not burn him and his death is certain or great harm happens.
And know that if you cannot succeed with the iron to close its mouth after the cauterization operation has been performed, then your procedure will not work.
The piece of iron used for infants should be very small according to their size.
After that, with the remaining ointments, so as to cure it.
Forty days and nights he lies motionless on his back until the blister heals
He should be fed with measured portions of his own weight for a period of time, in order to prevent the waste from passing through him and emptying into the bowl or bladder.
Then after forty days, when he is strong enough to stand up again, bind him securely with ligatures and let him rest for another forty days.
And he will regain his strength through rest, good food, drink, and light exercise.
When the regimen is followed as prescribed, then complete healing will occur.
And I say that the treatment for Rupturae should include incisions into his caput (head).
If Rupturae occur in the rest of his body and are about to begin, then they should not be added on, at that point cauterize the Ruptures with a heated iron or other cautery device according to their quantity: so that it occurs as if from before, just third. And then you should continue his treatment as we have said, without adding any more to it.
Some people say that the Ruptures should be cauterized with a triangular cautery device according to this form.
After the Ruptures are marked with encaustic wax and a line is drawn along their width across the top of the Ruptures to the upper side, and another line down from there. And place your hand on it as you would hold something hot
However, the first cautery is easier and better.
In order to cauterize when there is a chance of pain or shock, either from injury or concussion
Chapter 48
If Rupturae occur from injury or shock and the pain persists for a long time without any treatment: then it is necessary to cauterize them with Punctum Cautery.
And the Cautery for all parts of his body should be according to their size and strength, and any disability or loss of power he has experienced, and also according to pain that results from them.
"If healing is done through first cutting, it is good. "Otherwise, apply a cautery over this.
Because of the custom among them is that they are exchanged from one member to another as needed for what suits him best. Therefore it is necessary that with cautery those who are injured may be healed.
The method of cauterization from leprosy
Leprosy is sometimes healed with the greatest application of cautery. Especially for species of Leprosy which are caused by the decomposition of phlegm and melancholy. Therefore, when you consider that specific one with cautery.
If Leprosy is the cause and you treated it with that one, as we said in division. But if it did not descend or remained unchanged, do this: Cauterize his head five times: first on the top of the head near the eyebrows; second below him towards the forehead by the end of hair; third above both ears; fourth behind both knees and fifth behind his neck by the nape of the neck.
And lastly with the hand on his mouth near it, until he prints a foam in its mouth and they fall out of him; that is to free the expiration of heavy vapors from him; and cauterize also over his spleen as much as has been previously done.
And if the Leprosy is already spread over him and appears visibly; then do this with these cauteries as we said for the head. But add also on the nose, two above both cheeks, two above both shoulders, six above the back of the body, one large by the great tail, one above it in order to relieve the pain from his arm.
In your throat are some small bones beneath the chinbone (collarbone), and you should not swallow them.
When a cautery is applied to the upper part of the throat or nose, another one to the stomach (chest), and yet another one at the epiglottis.
You should know that the further a cautery is applied, the greater the pain it will cause and the quicker you will die.
You should know that if a person is not injured by the pain of the cautery as when they are burned, then their body has already been stunned (stunned or paralyzed).
It is necessary that a cautery be applied in proportion to its magnitude and extent of the members (joints) it joins together, according to which it precedes by the species of the tools used for such purpose.
After that, treat with flour and pitch the cautery until it is cured (healed).
In order to cauterize effectively.
When a member is stunned by something, it should be treated with medicines and oil and glue until it recovers or is cured (healed), but if the member cannot recover from its stunned condition, then cauterize it to revive it using a larger cautery as needed based on the size of the affected member.
Your cautery should be applied with greater force and at a faster rate than usual, if you want to avoid burns or other injuries from its application. After that, treat it with oil until it is cured (healed).
Sometimes when a cautery is applied to stun or stun the hand and feet by hitting them with something hard on exiting from behind, so that they may recover from their stunned condition (paralyzed).
However it is not recommended for a person who does not know about the anatomy of the members and how to exit from behind (escape), because they may not be able to escape or recover their stunned condition when hit by something hard on exiting from behind, causing them more harm than good.
The end of this excerpt.
When the veins become inflamed and nothing can be done by medicine alone, then cautery shall be applied deeply into that inflamed vein with a cautery instrument as much as necessary to cover up its surface until it is removed or the color of it changes
After cautery is applied to the inflamed vein with a cautery instrument, it should be treated with flour and herbs or lentis (oranges) and rose oil, and on the leaves of astringent herbs like hyacinths and columbines. It can also be treated with the blood of pigeon or hyacinthine flowers. All these things mixed together shall they apply over the skin until it is cured
The procedure for cautery in cancer
When cancer is emerging and one should hold it back from spreading further by cautery.
The doctors said that the cautery should be done last of all things.
I don't understand this, because I am afraid it will cause more harm than good and I have already seen this happen several times.
It is better to do the cautery by encircling it with a circle as we previously said or using multiple cauteries.
The procedure for cautery on bruises
When someone has bruises and they become mature or because of an excess of fluid causing swelling, or due to old age becoming weaker as their blood count decreases, or time, one should press on the bruise with several cauteries until it is mature. Then let go of it. It will finish maturing by itself.
If one perforates the bruise with the cautery then they should use a cautery iron which has this shape.
And deposit it in the middle of the bruises until it is penetrated through to make sure that the cautery iron reaches all of them and so it can be used when one falls ill as a cure for clear urine.
However, please note that this is a medieval Latin translation and the meaning might not be identical with standard modern Latin translations in terms of grammar or terminology used
Cauterize by means of a corrosive instrument
The head.
Corrosion is not limited to members that are immersed; it also affects the one being charred, as fire consumes dry wood.
If you want to stop the one being charred by corrosion, then apply a large amount of charcoal and a small amount of pitch, in the place where he is present, so that it may meet his location
Once you have applied charcoal and pitch to all parts of him until the corrosion stops completely, nothing else should remain from it except for a slight residue.
After three days, put on top of the areas that have been treated with charcoal and pitch a mixture of sulfur and oil, until all the char is gone, and every corrosion.
Cure him using ointments made from various ingredients.
If you want to cure a person who has become healthy after three days when there is no more corruption, it's good.
And if not, then apply the charcoal and pitch to what remains from the places that were corrupted once again.
The one being charred is treated sometimes with an acute medicine This happens because of the location of the charring.
However, the charring with fire is either excessive or of poor quality; and I have already said that the cure for it involves both a mixture of charcoal and an acute medicine applied to where he is present. Therefore take this remedy when you need it.
Cauterize by means of blisters and warts
The head.
There was a large amount of filth on the lower parts of his feet; it is heavy and filtered, which caused the foot to sweat.
The cure for charring involves two methods: the one with fire and the other with warm water.
When the cure is made with fire, it burns a certain amount of charcoal evenly from all sides; and its edge should be very thin.
In the meantime place it over a hot stone In the meantime, take hold of it with forceps and apply it to the wound until bleeding stops; then let it remain in place for three days, after which you may remove it if no more blood flows out. In the meantime smear it with honey and bind it tightly; then let it stay on for one night. It will be removed from its roots
In the meantime anoint and care for it with a healing ointment to keep it in good condition until healed.
If it fails to heal and many wounds happen on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet; then administer it over hot stones with forceps or a heated iron or pen of a skilled artist; then place it over the stone until healed. In the meantime use a small amount of it and tie your hand around it; then apply pressure with both hands to make the needle pierce into its root deeply, while also applying hot water on top of that same needle until the bleeding stops; expect the healing within one hour.
Then remove it because the stone will be removed with its roots.
Do this to them all one after another until you reach everyone who has come from these wounds on the body.
After removing it, care for them with ointment that generates flesh as a remedy.
The method of bleeding control in Tremor
If someone with Tremor from cold or fever comes to you, then it is necessary for you to apply four forceps on the forehead and sides of the head; five over the shoulders and back of the chest; across all the bones in the body; within his breastbone itself, while also above his stomach.
Tremor will cease with ointment application and the freshness of cold waters cures its own kind of coldness.
Cautery
The 72nd Cautery
When the Albathiri's pus is expelled from the body and becomes infected with corrupted matter, it forms blisters that are gross and corrupt.
Therefore, at the beginning it is advisable to cauterize each blister with a fine needle and brimstone, whose extremity is set on fire by flame Or using the root of the tall Aristolochia. Or with a lancet made of lead.
And when we have cautorized them initially and the discharge begins as follows, it does not increase; but the excess is removed by this method and they are healed.
However, after evacuation with phlebotomy (bleeding).
Cautery through the veins from the arteries to the ulcers.
Many veins were cut off by the flow of blood from an artery that was cut near a wound; they either went outside or into the member itself, and so on; it is difficult to remove them.
Therefore, when you encounter such a situation and are about to remove it from the artery's opening with your hand; place your thumb over it as an indicator, then pull him (the clot) out very forcefully until his blood is completely absorbed beneath your thumb, and do not let anything escape from there.
Then you apply a cautery of oil to burn away any remaining blood; and after that, blow out the flames until they are extinguished.
Afterwards take one of them, or many small ones, as is convenient and the place where the artery was cut; and you lay it on top of that same part immediately after removing your thumb from there; and hold it until all the blood has been removed.
If the clot is removed with your finger out of the artery opening and you extinguish the cautery at that time, then take another one immediately afterwards; from those which have been heated up by fire.
"Do not stop doing that thing with one hand and then another, until the blood is severed.
"And do not mix a poisonous herb when it's there, or put on another illness after weakness.
"And you know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to sever him; especially because one of the arteries is large and unless with four methods. "But as I said earlier. "Or when it's not extracted, "Then when he is extracted, his extremities are bound and the blood is severed. "Or tied with a strong thread, "And placed on him medicines of the owner who can sever the blood and are tied up with a good constriction.
"Whoever administers the severance of him with a thread and ties up tight, or puts on it knots of things to be mixed together, or similar ones, does not inflict any injury except rarely.
"If anyone puts this on him and there's no doctor nearby, nor medicine; then starts with the position of his index finger above the hole in one ear just as we showed it, and constricts its artery until he is completely blocked off by blood to the upper part of the nostrils, and above the artery. "And his finger is not removed at all with a cold water bath every time; until the blood freezes and becomes hard and severed.
"Meanwhile he considers what comes from cautery or medicine.
"On incision, perforation, and phlebotomy in ears, etc., and others like them.
"In the first chapter we have mentioned all kinds of accidents that people get burned or hurt by fire and medicine when mixing it with them.
I place the tools from the elbow to the foot
And then, having reached that chapter, I proceed thus: that he who is seeking for what has been sought by him may be relieved.
Before starting this chapter, it is necessary for you to know that the thing described here is found in the first chapter on cauterization.
And because of this, it is necessary that there be greater caution here since the operation described here has many dangers such as cuts with blood, cutting through the spine when opening an exit wound or a leg, cutting above the thighbone and so on: from all these things tremor, fear and death come.
I remind you so that nothing bad may happen to you since sometimes it happens to those who are skilled at this art because of the weaknesses and failings of people. It is because of this that someone becomes angry with his own pain and death comes to him: for it was brought on by his weakness and length, bringing him torment from his own pain and lengthiness. And because of fear there is also a meaning of death that arises.
It is from these things that someone gives up his own pain and says this to you hoping for health: the pain of him is destructive.
Therefore it should not be believed by anyone who has come from them whose mode is such. And there must be greater caution on your part than desire and greed. Do not believe anyone who is above something without a certain knowledge that can confirm the success of what they have come to do praiseworthy from you.
To ensure that your health is taken care of through the care and attention of all who are weak and to predict and indicate what is better for you than this.
This is an aid on your part in the acquisition of fame and glory as well as memory and praise.
"Inspiration comes from God's sons, his mind gave you neither direction nor guidance," because that is in their hand.
"I have ordered this chapter distinguishingly by chapters, as it precedes the chapter on Cautery, from the calf of his leg to the feet: so that you may find what is necessary for your healing through him and how he should be used.
"Of the collection of waters gathered by children's hands.
"Chapter One.
"Behold that these injuries frequently occur in children at birth, or when the midwife pulls away from the infant's head.
"And also those that happen and are not known by reason of a secret cause.
"I have not seen this weakness in others as I do in children, and death has come upon all whom I have found to be affected by them: therefore it is a necessity that I should cease operations on account of these.
"I have seen the child whose head was bound tightly with water and its head became large all through each day until it could not rest upon itself because of its own size; and the moisture increased until death occurred.
"And this very moisture can also gather between the skin and mouth, or gather under bone above the pubic hair.
"Operations on that are done when there is moisture between the skin and mouth; the pupil of the eye becomes blurred then it is necessary to find a fissure in length as a single opening at right angles: its length will be like two fingers until humidity runs.
"These are flat.
"If it is more greatly increased and the pupil becomes larger then two fissures should be made as above in shape.
"If the moisture is under bone and its sign is that you can find openings to the head of the hair from all sides; water will be depressed when pressed with your hand against it on the inside, and not hidden by you: then it is necessary for you to make three fissures in length as above.
After making an incision extract completely and entirely And then sew up the incisions with bandages and cotton wool. Then bandage it over completely, all the way to the fifth day.
Then apply a ligature and care for the wounds with plasters and ointment.
Do not remove the bandage evenly. And keep the member free from all wetness and moisture until it is recovered and healed.
Another mode of making an incision is to determine when a great many drops appear on the bandage; at this point you should collect water.
When there is more bleeding from one side than another or if it happens suddenly and unexpectedly, make a second incision for additional drainage of blood.
Therefore ascend with the incision where you see the drops and gather up the water; thereafter do it according to what is possible for you.
And observe that you don't cut into the artery and cause blood loss; also see to it that the patient does not die from the flow of blood with removal of wetness.
Of the arteries which are on the sides after.
The head is second, and its surgical techniques:
When a cataract happens on the eye or forehead and becomes old; at this point care is no longer given to it; then there is a last incision made into both of its arteries.
It therefore happens that you cut through the eyes so that the patient may recover his head. Then bind up with a bandage to see if the arteries appear. And then bind him tightly to his own bandage. Consider when one artery bleeds. Its locations are the ones that are on the sides of the body and which are depressed; they usually close up unless certain persons occur.
Then with a wax seal on top of each; and cut through both with a small pointed knife into the eye to its length; then lay it in place by its height along the head.
"And if you are making a cut through an artery and it bleeds more than is necessary, stop cutting immediately.
"The length of the cut should be about two fingers' width.
"If a vein is cut and blood begins to flow quickly from it towards your inner parts.
"However if the artery does not seem to be bleeding but you feel a space of three fingers' width at its point of incision, continue cutting. "Then seal it with wax and hold it up to your mouth.
"The amount of blood that should be emitted is one ounce, sometimes more, sometimes less. "Do this according to the quantity that seems to come out from your wound and filling up the artery of it as much or as little as needed.
"Then look at the mouth. "If anything remains in the mouth from the blood clot and you still feel hot, then make a cut there to prevent the cold finger.
"Then take care of it with ointment until it is cured.
"Of extracting arteries that are hidden away.
"Head 3.
"When a man has an ancient stroke or sudden attack due to acrimonious humidity and coldness of the veins, or from old sores, wounds, etc., and he is treated with the methods of medicine: then we make our expertise in extracting the arteries out of the times, or cauterizing them as needed.
"The method for extracting those is to pull out the hairs that are in the time and direct it towards a visible artery of the same place. "That method will be shown to you from your pulse and it is rare that it stays hidden unless in a few people or coldness.
"If you cannot do this yourself then the physician should wrap your head with his own cloth and afterwards worry about it. With a hot towel (applying heat), you will see a visible manifestation Then take a smooth sponge that I prepared before After cleansing with it, you will see a quick and easy healing effect. After using it once, place it on top of the affected area and gently pull it out after a short while, ensuring that you remove it from the skin completely to avoid any residue on your clothes.
If the artery is very thin, then apply it with gentle forceps. After cutting off a small piece of the artery according to its length and contraction/expansion with forceps so as not to allow any blood flow. If it is not cut or if it is not removed, there will be no bleeding.
Then wash the artery with six douches using warm water until three douches have passed.
If the artery is large, you must apply it to two places with double cord forceps or a knife so as not to let any infection set in before sealing and allowing blood flow.
After cutting off excess tissue between the two cords. Do this at that time or after some other time.
And if there is a need for sealing it with a cautery until the extremities have been cut through and the location has been secured.
It's better to do this procedure unless there is an illness that requires cooling of the affected area. Since cautery has been used in order to drain off the fluids. Therefore, it is better to do this procedure.
After removing the artery and securing its location with a knot, you should place a small piece of felt over it to prevent any more bleeding.
After the application and mixing with fresh water which causes flesh to come out, you should use vinegar so as to treat it.
"If blood flows from the artery during surgery and if you want to stop it immediately using a clamp with care or by saying 'stop' loudly until bleeding stops. "If there is nothing else present in your hand at that moment, then place a finger over the wound until bleeding stops. "And cover the wound with cold water to stop the pain and bind according to what is needed.
"And if it is easier and quicker to remove an artery with a clamp held by two assistants in the same manner as the first assistant, both of their knives are similar. "However, there is less pain compared to two assistants using the same method. "Because if they are very painful, it should be done in pairs with ice and not hit the body when you put on a bandage. "Therefore, if there is a little excess of fat, you should put heat on them with fire and remove the body or sooner when this method is used better than all other operations, faster.
"This is the form for the clamp.
"And if the space between two assistants is great due to excess of fat fingers after signing and depositing both with wax until they are filled up their mouths and hit one by hitting them on both sides, so that what is inbetween his extremities can be stretched. "They do not become consolidated because of this method's pain.
"Chapter Two.
"About how to treat acute and painful tears from eyes.
"When there are acute and painful tears from the head of eyelids outside the eye, do not let anything be cured by medicine with doctors; rub your face to remove the redness that came from the eyes; and feel a movement in your forehead as if you were moving your eyebrows; so it is for those who have been removed. And his eyelashes are heated because of the pain of tears: then they will endure this operation, and call it treatment.
"The hair of one who is afflicted with baldness should be plucked from his head. Then make three cuts on the forehead evenly spaced according to its length; and let each cut be as long as two fingers, and one is half a distance between the nostrils, and second in accordance with the motion of the tongue, and third at part from the other; and also cut both your hands down along the length of your mouth so that there is space for all incisions to join together. And let you remove any sponges or towels soaked with too much blood.
Then introduce a small sharp tool of two types, the one being followed by form. From the incision that is to part of time, until the second incision; and with it remove all the cut that is between two incisions, up to the upper lip (sifac). Then do this as well from the middle incision up to the second one. Then remove this small tool and introduce the other one called the sickle-like sharp tool from a part of its length; not from another part but at its length. And this is its form.
He then puts the sickle-like sharp tool into use with its handle attached to flesh and its length towards the mouth; he pulls it so that it moves until it reaches the middle cut; and removes all the cuts, which go down from the head to the eyes, except for the incision that goes up to the face.
Then do this on the middle cut until it reaches another one.
After running out of blood with equal quantity, remove the locations from which the coagulated blood flows out.
Then puts on all incisions a mixture of old wine and raisins soaked in vinegar or oil. He instructs that there should be no cold water running in it.
The third day you should apply a ligature and administer an infusion with heated water Then cure that by applying the ointment of Basilisk, and all others which require healing wounds until they are healed.
The top
For curing headaches and cataracts from the inside of your head.
When a cataract occurs to him and he becomes blind: And you stretch his eyes out, and make them pale, and then the aspect of them is weakened, and there are ulcers on their eyelashes, and hairs fall from them, and acute pain in deep part of head, it hurts badly, with tears. And as a consequence, there's an affliction. Then take this material, and the cataract comes back unless you come by many times
And after that, their cure is this. So the head may be lowered back with great effort. Then make an incision in the middle of his face and do it either way by length or breadth: And begin with a cut on the left side towards right, until you reach up to the mouth: And stretch your hand out from the teeth's time, which fall at mastication: Until when the mouth is reached: And you will dry all blood completely with a sponge.
Then make an incision between the two lips and use a piece of linen. And then tie it up with cotton wool, and take in pulses together with wine and oil so as not to let the cold enter into the eyes.
And when you have done that, and it is clear that the cold eye has already come near to him, then you must put something warm into his nose until he starts to come out of the flesh by breathing in air.
Then cure him with a regimen of hot things which bring forth the flesh: as if you take two parts of bran boiled wheat and four parts of colophonia: And prepare from them an ointment, and administer to the birth of flesh in these wounds.
The sixth cranial nerve
Of his eye that has fallen out
Everything that falls out of the eye is one of four species: either a mineral stone or a small piece of rock like iron, or a discharge; or it comes from the eye itself, just like tears and phlegm, or food residue - whether liquid or solid-like substances resembling them.
When therefore a stone falls out of the eye, or from these that are not added to it and do not grow on it, you should expose only the eye itself: if by chance you see the stone then distill into the eye something oily like oil or syrup. Then administer an eye wash to him and proceed with the cleansing as you put the nose's nostril plug from ear hair: after placing a band around his head, remove the ears that are above
Many things will occur during this treatment.
If it does not work then proceed with the eye wash using the technique of pulling on a fine thread: this is its form.
If it works as expected.
And if not then proceed with the eye wash using a small blind thread that doubles in length: this is its form.
And if not then proceed by making a cannula from the ear and inserting its tip into the auricular fornix as far as possible; and apply what is in the cannula with a softened oil so that only it can pass through, after which remove it with your strong pull.
Many things will occur during this treatment. If it does not work this way then take a glutinous preparation or water mixed with gluten that is used to wet the eyes and apply it to its tip as far into the ear as possible: after which you insert it gently in the auricular fornix, when you remove the excess oil from above.
If we have not completed our work with everything necessary for cutting out or sewing in place before the cold becomes too strong, then let's start with warming up and applying a lubricant first
The method of making an incision is to remove the limb at the neck (cephalic) if it has become damaged by a phlebotomist's work, and apply another amount of blood from his own veins according to their measure. After that, support the limb between your hands and raise it to its highest point, find a suitable incision at the root of the ear near the fat of his body in place, and let there be an opening (lunis) for removing with tools: after which you will remove him with him while what is possible for you from the instruments.
After that, tie off the incision at your time (hora tua) and care for it until it heals.
If a lump has fallen from one of the veins that are growing or being inflated (inflantur), then you should administer an extraction for him.
If not, take a thin and fine one according to this shape.
And administer with him the removal of that type from veins, which have fallen in the ear, and do not remove it when you think about what has become moist by a lot of air inside the ears because of this, until you put it into many pieces: then extract them with a hook or with a subtle movement, or with suction, as I said, for removal of him.
If water gets into the ear (ingreditur), let a patient with a cough first be held back from vomiting and has filled his own ear some old porridge (cotto ueteri) to such an extent that it is now open above her ear where there is water, If this happens through the same route, then it's good.
If not, take many stones according to the length of your fingers and warm them with a fire stronger than what is suitable for you, and let him be extracted from one of these (the veins) through the opening of his own ear: and spit over his foot one from that part, and strike another stone on top of it which is in the ear. When one stone is taken away from another stone until they are both equal in water
And as soon as the water is equalized until one of them is removed by fire or an iron implement, and you place both ends together into one beam; then ignite both ends simultaneously with a flame, until all of it is consumed Then repeat the process with another one, and do this many times until all of it is equalized; then remove that which was previously removed from a stone with a scoop or ladle.
However, when removing animals caught within it if their bodies are equal to a fox or similar and they need the same care as mentioned before.
But if their bodies are large compared to what is visible, then administer the removal of them with a hand gesture and tools; and they will be more easily removed by everyone holding on to it.
In the removal of the generations below, when you care for him as described before and with a tool to remove them; and do not offer any more care yourself; then it is necessary that you take hold of its top edge on the ground. If something appears from above among them, then remove it with a gesture or subtle tools.
If nothing appears there among them, then take the ladle (canula) with its form narrow below and wide above; and insert a subtle end into the beam, according to what is permitted by that which is weak; then suck up it along with strong sucking. Do this many times until all generations are equalized.
If they do not obey you to the end of removal, then collect around them with a ladle and like that which was mentioned before in stone.
If they are not equalized with the one mentioned before, then administer the distillates that were already experienced by others in removing the generations; and you will remove it through the tool of distillation.
And your emission should be as if you had poured oil and medicines into the beam with this instrument whose form is depicted here. As you would remove an arrow from bone or flesh, inferiorly, where there is a large opening;
Therefore, if the thing to be removed is trapped within a tube (cannula), it should be done from above with less force. If you are using a tube (cannula), grasp the forceps and carefully withdraw it with gentle tension at its lower end; then release oil, or allow it to be sucked out by another person, or let it flow from those medical tubes into the cannula itself; after that, introduce the heated iron into the ear canal gently, while feeling for it inside. If it is inserted properly, it will now burn with heat as expected and feel warm within you; if not, do not proceed further with the cold medicine. Medicine should never tolerate this.
The seventh head
Treatment of auricular injuries
Sometimes infants who have been struck on the head by their mothers' blows were not injured.
And it also happened to some men that their ears were torn off by the blow of an arrow or flesh;
And sometimes the injury occurred deep within the ear canal, without causing any further damage; and sometimes it happened just outside of the ear canal where a small tear was made as well.
Therefore, when an injury occurs deep within the ear and does not result in any further damage, it is often difficult to treat because of its location in many different places.
If that which was torn off the ear results from a slight injury, you must apply it to the sole and inspect it there; then if you see an apparent laceration remove it gently with a small, pointed object in order for its form follows closely, so that part of his extremity is somewhat flat while another part sharp: and what remains should be moistened by both sides.
If the injury is caused to flesh within the ear canal you must hold it with a small and sharp object and strike off that which was torn from the flesh gently and swiftly until all of it has been removed.
"If heat application is done to deep ear canal, then apply a small, fine brush and warm it with fire before applying the heated brush into the ear.
"If you sense heat from the application of that instrument into your ear which caused a painful sensation accompanied by hearing a ringing sound, then use an opening tool gently to help relieve it and avoid further injury to your ears.
"After applying the heated brush to your ear and feeling relief, put some ointment made from Egyptian unguent (a type of wax) into it according to the quantity of its pores which you applied earlier in the same way for a few days until your discomfort has subsided.
"Or apply the ointment directly into the heated water and mix it with honey (a type of sweet syrup) until you form a paste-like consistency, then use that.
"If you have already applied the ointment to your ear, it is advisable for you to remove that and allow another one which has been made with a mixture of olive oil (a type of vegetable fat) until it becomes hot enough; then apply that one carefully so as not to damage the ear. After applying this one, keep treating it gently until it subsides.
"If you experience a blood flow (which could mean that your ear has been damaged), then submerge the sponge or wrap it in cold water and apply it to the ear; continue with the remaining treatment, which was used to remove the previous one from the procedure of distillation.
"For the cure of Alteli (a type of eye disease).
The eighth head, also known as the 'sagittae' because it is shaped like an arrow.
"Those Alteli which strike upon the eyelids sometimes are moist and at other times dry.
"Therefore, it is advisable for you to treat them with lashes (eyelashes), or with some other object and hit the Alteli with whatever tool strikes its roots. "Afterwards, apply a paste-like consistency of sweet syrup.
"If blood flows from them (the Alteli), then burn or cauterize those with a small, fine needle to stop the flow of blood.
"To cauterize them [the wounds] is better after incision. "For many things return when something has remained from their roots "When cauterized with fire, the roots are burned and do not return.
"About the treatment of the eyelids
"The ninth head
"Many a thing happens to the eyelids that is attributed to Grandino on account of his strength and firmness; and because of this he is called Grando: and there is an addition of moisture from both upper eyelid and lower eyelid.
"Therefore an operation is performed on them so that you may see then if Grando proceeds in it what appears from the eyelid and are drawn towards every part; they themselves are easy.
"Find therefore a slit with breadth "Then remove it from every part with ease until you reach this slit. "Then suspend and separate it using a hook so that you may hold onto the eyelid
"If you are not prepared for his detachment unless after penetrating the eyelid with a cut it causes weakness somewhere.
"What if the slit is large then bind and suture them together until they heal
"If it's small you will not experience harm from that. "The healing agent restores and brings them back together
"If Grando makes incisions on the inner and outer surface of the ear then suspend it with a hook so that you may hold onto both eyelids until you reach this incision.
"What if an eyelid is pulled apart by cutting: it does not cause weakness somewhere
"Then treat the eye after Grando's incision with a mixture of salt and water until it is healed.
"About the treatment for Axirna's eyelids
"The skull of X.
"The eye of X.
"And the manner of his treatment is that he puts an injured head into your hand.
"Then take a linen cloth and prepare it to wrap around him tightly as if he is in a circle according to the amount that X had wrapped all around. "Then put him on it and press down with your fingers from every part so that X will be in the middle of the circle.
"Then find in the center where there is moisture from a wound caused by sweat, and do not let the opening be larger than that which occurs during phlebotomy to the bottom.
"Or it is necessary that you find a whole wound so that X can be inserted into many openings as X proceeded to make a hole for the white veins of the fist.
"Then remove it with a cloth that you infiltrated between your fingers to the outside and you try again by moving your hand to the right and left until X disperses: so as not to add in the hole, but X can be inserted without moisture in his eye.
"If you do not see X at the beginning of the wound, then you add into the hole as much with ease. "Then remove it like we said.
"Then immerse the cloth in vinegar and water, and put them over the place and tie him up with cord.
"And there are those who brought salt, and put it into the wound so that it will become soft from what remained moist.
"Then take care of her until she is healed.
If a man falls upon hot coals, care for him with wet cloths until he is cured
By the way of treating the eyelids, meaning to make the eyelid soft by using something like a soft cloth or anything that is gentle and not rough so as to avoid damage when wiping it
Head Eleven
When eyelashes grow beyond the normal course under natural hairs in the eyelids and they irritate: then these cause damage to the eyes, causing the mode of tears (lachrymas) which make the eyelid swell and white, until it is destroyed by the causes mentioned earlier.
The eye treatment is done according to four ways. By burning with fire Or by using a sharp remedy as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cautery. Or the eye treatment can be done through cutting and sewing. Or by using a spoon as I mentioned earlier.
You should place your head on your arm. Then, with the left hand wipe off the tears from the eye.
Therefore it is good. If not it is inserted into the eye in which there is a thread from below the part of the lower eyelid and go through to above with a cloth and tie up near the hairs; that is, near the edge of the eyelids where the hairs are born: and stretch the thread towards the top by wiping off with the lid and tying it with your hand.
Then, find where under the hairs are added to the inside of the eyelid until they reach more tears than less tears.
Then remove the thread and place a small, thin piece of wax under the eyelid or cloth; then tie it on top with an encrustment as if it were a seal made out of sealing wax.
However, the form should be according to the amount and thickness of the eyelid; because this has been diversified among men
There is one who causes it to be incised when there's much quantity in the eyelid.
Afterwards you find two lines on the eyelid that you have marked and then start from the tear duct further down to the tear gland itself, creating a fissure around natural hairs, as it is with the thickness of the finger
Afterwards, there's an incision made into one of two angles on the skin. Afterwards you remove everything from it. Afterwards, with stitching two lips together and using a fine thread and a needle, you remove blood, cut away anything extra from the hairs above both eyebrows and some other things that may be attached to them, if you want to do it - and if not, don't perform surgery
Afterwards remove the stitching and thread until three or four days later; then you apply a cure for this.
And if you want to do it without stitches and using only the cure that gets rid of everything and tightens up, go ahead. The eyelid swells around the incision and its swelling goes away; but there is something better in the future.
They used this way of treating Ataxmir by old doctors before.
However, there is trouble when it comes to the sick person and it's from a good surgery; but there isn't fear of death involved.
And another way is to treat Ataxmir like this; it's like a figure on the eyelid that looks like a death leaf or bird feather, and we use that as well.
Afterwards remove the eyelid with three or more separated and combined angles in accordance to that shape; afterwards make an incision of anything extra using thin blades parallel to that shape until you reach equal parts of the incision.
If you cannot hold onto the incision and it does not align with that; then take thread in which shape is there and put it into the middle of the figure; afterwards put another one towards tear gland more, and another one towards tear gland less; and apply stitches between your fingers at equal lengths.
"Having taken your hand in a similar manner and placing it on top of what is marked as your skin, we proceed like the barber.
"Having bound together with stitches the two lips of the mouth after examining him [the patient], I examine him.
"If the lancet should slip from your hand or fall into a cut of yours, I remove it with my other hand and touch its head to the wound as if applying unguents.
"And when also the eyelashes are struck through and turned back [in a violent way], we remove them with tweezers.
Therefore, let it be as if you have spoken about the incision before; but the artificial stitching is more [difficult]. "From the cure of Ataxmir with a dog.
"And it is as if you are touching both eyebrows and breaking through [the skin] in the same manner that I described. "Having made two needles or thin rods for a pair of eyebrows (using one in each hand), their length is according to the length of the eyebrows, and their width is less than that of a very fine hair; you have now struck through both ends as if from opposite sides when holding threads.
"Having bound together in a similar manner and placed them on the excess of the eyelid after examining him [the patient], I tie with both needles from opposite sides tightly, and release her by degrees. "The skin becomes tight and emaciated; it is also diminished and putrefies until it falls off on its own.
"If the time comes to do this after all, then I strike her with a barber's shears. "After examining him [the patient], I examine him.
"When the bandage is tightened and the eyelids are in good condition; they do not hurt the eyelashes.
"And this is the form of two needles or rods that I mentioned before, their length according to the length and width as described.
The twelfth head
"Having placed a bandage on the nose after examining him [the patient] with the eyes.
Operation on this is to cut it with a small knife and insert it into the head through an incision made from soft tissue Next, tie the extremities of his body with two knots made from fine thread; make one end longer than the other.
After that, cut off a little bit of the thin thread and tie it to an extremity of his body; make sure to leave some left over.
Finally place the patient's head on your lap and perform the operation; because it is a delicate or small operation
After that, insert the little finger on your hand into his eye and gently guide it towards the pupil; when you have inserted it, remove a small piece of the natural eyelashes.
Lastly, draw out the little finger until it is above the eyelid; then insert a finger into the same eye; if there are one or two or three fingers, do not put more than that many.
After that, take your hand with him until you reach the little finger at the top of his eyelid and guide it gently towards the natural eyelash.
If the little finger is pulled out and does not reach it; pull off one end of your thread to the lower eyelid with that you made in her and guide it gently towards the superior eyelid until you reach the top of his eyelid; then tie a knot on both ends, close the eye for two or three days until the eyelash regrows, and put the little finger back up there.
If the little finger is very short; either tie it to a longer one made from eyelashes or remove it completely until it grows out and then put it back in place after some time.
The thirteenth head
When an injury occurs to one eye, it is called a livida (blepharitis).
This is either a natural occurrence or an accident.
Accidental means resulting from the falling of flesh on another object due to carelessness in handling tools used for surgery, such as a fall while holding a scalpel or tweezers, or by cutting oneself with a knife during surgery.
The method of the operation is as follows: you must find the incision point and separate his lips from them, then place what lies between them on it so that it can be removed from there with a linen strip, after which he should be bandaged up.
Do not allow what excrete and constrict his things to do so, because if you do this it will be worse than before. Instead, you should take the excreting items gently as though you were using a broom with water, covering it in damp linen: and anoint with oil of lavender, which has been prepared from olives: and unguentum of aloes, which is made from honey.
The collection for your care must be as comprehensive as possible to not leave any gaps, according to the first shape that was used initially.
This is only a correction of Albucasis's operation to ensure that the form was not lost throughout the entire process.
The care for Albucasis on the lower eyelid is either a tearing or closing up of both sides towards right and left.
The twelfth chapter.
This is Albucasis's care on the lower eyelid and it is called Albucasis's eye ointment. It is either a natural occurrence or an accident.
Accidental means resulting from the falling of flesh on another object due to carelessness in handling tools used for surgery, such as a fall while holding a scalpel or tweezers, or by cutting oneself with a knife during surgery.
The method of the operation is as follows: you must grasp it with two fingers and pull gently on it while placing one end into the flesh to reach across it towards the left tear duct and right tear duct simultaneously, until both ends are pulled out from the body.
In this direction, extend the arm up towards the shoulder with a sharp blow, and strike it with a blunt one at its side. If that brings about the second figure of the eyelid as is fitting, this is good news.
If not, take the radius and place it into a cut, and strike with it the eyelid; and find two cuts in its inner surface of the eyelid, and there are two cuts from both angles of the incision, until they meet and there is an angle made by them: thus when they come together will be the figure of these, and this is Greek writing.
Afterwards, remove that arm along its length, which is the lower edge of it; from this follow the eyelid. Afterwards separate the two parts; sew her with a thread of wool.
Afterwards care for them as we have mentioned in connection with medicines and ointments until they are healed.
And if Alixatria strikes through the cut and sutures or cauterizes; then you must ensure that there is a flat cut beneath the eyelashes and also as before mentioned. Afterwards separate between the two lips with a thread, according to what we have said.
And finally the end of our treatment for Alixatria when it is above or below should be such that it goes into this operation according to what was prepared from the shape of Alixatria
This is the figure of many differences arranged: and a wise workman, when he wants to bring it into its own form, or one close to it, and himself weak according to what has been done for him by means of operations and instruments in several arrangements.
The fifteenth head
The eyelid with conjunctiva, or the cornea.
Whenever this consolidation happened to many people, in such a way that the upper eyelid is consolidated with its white of the eye and should be prevented from its own natural operations
"You should then insert the tip of your thumb under the eyelid and lift it up; or extend it with a knife; thereafter cut into it gently with a sharp, thin instrument, such that there is no discomfort from the incision's sharpness; so that you do not worry about an ill-at-ease patient when performing the operation. And after the eyelid has been removed smoothly, then let your incision be closed as before.
"At that point in the eye, you pour salt water into it; or distill it out using factum or ziniar, by dissolving with water.
"Then separate the eyelid from the eye with a linen strip; and place above the eye a soaked strip of linen with alum (alumina). After three days use factum or ziniar to remove it along with any crusts that may have formed.
"From incisions in the eyelid and areas around the eyes.
"Chapter Sixteen
"Know that an eyelid can be removed using two methods. "Or it may be plucked gently; and with a soft, thin instrument similar to factum or ziniar. "Or it may not be plucked gently; and is similar to a frozen piece of white cloth that can be torn with the knife or grasped by using factum or ziniar; then cut away from there.
"The other two types of eyelid removal do not start until the eye is already more swollen; they gradually let go slowly and stop opening up or moving the eye.
"And the method to remove it is as follows: place your patient's head in yours, so that you can see how they have made a slit at an angle. "Then open up their eyes and lift the eyelid with your hand. "Then secure the eyelid tightly with two or three fingers of factum or ziniar; and extend it upwards. "Then take a thread from the tail of a horsehair and its corresponding hair; or some other fine thread: make it strong, double both ends with factum or ziniar to secure it tightly; fasten this into the slit in the eyelid; pull gently on it; extend it upwards; and remove any hairs that follow the pupil. And if you hold onto it up until their forehead, then release it at the very end of their eye.
In the event that no tears are shed from an injury to the lacrimal gland itself or through its ducts with small spatulas (needles), it is necessary to remove the natural meat of the lacrimal glands, lest they be injured by continued incision and repeatedly weeping.
Or when a hook or a single cord extends along with it; just as we said. Then they are scraped off with blunt spatulas, which is their shape.
And as well, if the blunt spatulas should come into contact with the cornea of the eye; they would cause injury and tear away the pupil.
After an incision has been made, if anything salty is introduced to the eye; either from a blow or a sharp object, it should be removed until another day. And after that thing with which treatment is required, must remain uncured for as long as necessary
If the hook is not smooth and cannot be introduced into it without injury; then this species of hooks must repeatedly be scraped off with medicines and they are cured just as they are scraped from urine in a dish.
If you make an incision into it; then open the eye and take blunt spatulas gently, weakly, badly made but of a small size, according to this shape. And after that, scrape off the hook with subtlety. If you see that the thing is to be removed and must be separated from it and reason dictates it; then distill out of your eye by a blow or sharp object, salt water, or an oily rag, until another day.
Then repeat the same treatment until all is removed from him. Unless there are hot ashes in your eye; then immediately remove it and treat the ashes until they are cured.
Then repeat the same treatment with reason until all is removed.
However, the natural meat of the lacrimal glands if it causes great harm to the eye, should be scraped off with a hook and cut away from that part of them; so as not finally to make an incision lest they continue weeping excessively.
"Therefore, when tears fall from a tear duct due to sneezing, it should be treated.
"From the incision of the eyeball and the flesh that enters the eye.
"Head seventeen
"Sometimes blood from the eyes of men is collected together or overlaid on the pupil, so that it can close the eye, or protrude forward to the eyelashes and turn them outwards; and in some cases, it turns the eyelids towards the outside; and it becomes accustomed to the roses.
"And there is also an operation involved so that a patient can put their head into your lap "Therefore open his eyes and lay the whole flesh with the fingertips over it; hold it with one forceps or a hand.
"Therefore cut off the meat first so that all of him is completely finished when he has been cut off by an instrument "And also from the eye so that you do not leave him at the operation; and your incision should be made in such a way that he is inserted by the same instrument, or with spatules which we have used for cutting off the eyelashes; or with scissors, according to whether it will take shape or finish his head.
"Therefore, when your incision is completed and the whole of the eyeball has been removed, then a drop from his tear duct should be treated; or it may evaporate its blood along with tears to cool him.
"If anything remains from the eyeball, and you are dominated by a cold blood; then lower it, and take care of him as he nurses the eye.
"Then repeat with your operation so that he is treated.
"And similarly do the same thing to flesh which falls into the eye by this method.
"However, it is necessary that the care for all the weak eyes from a natural or accidental path with iron; and you should not insert your hand into any of their operations unless they are done.
From the eye socket
Head 18
The new eyelids that cover the eye and prevent any movement of its own; they weaken it over time.
Therefore first of all you must know that if the eyelid is strong and there's no moisture or other condition on it besides the eyelid itself, then attach (put) the eyelid onto him/her.
And you must also be mindful of any weakness, to put your head into place inside yours.
Then hold the new eyelids with a single one or two fingers according to your prudence; and there should be a soft uncinus that adapts itself, so it can adapt to both forms of attachment, either as one uncinus inside the body, or as two uncini in one body.
Then attach the new eyelids with soft fingers and gently remove blood after removing it from the eye until they are removed; and so that the eyes will not be damaged by the softest parts of the hands.
And your work should take place before the sun rises and you should remain firm during your work; so that only these new eyelids are to be touched.
And when you have removed them, then pour into the eye either a drop of oil or mucus; so that its natural oil is washed away by their sharpness and they remain after removing from the eyelid.
If you are not able to attach the new eyelid in that same time or if doing so causes eye pain; then take another eyelid and apply heat by warming with hot water, until the first eyelid is removed and its pain subsides; and secure it from frost by wrapping in a warm cloth after removing. Then repeat this process again for him/her according to the same method, until the pain is gone.
And that's how you do surgery with your fingers.
Of reduction of the nose
Head 19
The physicians call the fistula Arissati by whatever treatment it is done with; whether cautery or acute burning medicine.
"If it cannot be cured, then there is no skill in that; unless you find a skilled surgeon who was born to him and takes away the whole moisture which exists in him until he is treated.
"When it has been treated [i.e., the moisture], you will see if there was a corruption or injury; then apply him with an instrument whose form is this.
"And the name of the treatment for the head wound is Aspri.
"Let the head be treated with iron; and let it become round like Aspri as long as its wound is treated according to the ways of Aspri or Aliskilfer, either using a lancet or a needle from Aspri or a subtler one for puncturing: and place him upon a corrupting ossus.
"Then withdraw the head between your fingers and place both hands upon it until you know that the corruption is already healed; then do this several times.
"Then restore its place with medicines of excisius (i.e., excision) and stitches.
"If the place is thus restored and new flesh grows up there and the course of the wound is cut off; then it remains for thirty days without returning or becoming worse, not harmed by any accident; you know that he has been healed.
"And if this is not the case, then there's no skill left in him unless a skilled hand reduces his fist to its nose according to that shape.
"And if the bone is broken in a second place; or with iron; and when his mouth has been treated, then you take the rod according to that shape, it being iron-like at one end, triangular: and its wood should be cut from him so that it reaches all the way down to his extremity as you see.
"Then place this upon his mouth and let it be near tears; and stretch out your hand from the mouth as little. "Then withdraw your hand with the rod until it penetrates his mouth and he feels that; by this means you may make a hole to let out any bad breath from him when you place your hand over his nose.
Therefore restore a place with the help of medicines sprinkled upon it like I have done unto you
The body is born and hardened at that place; then the material which had been on its outside returns to the nose; hence it is better for the sick one of this kind.
On the reduction of importance/size of the eye
Head XX
When the eye is complete and does not fall upon a foreign body, nor decrease; then it should be applied to an invalid person; thereafter, you must take bloodletting from him; later place warm sponges on his forehead without any scarification, but with suction.
After that you must apply to the eye a mixture of acacia, aloe, and olive oil and sardine sauce After that you should draw up the eye above the eyebrow with multiple filaments.
The manner of the filaments is as follows: you take from them loose hairs and many, and stretch out all of their hair over four; make some of these, and put one on another according to quantity like the eye; then draw up them with a hard cloth in great force.
And apply warm sponges without any scarification using suction.
After that you must remove the warm sponge and let the eye rest for one day and one night.
If the other filaments loosen up, then you must draw them up in great quantity; after that remove the filaments for one day and one night as we said.
If the eye has become clear of its bandage, that is a good thing; if not, then you apply the bandage again and the filaments as before until he is healed.
On the cutting/incision of the eyelid band
Head XX1
When the disruption of the eyelid bandage occurs then it is restored and goes out to the corner like a grain of pepper; and becomes its form due to this, and you should cut into it, so that an operation upon him is made as described before, according to what I have said; and thereupon when you approach at the root of the eye from below to above.
"Then you should enter into another vessel where there is a double-threaded vein apart from the lacrimal one and then force it to penetrate.
"Then you should cut off the two vessels of that vein and tie around its part a small loop so as to tighten it.
"Then you should take out the thread and put around the eye a piece of floss so as to tie it with the vein.
"And then carefully apply pressure on that eye in order for its inflammation to subside.
"When you tie around the vein from all parts with a strip of cloth until it becomes prominent and large.
"And then gently press and pull with fine spatules until the moisture from the back of the eye gets to its deepest part and the eye descends, and is immediately tied up so that it does not slip away; but if it slips, tie it again.
"On account of the treatment of the [eye].
The twenty-second chapter is about the head.
This treatment, which is called "Alcomnatis," unless it causes the eye to get better and swell similarly as tears descend from it but doesn't cause pain itself.
The method of doing this is by either having a fixed pillow placed on the head or turning towards one side to make it sit comfortably with its head raised and directed.
"Then take his head in your two hands from the front by two parts and move it until both of its eyes are looking down. "It becomes still and does not go downward; the light is shut off and it is dark inside of his eyes as it was before, but if that did not happen you should know that it may be because there was water in his eye.
"If the descent of the inflammation with him is not as we said then you should lay the patient between your two hands and keep holding them there. "Then gently press with fine spatules and find him in the superficial skin over the outer layer of the eye so as to gently hold it within a covering made by the combination of his eyelid and the cornea until he gets better.
"Having heated up the eye with warm water that you had applied earlier for the treatment of eye diseases, or with water from which you had previously applied ointment made from iris and honey; then I cured him after proper cleaning.
"For curing of that water that has descended into the eye, or for cataracts.
Head (Twenty-Third).
Having received that water for making a small incision and applying a bandage to the patient after proper preparation.
"Then you should let the patient lie down between your hands square and opposite to the sun; bind his eyes securely with a bandage after proper preparation.
"Then take the bandage in your right hand if it is on the left side of his head; or with your left hand if it is to the right.
"Then with your right hand gently and carefully place the bandage over his forehead passing through the length of your arm to the visible part of the tear; then pull it tight as you can after proper preparation.
"And make sure the measurement of the bandage reaches to the bottom, which is from the pupil up to the end of the black part. "Then gently place it on his eye with the help of your other hand for the benefit of the clear cornea.
"Finally, place the bandage until you reach where there is water. "Then, with your other hand press downwards gently to remove it from his forehead after proper preparation.
"If water descends immediately, the patient should hold the bandage above his opened eye and place it on his own eye.
"Then you are finished. "If water descends immediately then remove the bandage from your second hand after proper preparation to avoid it falling on him when he is lying down between your hands.
When this happens and does not rise up, then you take it out with ease and quickly give your hand to it
Then dissolve it in water into some clear beads; and wash the eye with that. Then put all around the eye a piece of cotton wool soaked in rose oil; and wash with it the eye clean.
But for those who are our contemporaries we put on him a mixture of alum and vinegar
If the almond does not soften and become soft enough in your hand to be introduced into the eye because of its hardness; since it is from men whose eyes are hard, that is to say, you must take a file, which is called an alberid, whose shape this is.
Therefore take it gently with your fingers and do not put the hand into a hole; unless you make a way to the place of the almond subtly.
Then introduce the almond according to what we said.
And at the bedside of your work will be provided with an infirm rest, in which he lies on top of his back in a dark room; and shall not move from all movements, nor by any means: and you put food for him that relieves his nature, but not to move his head right or left.
And the ligature according to its placement until the third day.
Then dissolve it in that dark room and make him see his own face; and do whatever you can to help the man recover. And reduce the ligature until the seventh day.
And it is not necessary to do that when the time for care comes or after an operation at once; but it is necessary to take away that from someone else so that water rises quickly through a severe aspect.
If the hot oil has burned an eyelid then it is necessary to wash out the eye before seven days and correct that with something that settles the oil until it is settled; after which you should wash off his own face from above where he rules himself under for a certain number of days, in such dark room.
As you enter into your home gradually and get used to the circumstances of yours
You should know that any pupil is excused from practicing on another's body more than once. At that point the student may perform an operation.
There was a certain person from Alayrah who said that he had made an incision on Alayrah's finger with water for purification
Indeed I did not find anyone of yours who had done it; nor was there found a book from an ancient one containing this matter; and it is possible that what he said might be new.
These are the shapes of the things from Alayrah as long as who does not know them remain under them.
They should be formed with proper breath; and the extremities of theirs should be in the same triangulation as this, acute extremity.
Head twenty-four.
From the cure of fleshly birth to the nose.
When the fleshly birth occurs in the nose of divers kinds added on, from which there is something that assimilates many feet scorpions; and from it is the flesh cancerous, pale idea, colors of the fox: and from it is what is the flesh soft, not fox coloring.
Therefore what from these flesh is soft and not deceitful or cancerous should you make to rest the ill-willed one between your hands opposing alone with open one in those flesh: thereafter draw them out towards the outside and strike that which you comprehended ex itis through spatulously sharp but on a part once, until you know that all the flesh is now entirely removed.
If anything were left from that whose removal was not possible; then take it with one of the subtleties of instruments and easily thereafter until nothing remained from him. If your blood were dominated by you or it fell off a cold hand; then apply to him what is necessary through that; or if there are venomous apostemes, then carefully burn the one until the blood departs and all of the flesh was burned away.
After making a cut in the nose, apply vinegar and water, or wine If there is bleeding from the nose, proceed by applying moisture up to the palate until it stops. At that point you can say that he's well again
If the moisture doesn't penetrate into his nose as it should, you can say that the knife has entered into his upper nasal cavity and cannot be removed by itself.
Then you should insert a thread of some thickness to remove the clots and mucus from his nose. After this, you must gently lift out each obstruction with your fingers, either one at a time or in groups as much as necessary: And you will have to keep them clean until they are removed completely; and then you can proceed upwards towards his throat.
Many children do this for their teacher at school because it is an easy task to perform.
After that you place both your hands on his face, one over the nose and the other remains in his nose. After that the surgeon removes the thread with all the obstructions it has collected. Until you know that his flesh is now free from the thread and its obstructions.
After that you extract the thread; and apply the Egyptian unguent to his nose after the blood has been removed with it: do this for three days or more until the unguent has completely dissolved what remains on the body.
After all of that you place a plug in his nose to stop the bleeding and keep him from breathing through it for some time until he is well again.
If the cure does not work, then try another one.
To remove the nose hair you should use olive oil or other remedies applied to the nose; put it in as if you were putting an onion into your own nostril and breathe through it.
And if you make a plug that is sealed tightly like a canna.
In order to perform an operation on the brain, it must be full of instruments; one who holds his hand by its thumb should have his arm extended; when you warm up with oil, or what comes from the scissures, and all other things flowable
The 25th head
A nosebleed often occurs at the end of the nasal cavity; it is large and increases with time until a clot forms that blocks its view.
For this reason one must take care so that the appearance of it at first begins from him and he removes all of it completely. Afterwards place a bandage on top or burn with a cautery or apply a medicated ointment in the location where that occurs.
If this delay occurs, until it becomes large; then consider if there is a stone, or any other hard thing in the way that causes pain on feeling. Then do not touch with iron, because such a touch will make cancer spread.
Indeed, many times have I seen that when an arrow hits the eye of someone it causes great harm to him who had held it
If the touch of the arrow is light and does not cause bleeding, then do not cause it pain in color or look at what incision can be made all over him; then apply a warm compress and strike lightly without fear or haste until he is cured.
The 26th head
Of the nose, and the lips, and the ears.
For this reason the operation of loosening the continuity of one or more cartilage is often unsuccessful unless in some people.
Therefore when something comes out of him do you look to see if it is a recent wound with his own blood; and then apply the stitches immediately so that he will be cured.
If the cartilage is already separated and one or more parts of it has been made whole; then you must make the incision through all its apparent extent until bleeding stops. In the meantime make a two-layered cut with sutures and tie them together, then pierce through it with an awl, break off its top part to leave just its base; next bind both ends of this base tightly to form a loop and put on another piece of string or cord: afterwards you may remove the first tied knot after two days, or three. After that, exchange the treatment (medicine): then release him from his bonds as needed. After tying together and piercing through it with a awl: after being treated with ointment, he will be cured
The method of tying is as follows: either with continuous thread or with a needle, like we sew up the mouth of an animal: either tie together the solution and thread, like I taught you to do before.
The 27th head.
In order to remove hair from the eyelids (eyelashes).
Many people's eyebrows are very thick and hard to remove, some of them less, others more.
Therefore it is necessary that you cut the eyebrows down to size and remove all of his hairs with a razor or scissors; afterwards tie him up again.
After piercing through and cutting off the top part: afterwards you have tied up, then release the blood.
Afterwards bind him tightly with vinegar and tie it securely, where there is stiffness: until all ulcers are healed.
The 28th head
Of the cutting off of a finger nail over the ginkgo leaf
Many times more fat is added to the finger nail over the ginkgo leaf, compared with those that are called bulbuls.
Therefore it is necessary that you tie her tightly with a razor or scissors; or hold her securely in place using tweezers and cut off the end of her finger nail close to its root, and then release both blood and skin so as to allow them to run free, or let him bleed.
Afterwards bind the place tightly with thread, and others tie their eyebrows short and tight, until they are healed.
"If she is unable to deliver it immediately after receiving (it), as often happens, then cut her off at the second time and burn/sear her.
The 29th Head
Regarding teeth with a steel instrument
When the teeth are collected together on the top and bottom of both the inside and outside parts, and when they have been separated with a blade between the edges of the gums and cheeks, then if they fall out or become loosened, they disappear; otherwise, they remain, except for those lost through corruption to their roots.
Therefore let you sit on him with your hands and bring his head into yours, and grind and tooth in that place where the edges appear to you; unless anything remains of them, do it similarly with a razor blade also, for both of you and all others until they become detached.
If therefore the reason of teeth is fulfilled at first, that is good; but if not, then there will come another day for them to fulfill their purpose again, and a second one after this, until finally it may be completed in doing so.
And you know that the reason of the teeth is different from one shape to another and many forms; according to what preparation for your operation: first, when a razor blade cuts off the tooth below (from its base), it is different with respect to where it is cut between the teeth itself, depending on various shapes.
And these forms of razors are prepared for you that you see.
The 30th Head
About the extraction of toothache
So that you heal the tooth with all your intelligence and try to get rid of it completely. It is not that he who administers it will be healed when it is removed; because its essence is sublime: unless a reason for removal of it is excused until then, then one must administer the toothache to him in order to relieve him and verify with you whether his teeth are aching.
"For when pain is felt by a diseased tooth and he believes it has been removed from the tooth; after that however no relief of pain occurs until the diseased tooth itself is removed.
"We have seen this in the veins as a result of phlebotomy (bleeding).
"When the toothache is certified by you (the reader), then it must be that some remedy should come from the application of certain substances on the teeth with a brush or similar; until the usefulness is satisfied and all pain goes away: after which point move the finger to its place, either with your fingers or with delicate tweezers first and foremost.
"Then locate the finger firmly onto its place and bring your head between your thighs (while sitting or kneeling); you have held it well until now, so that it does not move away from its place after all: then pull out the tooth as per the correct position, lest it be broken.
"If that does not work, then take one of their instruments and slide it underneath from all parts with ease; and compare its movement as you did at first.
"If the tooth is perforated or corroded; then it must be that you plug this hole with a cloth and bind it with your delicate fingers until after all: pull out with your fingertips gently as not to break at the time of your tightening, lest it break when being pulled by the tweezers.
"And it is necessary that you apply the scraping with a toothbrush on all sides of the teeth thoroughly and often.
"And be mindful of your strength so as not to break it and let the part remain, and so that any evil causing harm greater than his first pain will cease.
"And also be mindful that you do not do what ignorant ones call phlebotomists by their rashness and audacity; except for doing the things we taught.
"Many people make great efforts to alleviate the pain of those who are afflicted with powerful afflictions; but some are more difficult to relieve and remain, their roots all; or they will take them out from beneath by certain mandibles [teeth?], just as we have shown that many times.
"After its removal is mixed with vinegar (wine) or sour wine.
"If the blood flow is cut off from multiple places (for it often happens), then apply something from a vessel to that place; and if not, burn (or cauterize) him where he came.
"The small teeth (forceps) with the help of which cuts through dense first and lasts until long extremities are reached; and if they are closed up when they come into contact with the hand, then bind them with a clamp; if not to the forehand, let them slip off in order not to be doubled. The extremities are bound tight as well, from the forehead downwards, so that none of the teeth may slip away: the short extremities and bind them tightly with a clamp or hold on them firmly until they constrict properly.
"And sometimes (the ends of the fingers) are like those of the beak of a stork and are strong in constriction.
The end.
"About removal of teeth and extraction of fractured jaw bones.
"When something is broken off during the removal of a tooth, it's necessary to apply butter for one or two days until the place becomes soft; and then introduce an algost (some kind of instrument) into that place or use forceps whose handles are like those of a stork. "This is the form of the forceps.
"The handles are made in this shape, either like a small beak or like a long beak.
"If you do not succeed in removing it with these forceps, then let the patient lie still and cut off all his meat; and use an instrument called 'Palanca pauper' which is shaped like this.
"The extremities are tight as well in the front as behind, but they should not be tightly bound lest they tear.
"If it is necessary to remove the root through this path (with these forceps), then it's good; and if not, you will need other instruments with similar handles.
The first form of a triangular extremity, containing some thickness
A subform of a triangular extremity
And with other instruments and tools that came before them in the reasoning of teeth.
The instrument is now set up with this one that resembles a great hook, whose form being triangularly bent, containing some thickness such that it does not break through; and so the drink may not enter.
And you know that the instruments of teeth are many; and similarly, other auxiliary tools do not count, but a wise craftsman has introduced this tool himself through his own art, according to what operation was given to him by those arts themselves.
Since the instruments were from which they did not mention before any other instrument, because of the diversity of their species themselves.
If the mouth is broken off from the jaw or any other bones of the face, or withered; then it shall be examined on that place where he met with him by means of the instruments and forks that I said in extracting the root, and to drink using a hand whose form is as follows.
In that certain thickness is small, so it can be stretched out or held together with him the mouth, and does not fall off nor be used in vain; until the place returns to its own state; and restoration comes with the aid of medicines suitable for that.
If there is a small putrefaction of bone, then he shall remove it from its own corruption and take care of him until he is cured.
Chapter 32
About the repair of broken teeth above others.
When the teeth of great importance go not according to their own natural course, then there is a wound made by this shape; and especially when that happens in women or children, namely infants.
You should therefore understand. If a dense one is born after the tooth of another and does not lodge there, or it may be his repair; neither incision nor bruising on that part; then you remove him from there; and if he has been attached with another tooth, then strike him with this instrument whose form is as follows.
The face is very small and it bleeds easily from iron wounds, even to the bone
Your toothache will go away with the use of this instrument many days and for hard teeth, so that no other toothache occurs from the teeth
If the instrument is too small or not suitable to fit your mouth, then you must use another instrument with a shape similar to this one.
It is all done with this instrument and its smaller points are not painful at all; just like the sharp point of a needle when it pierces through soft material quickly but painlessly many days later so that no other pain occurs from the teeth, and stops: then release it gently in fine and use it again after some washing.
If the dens is too thick and breaks off part of it or damages your tongue, then you should use another needle as well to pierce through the tongue gently without harming the voice, nor breaking your speech.
The 33rd chapter.
About removing teeth with the help of an air pipe.
When the previous teeth were injured and shaken by blows or from other causes, it was not possible for them to be removed in one day without falling off; so you had to treat them with medical stitches, but they did not heal completely, then the mind within them is there until they are pulled out with an air pipe. For gold can be lost because of wounds and can rot after days, but the ear never changes.
The air pipe has to be a certain size for its length between the teeth.
The shape of the instrument for removing teeth is as follows, you insert it between two healthy teeth and then pass it through to another tooth by the double points, either one at a time or several in turn until reaching the other side with your hand up to that point of the healthy tooth. Then repeat the procedure until you reach a part where you had inserted it and pull your hand with dexterity and wisdom; do not let go of the instrument until it is removed completely; and make sure there is no slack in the cord as you pull out the instrument at the roots of the teeth so that it does not slip off.
"And then you should cut off the superfluous ends of the fingers with scissors; and also remove both of them together, by cutting across them, while holding their hands gently; and afterwards, secretly insert these between the tooth and gum in such a way that they do not touch the tongue; this will prevent the speaking being stopped.
"If it should be necessary to tie them with a thread instead of cutting, hold one hand and tie both together using the same thread until they are tied firmly.
"This is how the shape of teeth should be, and the form of the two healthy teeth, and the two moving teeth; as you do.
"And sometimes it may happen that one tooth falls out or two teeth fall out after a blow and they stay in their places just as we have tied them; but this will not be done unless the craftsman is wise and skilled.
"And sometimes it may happen that something happens from the jawbone downwards; and this will be like the shape of teeth, placed at its place, as if we have tied them so; but they remain and are fastened with him for a long time.
Chapter 44.
"When the tongue ligament that was cut off under the tongue is either natural because it gives rise to man; or accidental after one has become consolidated.
"And the operation is done to make his mouth open gently with its head turned towards you; and release his tongue so that it can speak by itself; then cut off this ligament firmly in length until the language is released from its retention.
"If there was any kind of hardness or knot in it and it became like a lump from the swelling; then you should loosen it gently by pulling it out with your finger until you cut off the ligament and release the swelling.
"And also remember not to make a hole deep into the flesh so that you may cut the artery there, and stop the flow of blood.
After making an incision with water that is hot (or) with vinegar, or with cold water
Afterward apply a solution of liniment to the tongue which shall hold it soft and moist at all times so that it may not become rigid overnight
If there is bleeding when making an incision, then apply a compress of vinegar over the location where the blood flowed. If your finger bleeds when making an incision, then apply a ligature of a linen bandage over the place where it bled and care for him with the remainder of the preparation until he is healed.
The end.
When a flap of the tongue falls off from under it and becomes stuck to the underside of the tongue due to the tongue's natural action being prevented by an operation performed on it; and perhaps be magnified greatly in size until the mouth is completely closed
And there was an operation done upon him so that you can see his tongue from outside of the mouth and consider the flap.
If therefore your finger is injured by bleeding (or) by blackening or being burned and it does not hurt the patient's senses then do not apply any bandage to it because there was a burn.
And if the flap is loosened due to whiteness and moisture (or) looseness of the tongue then release it gently with a fine scalpel blade and free him from every part. If your finger bleeds at the time of your operation then apply a compress over him and wait until the bleeding stops; thereafter proceed with your treatment to remove it together with its remainder.
Afterward applies with vinegar and salt water and care for him with the remaining preparation until he is healed.
The care of two flap folds in Amigdalar
The end.
When the flaps of the throat are injured (or) those that resemble folds of flesh which occur due to wounds; and they are called two flaps of the Amigdalae: when you care for them as we described above in division, but do not heal, then consider it.
If a sharp point is lacking, its sharpness fades and few senses remain; then it should not be used with iron
And if its root is rough and thick, then it should not be used with iron at all; for fear of the flow of blood, I will let go (of the patient) lest he die (from loss of blood). Either you may pierce him through and through or by himself he may be perforated.
And if its root is white in color, round, and of a soft nature; then it should be used to pierce (him).
The operation on him is thus to be considered before the performance of your own operation; if his sharp point has been quietly completed or was about to be completed by a slight movement - then you should pierce through and through into his body, and place its head in yours: so that he may open his mouth and receive food from your hand.
Let it be with silver or gold, as soft as the yolk of an egg
With that premise and it, you will show the point to him, and he will fall upon your hand; then receive one of them by its tail, and bind it in your fist, so as to hold on to it with both hands, except for when you must grasp something from his clothing.
Then pierce the other one through with its instrument, following this shape. The other one will be received with the fingers; however if its extremities are not straight but curved, then you should use a sharp instrument to pierce through and through into his direction, lest iron poison him or he drinks it in (the alcohol).
If the other one is not present at that time, then pierce through and through into his direction with a blunt instrument. A sharp point on only one side should be used to make an incision; use both sides of it for the other incisions.
After piercing through one, pierce the second according to this same pattern of incision.
Then after making the incision you should take care that he drinks cold water or a mixture of vinegar and water.
If a person is choked with blood, he must gargle water in which the granulation tissues have been burned; either leaves of death or similar things from them are applied to his throat until the flow of blood ceases, then the treatment begins and continues until he recovers
And sometimes birthmarks arise in the back of the throat other than the two tonsils. Therefore treat them equally as I said about the cutting of the two tonsils.
And I myself have treated another woman who was born between her tonsils and had a constriction of the throat, which she barely felt when it occurred; but now almost all feeling has been lost in it, so that she can hardly breathe with me closed to such extent as to prevent drinking or drinking water. She is likely to die if this condition lasts for one day or two days.
And the tonsils were expanded such that it only felt two openings, until they stretched over the top of the nostrils.
Therefore I stopped at one opening among them and closed it up. Then I took him by the hand and treated from that great part of his body.
And then I released her where she had taken breath in through the nostrils.
Therefore I did that thing to him which was brought forth by the other nostril.
Therefore I opened his mouth and pressed his tongue; thereafter I fixed one of the openings in it (the tonsils); then I released part of him from that great bulk which was upon her body, so that he could not breathe out except for a little blood; thus she became well again immediately.
Therefore I continued to treat him through the tonsils for a long time; and they kept on swelling in that place where I had made incisions, until it was lessened by half and with her thus.
So I cautorized between his throat the tonsils, to prevent breathing from them: and she recovered immediately.
And it remained thus until the addition was done away with; then I walked on my side, not knowing what God did with her after this.
On cutting off the eyelids
[No translation is needed for this section as it does not contain any text]
When the catarrh descends down to the eyelid and becomes dry, at that point it is called horizontal; but if it extends further down into the lower part of the eyelid (which can be rounded or flat) then it is referred to as a wane.
When treating it as we described in the section on cutting off, and without performing any further care; if you feel that the eyelid is warm (i.e., inflamed) after this procedure, then you should gently touch/strike it to determine its nature.
And if it is a rounded swelling and not very long, and is bloody or dark in color, without feeling any sense of touch from it; then you should make an incision to it (i.e., perform the cutting procedure). In that there is fear of the weak.
Therefore when you see it according to the manner that I described from white and its length (i.e., regarding how long it is), so you should gently hold/support a weak eye with sunlight, speak to him using an instrument of which the previous description was given; then take her down below, strike her gently once or twice with two instruments that were mentioned in cutting off the eyelids procedure.
And you should not cut into it unless a thing is added over the natural end without any additional part being put on.
If you strike/cut into it more than that then he will speak and say something.
After cutting (i.e., after the procedure), apply a treatment/care to it as we described for that procedure; and until it is cured.
If the weak eye was shaken away from the cutting procedure, then you should apply your mind to cautorizing it without fear and trepidation (i.e., do not hesitate or worry).
The manner of cauterization is this; use a sharp hot water to set the weak eye into your hand (i.e., put it on with great care). Then you should speak to him using an instrument that we mentioned. "After taking water as I instructed you in the chapter on cauterizing, and tie it down with that knot so that its heat cannot be extinguished, do not loosen it too much or too little, neither subtle nor coarse, but place it so securely that this instrument's grip is firm.
Place the instrument on its handle (extremities) where medicine grips hold onto it as firmly as an ear's cochlea holds onto a radius.
And place the instrument on top of that medicine and keep it steady so that its weight falls downwards towards its own length, as if pulled by an intrinsic force from its mouth, in such a way that nothing comes out of the bottom of it but pain, and let him stay there.
Then hold your hand steady with medicine. And then you put it on the top of that medicine in a quantity and measure with your thumb its size when ready to be burned off, until you bring it down already burned off, and let out only one incision from the medicine's bite.
And if you want to take hold of it then place its end over the handle of your thumb and fasten both together with medicine, and insert a radius inside that hole until it holds firmly on top.
Do this many times so that you become accustomed to the way of burning off. Then let go of it: for itself will burn up and fall after three or four days.
And if you wish to repeat the medicine, repeat it again: and after cauterization let go of it when bound with a cord soaked in butter, loosen it while holding on to that which is from the medicine's grip by water; then tie it tightly cold water.
And healing took place externally with ointments, and inside with gargling until he was healed.
Therefore the incision of surgery is better for health but longer because of fear
And sometimes healing happens with a knot more subtle than the cauterization and incision: for healing takes place when suffocated by that method. "Take from the plants themselves," etc., such as sumach, hyssop, origanum, rutabaga, sea holly, chamomile, abrotan, similia and others: mix all of them together or some into a drink, and they will sink when poured on oil; if put in the middle of an oil-filled vessel, it will be pushed out through a hollow tool.
"If you are using an oil lamp, either by the light of day or candlelight," until the wick is soaked and rises up to the top of a hollow vessel where it can be extinguished.
"Then rinse thoroughly many times, until removed.
"And do not let the beginning of this treatment be performed by someone who lacks experience. "But then add some lukewarm water, not letting it happen without the help of an experienced person.
"But if you do not have this tool present to you at the time, then take a hollow vessel and fill its opening with oil so that it cannot be extinguished; for the wick will prevent the flame from reaching the mouth of the lamp, as the wick prevents burning oil in the same way. And this is done through good care and health.
"From removing the fat (spines) and bones from the broth.
"Chapter 38 is complete.
"Many times rinse away until the fat and bones are removed or something similar.
"Therefore let you be released from what appears above where the candle was extinguished after you speak with an instrument at daylight and it is declared to you that which remains in fat.
"And what does not appear to you and hides in fat must be done with a greater amount before the food is digested by the stomach. "In such cases, it may happen that an additional part will come out through the vessels (intestines).
"Or the food is not digested by the person's own body at all (in such cases as when someone has a stomachache or indigestion), and he swallows seawater gently to relieve it, and then drinks something else; or he takes water from sponges of sea-weed and strains it through a fine cloth: and after that, he drinks this. "When it is found at a place where the spine and/or mouth are, then it should be extracted there.
"If not extracted as we said, then you will use the tool from the lead pencil in this manner.
"It is larger than the radius and its curvature is greatest at its extremity; it enters into his mouth with ease and he himself raises up his head.
"And it should be handled with the end of his tongue so as not to hurt him in any way, and pulled with him the mouth or spine by hand; or entered into him (the patient) through a surgical incision made with his own hand.
"Indeed the one who is weak should enter, that is better: in order to take from him (the patient) as much as he can prepare himself with his knowledge of where the part to be taken was attached; and it should be drawn downwards or pulled by hand together with a tool all according to the amount which has been prepared for him until it reaches.
"Of the extraction of the phlebotomist (blood-letter).
Chapter 39
"When the phlebotomist is being treated when he says to divide from the collection along with medicines and does not bind them together, then you should observe at his foot in front of the sun, or if it were after sunset in front of a lamp.
"If your hand falls upon him while treating phlebotomy, then you should extract her with the hand that was given to you, or gently and carefully.
"If it is not possible with them, then you should take the cannula and go into her mouth until just before her mouth; thereafter enter him into the use of a heated iron. "Do this often and let the patient be free from water for one whole day.
"Thereafter he should drink a full amount of cold water and open her mouth into it; he should put his mouth inside of it as well and not swallow anything from it; and spit out the water for one hour after another with his own hand. With cold water it falls off
If we do not use the same instrument (which I did not specify), then a supposititious one would be used instead, and if that instrument were to become clogged with mucus or saliva, it could lead to suffocation due to blockage of the airway.
This is done repeatedly because she/he does this often.
The method of the operation during suffocation is to insert a tube into your mouth, which should have holes through which to pass the breath and air while the throat is protected by the operator's hand on the middle part (forearm or arm) in order to prevent the airway from being obstructed.
After that the operation of suffocation is completed and the patient's mouth has been inserted into the tube with its end in their throat, if they close their mouth, then the suffocation will not be successful until you know whether the suffocation was successful or not The bleeding quickly falls off.
If that does not work, then repeat the procedure many times.
And if the patient remains quiet and continues to eat, drink, or swallow water after the operation is complete, they will bleed even more.
It must therefore be done with this method.
And this is the form of the instrument used to remove blood from the throat when it falls on top of your skin.
The same as a pitchfork is with respect to the manner in which it is used to enter and remove from the throat, unless it has been inserted for this purpose. The end of that is similar to the beak on a crane or stork, which has a sharp tip; if it grasps something and does not release it instantly, then it will damage whatever it is grasping.
In the opening of the aorta, and their sectioning and care regarding that matter
End cap U
Species of the aorta are many and various depending on how you recall them; for example, one is to remove it (the aneurysm) by its own perforation, while another is to use surgery to remove it from both ends (bilateral).
One is taken from a species of sponge and comprehends it by moisture
The second one is due to places where it fell off the body
If an accident occurs on the head of a sponge, it is another due to its falling off from above; and if it falls from below or out of the body, it is another due to its falling off from below or within (the body). Each of these accidents has its own judgment by operation.
Those due to the sponges should not be perforated unless after they have matured within them and are complete; those that are necessary for perforation during their raw state and do not mature in accordance with their purpose.
Like accidents that are near to the joints.
If an accident occurs near the joint and its fall is prolonged, until it has decayed to such a degree that the surrounding ligaments become loosened or the tendons are torn from the joints; this leads to a stronger contraction in those members.
Or if the accident occurs at the main member; because if you delay the perforation of it until it matures, or its fall is from this main member, a blow to one part may result in injury to another.
Or if the accident occurs near the anus and is not perforated mature; do not perforate it unless you have completed its digestion or until it does not putrefy deeply within, and is prolonged to reach into the interior of the anus, a fistula may be formed, or there should be an opening at that part from which he cannot heal.
You should perforate the sponges as soon as you know they are mature in accordance with their purpose; there is pain of sedation and fever, retraction of muscles, reduction of swelling, decrease in pulse rate, weakening of the strength of the head, other signs.
You should perforate the sponges at the lower place due to them and make it stronger; if they are on the hands or feet, or places where there is much movement, or tendons, nerves, arteries, veins, or in all the parts equally distant from each other but not reflected back onto themselves.
In those parts where a reflection is made, make a hole according to that part.
If the apostrophe is found in a place that should not have one, it's best to remove the hole and then confirm its removal before continuing to feed him [the patient].
Because if you make a hole before that, the urine will flow backwards out of him [the patient], and it is foul-smelling, sour, and may cause tears to his eyes, and perhaps the lips are torn off as well, and its depth increases.
Some [people] make holes according to body width when needed or in the place where it's necessary for a part [of his body].
And it is recommended that when you administer through small holes and large holes separately, or cut multiple sections based on the size of the aperture [hole].
And there are holes through which it is necessary to bandage up the skin and cut when it has already been done as a piece of cloth or until its expiration [death], so that you may repeat what happened in many cases like this, with bandages and puffs.
And from those holes there are sections made having three angles. And from those holes it's necessary to make a cut like the form of paper when killed.
Like an anus [hole].
And from those holes sections are made circular and crescent-shaped; and similar sections are also from the cut pieces of them.
For him who has no head, like superficial holes should perforate [his] body with a shallow hole or flat.
When a large hole has already been made and is filled with much blood and you perforate it, [you should] not leave any of the pus out; instead remove from him all of its parts at that time. After these holes up to another day. Afterwards [you should] remove something from the pus again.
Do this repeatedly according to gradation [levels], until you reach a certain point; it is especially important for the weak and the sick, or women who are pregnant, children who are young or old men whose spirits have weakened: because the animal spirit is often removed with the discharge of urine; perhaps they will die if they are weak, but you do not know.
Therefore be careful in this chapter
After making a hole for the arrowhead, when you have passed through the aperture and it has removed the feathers, you must stop the wound and consider. If there is a wound from an arrowhead or if it's just a small cut, then apply linen bandages or old cloth to bandage the wound. And if there is a large arrowhead or multiple perforations of the aperture, you must then go into every wound and apply your linen bandages until they come off by themselves.
And if you have cut off a part of the arrowhead or encircled it with your hands, then apply a bandage from old cloth and tie it tightly until the third day.
Then wash it well and care for it as you would do with ointment or oil so that it may be healed.
If there is blood flowing from your hand during the time of your operation, then apply cold water and vinegar after it has soaked into the bandage or cloth. And lay it over the location where there was a great amount of bleeding.
If the blood continues to flow even after that, then you must apply a cure and care for it as described before in this book of ours and with oil or fat.
And if there is a time delay and the location of arrowhead injuries is multiple wounds, then you must apply poultice with wine or oil and put them over the locations
And if there is a time delay and the location of arrowhead injuries are rough skin, then you must apply poultice with wine or oil and put them over that location. Until the third day is over, as we described before, then you must stop removing it and apply to its care what was done for him earlier until he has been healed.
This is therefore necessary based on the universal knowledge of treating arrowhead injuries.
"On the other half of a second division [after 'half' is added for clarity], I say about every incision made by the surgeon in order to secure its end.
The 41st head
About cuts on the scalp
The incisions on the scalp are made by the surgeon and they appear to be of the type that secure the earpieces held in place by the hair; it seems as if these earpieces have been pulled out by chickens.
The species of those involved is many.
Among these are the earpieces that secure the hair with a damp cloth and hold it in place by the skin of the skull; among them is another type that holds the scalp tight to the skull by means of a hard plate; and there are others that do both, but they all use some other method for securing.
In the course of the operation as a whole and with respect to their removal there is no fear that anything contrary to art will occur with respect to the veins which are fed by those arteries [veins].
The operation on their part is as follows: after the instrument with a certain form, which I call "the approach," has been introduced to examine it closely and find out what holds inside of it [i.e., within the incision].
If there is moisture that holds the instrument in place then you should remove it by a cut along its length and use this method of cutting along with the line of an initial incision, which is called "the approach.
And begin with the cut along the line B to the line G; when you remove the moisture you will find that something holds it in place and you do not leave any of its remains behind.
Many things are left if anything is remaining from removing this
Then immerse your hand into the Egyptian unguent if it is present; and if not then do so with water and salt; and you should cut through to its end until another day. It will be destroyed by what remains from the cut.
Then use the Egyptian unguent for the second and third time; if you grow weary of that then do so with water and salt until it is healed.
If the epiglottis is closed, then squeeze it according to this shape; with a cross-shaped hole and a pair of tongs: and pierce the vessels between the two sections, and excise him from all parts; and let your power be exerted in the extraction of the tunic that holds him.
But if it makes you an artery, I will tell you about that afterwards.
And similarly do with the epiglottis if there is a stone present as well, remove it from the section and care for both of them together according to what we have said before.
The removal of the epiglottis is easier because there are few blood vessels and moisture present in it. And sometimes there are epiglottis-like structures found in the head of some people where there is no moisture present.
This is because I encountered an epiglottis on the tongue of a woman and pierced it like a solid stone, rough, white, that could not be scraped off; and if someone were to pierce him with something while he was being extracted, he would have been injured from doing so.
In other cases the epiglottis may be injured through accidents on the head, except for these that happen to boys and at the roots of the ears; sectioning them all is a superficial section.
Or there may always be perforations in their lower part so that the discharge from the nasal cavity could go downwards to the lower parts of it.
After this, treatment with him through his care after extraction.
Of the removal of the epiglottis from the neck.
Chapter 42.
Many of these epiglottis injuries occur on the neck and under the hyoids, and sometimes they happen throughout the body as well.
And those from which injuries occur on the neck are one and many; they are generated by the pharynx; all of them are within their own tunics as is in the epiglottis and in the head-endings, just like we mentioned before.
The species of harps are many. Among these there are stones; among these also are those that cause dampness; and among them too are those that are harmful, unyielding to treatment.
Among these there is a good disposition for handling, whose apparent proximity to the skin allows it to move over all of its part and not be attached with folds or guides; nor does it go deep into the body. It must be cut away from the upper part of the body along the line, then across that line, finally extending two lips outward towards both sides, as if one were taking out a finger through the ear lobes on each side at once and quickly removing it, just as in the case of the fingertips we said before; so remove this promptly.
It is necessary to be cautious that no injury occurs through carelessness or negligence.
Do not cut off your own hand with the incision, nor cause injury to a weak or sick person, nor remove anything that is not necessary for their treatment.
If you cut off a limb or an artery and cause yourself to be unable to continue the treatment afterwards, you should make a cut in it so that some veins can release the blood, then bind up this vein, and loosen it later; otherwise, let it begin to rot.
Then take care of your own health after the treatment is over so that you do not bleed as a result.
Finally, with one finger pointing to other ear lobes if anything remains from the harps, then cut it off and dispose of it properly.
If the harp is located deep in a root and cuts it off from its own roots, you should cut it only with a doubled-twisted cord and remove it until it falls by itself without injury or damage.
Finally, loosen the older wound that you have already soaked with the Egyptian ointment. Finally, take care of yourself.
"When the stitches are cut through completely, it is necessary to apply a compress with two wounds on each side and immediately seal them up, as soon as you see that there were no further losses.
"If you see that the strophule was too large and a portion of it remained after cutting through completely, then you should go back and try to make an incision at its root as well, and take out what is left. And apply the stitches we have mentioned.
"If any of the strophules remained after they had been completely cut through with a small incision, perforate that and make it into a superficial opening so you can see where its center is located. And then put a stitch below this, just as we have mentioned.
"Then apply a ligature with ointment to the strophule that remains after it has been perforated by a small incision, and also do this to its neighbors so they will corrode what was left from the corruption. Then when you see that the wound is healed, you should take care of it right away with the same process as before until it is completely healed.
"Chapter 33, head.
"From the epiglottis being dislodged from its place inside the throat due to an accident.
"The ancients made this incision into the epiglottis and did not find anyone within our territory who had done it: so these are their writings.
"For those who have synechial membranes, it is necessary to make an incision into the epiglottis when there should not be a gap through that opening for fear of damaging both lungs.
"For those who have a cold or sore throat, an incision into the epiglottis is necessary when there is no burning sensation coming out of their windpipe.
"Therefore when we want to do this, let's make an incision into the epiglottis under three or four circles of it, depending on how big and wide that opening is between the two circles in terms of its quantity; so if you cut through cartilage there, but not through the strophula. And then that very place becomes visible because it is close to where the flesh was injured by the cutting, as well as the blood vessels being far away.
When a surgeon is timid, he should stretch out his knife from the throat with caution. After cutting the skin, wait until it is ready to be pulled through (the canal), and if you see anything from them, do not hesitate; quickly withdraw your hand with blood on it.
After the incision is made (made on a channel), take note of it; its meaning is above the cut on the channel, when withdrawn from this and separated by cutting off, and making an opening with your voice.
After a while you should open up the wound (if necessary).
When the time comes when one is fearful of the beginning (of surgery), gather together two lips from the skin and leave them alone without cartilage.
After this you should administer medicines that save birth wounds until they are healed.
I have finished. Here is the final part of my translation; please let me know if you need any further assistance or clarification.
And what I heard through you is that one of the assistants was performing a tracheotomy and inserting it into his throat.
My breath was taken away from him, just as it is for one who is dying.
I therefore took note of the wound and entered blood that had come out of it into his chest. Therefore, I was confused because she did not leave her wound unguarded and she went out of the wound.
I then took care of my wound and him until he was healed; and the assistant did not do anything except for a little redness in her face and she returned after some days to better dispositions.
"Herein is explained that there should be no fear.
Of the throat's hernia
The head has 44 vertebrae.
This hernia of the throat is called "great" and it is large as to its color on the body; it is very common among women.
It can occur either naturally or accidentally.
Certainly not by nature.
The second one is similar to a knot on the beak of birds. The other way it occurs is by a knot in the artery. And there is fear in it; and it should not be that it cause a swelling with iron unless by its own nature; and you must try to probe it with an instrument (i.e., a tube or something similar), and examine it while inserting it, using it as an introduction into the body. If you encounter it similarly to a knot on the beak of birds and it is not tied up with any of the veins; then dry it out as they do for knots, such that when they are dried it may be taken out just like them: and if not, then search its entire length thoroughly. After treatment of the place with whatever is necessary for curing, until it has been cured.
The head has 45 vertebrae.
Of the throat's nodes.
There are many nodes (or knots) of the throat; and I have already enumerated all their species one by one; and it is necessary that we indicate here a difference between the node and the exit in such a way that those who make doubt should see this.
I say therefore that when the exit is complete and the swelling has subsided due to the expulsion of excess fluids; at this point they remain in a state of weakness and fever.
The node of the throat is not hot or cold, nor does it cause any pain; and they stay tied up as a knot on the body's color; and their opening is like that of a sack (i.e., round), and one way in which to approach them is from above downwards, and another way downwards towards the bottom: both big and small openings are possible.
The two types of wounds are either puncture wounds (which may contain moisture) or open wounds that are contaminated with moisture. And the colors of moisture are many according to what I said earlier.
When you come to examine the node (of an organ), so that you can test it and ask about its first with a tool called Intramission, according to what is not its form here after this.
The way of asking about the nodes is general, so that you take this tool and enter it into a moist place; and then use your fingers with him for a while until you know that the tool has penetrated the wound. Then finally put down your hand according to the measurement of its magnitude.
Then take away Intramission and consider what went out through his incision.
If therefore the flowing moisture is red, whatever its color may be; then dry it with a superficial cut according to what I said earlier.
If the flowing moisture does not go out through the incision of Intramission, then you know that it is a puncture wound; so dry this with a cross form having a deep cut according to its form, as I taught you: and hold him with your nails, and strip off the wound from all parts easily. And be cautious of the tool if you can, in order to take away this safe node along with Nodo.
If the moisture in your tool is broken by surgery and you are not able to take away this safe node, then you will have to extract it with force until nothing remains of that thing.
If something remains from that thing or much, the nodes follow as many times.
If you are injured and there remains something from it; then you should use a tool with sharp corrosive ones for cutting off the wound: hold tight onto the wound, put on top of the cooled one that sits in the tool's mouth (the Intromission), care about him with the remaining care. Until he is healed.
If there is a large knot on it then remove both of its lips and care for him as if he had been born
If there is a pulsatile vein to you (which can be pulsating or non-pulsating), then remove it quickly with a sharp knife, and give him strict diet of two days, or three if the ulcer is not healed; until the pus comes out, and he lies still in ebullition. Then return to the incision which remained after the knot was removed.
Head 66
Of instruments for section and perforation.
These are the forms of the introducers, and there are three types.
From these is the large one, from them is the medium size, and from them is the small one.
Let him fall downward to meet the extremities of the introducers, so that he may enter with a bang into the introducer who has received him.
These are the forms of the experienced ones, and thus it is said that they pierce through or perforate; one of them is called a bore, namely piercing; there are three types.
From these comes the large one, from them the medium size, and from them the small one.
They are joined together so that they may penetrate with a bang through the openings and the fistulas (abnormities where urine or feces come out), and bubbles from what is between them by the bones.
And there are others which are rounded, flat, narrow (like a very small needle), of the type that is sharp on one end and blunt on the other; those ones pierce through the skin itself or through the flesh with their pointed ends, from this one in particular or that one in particular.
The better of them are which come out through this one.
And there are the experienced ones of the black lead, who join so that they may penetrate through these fistulas which have a constriction, and with their flexibility they reflect as if in agreement with each other's movements.
There are three types more. Because from these come the long fistulas, and then medium sized ones, and then small ones according to the quantity of the openings and their stricture (narrowness).
"The form and manner of treating many different types.
"While some are simple in their nature and have one treatment method; others three types of treatment.
"And there is a form that has no cure for it, but three types of treatment.
"And there are two forms that have two treatments each and three types of treatment each; and all these are necessary to be present.
"These are the forms of scissors used for cutting and removing knots; and also for shaving.
"The extremities of those tools are sharp and the others not sharp; they will not be used unless there is a small opening for use after shaving, or to cut off nails: so that any injured person may be treated with it, and bring back quietness more than from scratching due to the roughness.
"They are like the scissors of the ears; when you blow into them they become a trumpet and make noise as if it were alcohol; but their point is hidden and curved inward and outward.
"The form of the scissors that hides between fingers when used for shaving; they do not feel them as soft; and there are three types - great, middle, and small.
"The forms of the mouth when used for drawing blood; there are three types - great, middle, and small.
"They can be shaped like the ears or trumpet-shaped with an enlarged point at one end as long as you wish; and they are to be sharp.
"You need to have those forms of the mouth with you and prepared for drawing blood when you are in a situation where there is no immediate medicine.
"However do not use them in the drawing of blood everywhere on the body; but only in the places where it is hairy - for example on the arms, thighs, buttocks and breasts.
"And sometimes instruments are taken from them resembling fists of the size, and similar to the palm of the hand; on which blood is drawn when it flows from a vein or artery.
The 47th head
"Of the care of human beings who are assimilated by women's breasts.
When the breasts of men are inflated with sleep (that is, when they become erect during sleep), until they resemble the breasts of women; and then remain embarrassed by shame after that feeding occurs.
Who therefore is disgusted by this, it is necessary that he hide behind the breast section, according to its shape from the line, D then go down to the line E; and finally, completely remove the embarrassment with a cure. After being exposed due to the incarnation of a doctor. Then gather two lips with sutures and care for him until he is healed.
If the breast falls downwards and becomes mollified by its own size, as happens with women: then it is necessary to find support in both his upper lips using two sections resembling a lunar shape, one of which is retained on each side at the ends so that there remains a line containing the smaller one, according to this form from the line, D then go down to the line E; and finally remove the swelling with sutures and powder it as we have mentioned in the cure for cuts.
If you are not going to make a complete incision for him due to fear or the flow of blood: then it is necessary that he lie under a corrosive unguent and release him until the remaining swelling is burned away. Then care for him until he is healed
Regarding the perforations which occurred under Titillicus.
The 48th head
These are the wounds that occur beneath a titillus, they are hard and tough like thorns or spines of a hedgehog, from which come out those that are moistened by humidity.
Therefore those that are moistened by humidity should be cut off with a lunar section, according to this shape, from line b to line g; and when it is completely drawn out of the wound beneath, then let him who made [it] apply an old cloth over his head up until another day.
Then he was dressed with a suitable ointment to heal it; and when it was healed
If the wound were from the spines of a hedgehog, then let them who made [it] shave off above it as described for shaving over the spines of an hedgehog.
If however a wound extends out so that it discharges pus, then administer to it a cautery as described for the discharge of pus when something was previously applied to it.
The thirty-ninth part of the work.
Of wounds caused by arteries and veins
When the artery is broken and the skin above it is consolidated, then many wounds occur beneath it; similarly they occur for veins as well, both of them causing the wound beneath to swell and inflate.
And the signs by which it can be known that wounds and swelling have occurred because of an artery or vein are as follows: for when there is a wound beneath from an artery then it is long, extended into the depths of the body; and when you give a blow to your finger on its way out, you feel as if he is struggling.
And that which occurs because of a vein is round upon the surface of the body.
And the section over this wound is an error, and especially beneath the scales and gills, and neck, and in many parts of the body; it is very large. Therefore let it be treated with care using iron, and anything that came from them beneath as well, whether on the extremities or head should also be treated.
The condition being examined is due to a narrowing of the arteries from their openings After examining the section with the needles, then release the artery and allow it to be released from the clothing until it is identified.
After inserting it under the point, then make it penetrate until another point on a different side of its length and tie off the artery with two separate knots, as you have learned in extracting both arteries from the wrists.
After puncturing the location between the two bands with a spatula and allowing all of its contents to drain away until it is entirely empty and then seal off the aperture.
After administering a treatment that generates pus until the bands fall away and then care for it with suitable ointments to this extent, until it is healed.
If the aperture was due to a cut in a vein then you should hold tightly with your hand as it is possible for you to do so from the opening while holding it securely with needles or thread. After inserting the needle under where you held your hand tightly and make it penetrate into that area with a double thread until it is pulled out from another side of its length. After tying the artery with good cord as you were taught by me using two parts of thread and two extremities, respectively.
If however you remove the thread then insert a needle with another one under the opening completely on the incision and tie your thread into four parts.
After drying off the opening and when it is ready then you make an incision through its contents and remove what was bound by it.
After placing a small stick that you soaked in oil on top of it while submerged in the wine. After administering the treatment with liquids and ointments until it is healed.
The head of L.
The condition that occurred due to the tearing of the nerves
"Like an arrow that struck the artery and vein, similarly it strikes a nerve; for it is when it hits them (the nerves), or due to excess exertion, [or] from similar causes: so many injuries occur in the hands of those who perform sutures, whether in their fingers or at other places where stitches are made. And thus bruises abound.
"His likeness is seen in the body of many people, and he has no sensation without pain; when he is stretched by excessive strength, he falls into a similar swoon.
"He is not an arrow accumulated deep within the body, and he falls under a stroke; and he is moved to every part of it, but not to the front or back.
"Therefore, what comes from them should be applied with the hand rather than a weapon. "If it is twisted.
"But if from them comes to the head or front, find a stroke with a whip. "If it is a small arrow, hold him tight with fingers and pull him away from his root.
"If it is a great arrow, suspend him with a cord and tear him apart; then collect him, treat him, until he becomes whole.
"Chapter 1
"On the treatment of arrows.
"Many people are injured by arrows of their own kind.
"From whose root is small and from whose head is large; the lips vary in them. "They are also of a lesser kind, or more powerful kind.
"And I heard of a man whose arrows were two; they were more like the things mentioned before than any other similar thing.
"I therefore cut off one of them and make an incision on the other as if it were half a Roman ounce (eight times a fraction), then perform the operation with an incision into both of them.
"Since there is much blood at his section, therefore if the one who performed the incision bleeds, then cauterize him immediately.
"If you see an infirm person trembling from the incision with a needle, then take a thread made of lead and make it dangle downwards; after that tie it to his arm according to the method we have mentioned, and release him in two days.
"Then add lead poisoning to his stricture. "Therefore do not tie the lead, since it can still be removed and die without labor.
"If there is a large tumor on his incision then it was with some fear and weakness; especially that which is inside the groin.
However, it may be possible to remove the obstruction from him gently. "Then cauterize him so that he does not die.
"Then take care of him until the ulcer is healed.
"And remember that you should not perform an incision on the one whose skin is swollen and has a bad smell; it is indeed an ulcer with pus discharge from the cancer, and I will remind you of this after some time.
The second head
"Take care of the disease of Vmbilicus.
The illness of Vmbilicus came from many causes. "Or it may come from a fissure on his back; and then he would die after the intestines were burst, or if it came from the intestine. "Or from blood which flowed out of a vein, or from an artery according to what was previously mentioned. "Or it may come from the hardening of the veins inside him.
"If it is due to a cut on the finger, its exit will be upward; then the color of the wound resembles that of the body; and there is no pain; and the place appears different. "If it's due to an exit of intestines, then its location is as described above. "When you grasp it with your fingers, it is covered; then comes back, and it may cause a sound like a bell; and the work of it will be done with great effort.
"If it is due to moisture, there is no pain; when you grasp it with your hand, nothing happens except for the covering.
"If it is due to blood, then with these signs appear a red spot on the back of your hand.
"If it is due to the fat from the liver; then there will be a blue spot, large, moist, and it will appear according to its quantity.
"If it's due to heat, then touching it is light (not painful).
"The operation is done on it as long as you consider that the prominence of the abdomen was due to either blood in arteries or veins, or heat; then you have to stop the treatment. "In it there was fear and weakness like I saw them in the chapter where I described wounds due to arteries or veins.
"If the prominence of the abdomen was due to intestines or a wound; then you have to make sure that the person is lying down and not moving. After placing it around the belly, place signs with wax all around. "After that, press on its surface between your hands to lift him up onto his back. "Then, after placing the signs with wax all around; put it down over where you placed it. After that, extend the middle of the wound towards above and put a large bandage on top. In a strong grip with cord and firmly against bone, or tightly against chord of the sternocleidomastoid muscle: then set the knot in the relaxed position.
After securing it to the sternocleidomastoid muscle as mentioned above, gently pull the lower eyelid upwards and outwards towards the nose with a finger or thumb. If the eyelid is now firmly held by the cord, then remove it from its position and introduce a finger into it; move the stomach towards the interior of the body while grasping an excess amount with your thumb: if the eye is still held in place using only one hand, grasp it gently and strike against the other hand's knuckles.
If there are any arteries or veins around, then make a complete circle with it (i.e., encircle all of them). After that, return to your operation. And take two strong needles; tie them into a double knot with their ends as if they were crossing each other at the base of the eyelid and then force them through to make an X-like shape.
After that, tie the eyelid to four places above one of the needles; if necessary, remove and loosen the other needle and release its place until it becomes long and falls on itself or breaks apart.
Then attend to him with whatever oil is required until he is healed.
If the prominence of the belly button protrudes from his flesh or moisture, then it is necessary that you tie him to the eyelid as we mentioned earlier. And remove blood or moisture which may be present within him.
Then attend to him with whatever support is necessary until his position is fixed.
End of text
The end of the treatment, as mentioned earlier.
We mentioned earlier the use of species (surgical instruments) for Cancers and how they were used to care for him with medicines; we also warned that one must be careful not to injure or ulcerate him while using iron tools during his treatment. And, in addition, we specified where the cancerous growth was produced from within the matrix and recommended taking precautions when caring for it.
When a tumor occurs where it can be removed, like a tumor in the breast or thigh, and others of its kind from limbs attached for removal, especially when it begins small
Unless it is very large, it should not be cut off
I was unable to cure someone from that
And the operation on it, when located as we said, is done so as to be able, and only one who has been seized with cholera will fail. Afterwards, you must remove all of its blood vessels along with the filling
After that, you prepare yourself to perform the treatment (surgery).
Afterwards, you must remove all of it's vessels which are attached to it. Afterwards, you must remove it completely from all sides along with the blood vessels according to your treatment until nothing remains of its roots: and release its blood flow, do not cut off or tear it apart, I swear by the location where there is a possibility for removal using instruments.
If however, the blood flow of its large vessel is obstructed by cutting into an artery or vein, then cauterize that one until it stops flowing blood. Afterwards, you must perform your treatment on it along with the remaining care until it is cured.
The cure of hydropisis.
End We are treating hydropisis by this mixture of water and signs (symbols), just as the combination is formed when mixing together water with its own characteristics, and care for it along with medicines.
And that which is cured by iron is only the sign of scabies alone: and cannot be combined with the iron of tympanitis, nor can it be combined with the iron of hypo-scarcity, for this would be fatal.
When you are cured already by this symptom of hydropisis and tympanitis along with medicines, and your treatment did not work: then consider it carefully. "If the patient is already weakened or has another illness in addition to Hydropism, then as it would be if he were a sieve with water flowing through him; so that when he drinks, either of these things will happen: either his strength will return and he'll get better, or on the contrary, his condition will deteriorate further. But if you give him iron at this time, because of fear for what might come to pass.
"If you notice a patient who is already very weak and has no other ailment besides Hydropism, it's not that he is getting worse due to the additional affliction; nor yet an infant or old person: so at this point in his condition there must be a mode of treatment which I will tell you now. You shall draw him into your hands as if you were holding out one hand and supporting him with the other, then pour water gently down his throat from above downwards.
"Afterwards take it slowly and carefully by this way. The two parts are acute, long, and narrow like a sieve. "However there must be some slight weakness present so that you won't pass through it until the operation is complete and afterwards.
Afterwards consider "If the generation of Hydropism comes from a part of the intestines, then you must extend it with three fingers' length upwards and downwards above his throat.
"If the generation of Hydropism comes due to exhaustion from outside, then you must make a section with your left hand and extend it three fingers upwards.
"And if the generation of him is due to weakness on one side, then you must make a section in the right side and do not let there be made another cut into the weakened place lest it flows out more than needed.
"Then make an incision with your whole instrument. "Then insert into the incision and take your thumb with a sieve between the incision, and push it gently as if you were squeezing him; and let there be applied the quantity of that which is being removed equal to the length of a finger or in such manner around.
"Then pierce the vein, let it run out into space until there is a vacuum; and that spot will be water. "After piercing, remove it out and put [it] into the opening/foramen of an instrument whose shape this is. "And it is similar to a tube of metal or air or ear trumpet; there are three openings on the side opposite from where the vein comes out and two on each side near that opening/foramen, one at an angle to the other - thus its end was cut off in the manner of a razor blade as you see: above it is a ring.
"When the instrument pierces through to water then that water descends immediately over/upon the instrument; therefore half a measure of water is extracted at once.
"If the water is extracted from it more than necessary then either the sick person will die at once through a failure of his vital spirits, or he will have convulsions which approach death.
"Indeed the water is extracted from it according to its power and how much strength he has; also considering that you know his dispositions when you feel his pulse with kindness.
"After removing the instrument hold onto/retain the water.
"This is because you must hold onto/retain it quickly due to the cut that retains the vein where it comes out; from which I will tell you how to pierce it in that manner.
"The following day if you are able to tolerate the instrument then remove and also extract half a measure of water.
"Do this on several days without fear or worry until all but half the water is not left over/remaining from the water.
"If the sick person is worse and you have removed a large amount of water then care for him with cold water baths, sweat much on hot days, expectorate from his chest, wash over/upon him [with] wet clothes after removing it; according to what I told you in that instrument.
The care of infants born in a place where they are not pierced
head
When I examine a newborn infant from its mother's womb, and the child's head is not pierced (or has a narrow or blocked hole), either because it was not born through the birth canal, or there is something wrong with that place
Therefore I suggest to apply a small piece of wire (sputumuli) immediately upon birth in order to remove any obstruction and ensure smooth passage.
Then place a small clamp made from lead (cluum), bind it tightly, hold it in place for three days or four.
After urination is emitted, remove the clot and urine remains. Then release him.
If you don't put lead, it is still possible for the urine that flows over the place not to allow the clot to form.
The one whose hole is narrow must be treated with lead as we described, for many days until it becomes wider.
Those who have the hole not at their place are to be treated. That is because when they are born the hole of their head ends in the neck of the veins (or in some sources, the hole ends at the top of the neck). And so it cannot empty itself to its own, until it has released the hand with its own towards its upper side. Neither is generation there, because semen cannot penetrate into the mother's body in accordance with nature; and therefore, there is foetal distress from lead.
And the way of treatment/operation in this case is to support his back up Then extend his head towards the left hand of you and cut off the top of veins from its place by a sharp tool (sutumuli or spatumili), so as to remove obstruction, ensuring smooth passage like an incision with a knife would do, except this is done with the fingers rather than a blade. And then bring it to the middle in accordance with what is appropriate.
It's important that you are there at the time of his blood flow "Many times does it happen that this occurs. Therefore, if he cuts through the artery with his instrument and causes a wound to bleed out, until he is cured.
The things that occur through the instrument and the cutting of the vein, corruption, negligence, and the letting go.
Section VI.
Many times occur these things to Albucasis with the instrument, and a great swelling of the muscle occurs.
And from this other things are bad as well as good.
Therefore it is necessary to suspend with a subtle hook and let go of her, until all the world has taken her entirely. Then he puts himself under an Egyptian ointment on top of her. Therefore the care is with him after this thing and the ointment for healing, until he is cured.
If Albucasis is bad as a color, then it is necessary that you administer to her cautery after the cutting of his and hers reasons.
If Albucasis is captured through the instrument and is not circumcised, then a part of Albucasis between capture and another part outside it is necessary that you take Albucasis who is inside first until he consolidates; thereafter care for him externally because when you cure her simultaneously, it does not secure the capture which precedes.
And also occur these things to Albucasis on testicles as well, and corruption occurs from capture and negligence Therefore it is necessary that you tie up everything which has already been corrupted as well as what he wants to corrupt or is already corrupted.
Then you put a line on top of him after this with the earth which has been tied up previously with flour for grinding grains and herbs as well as threshing weeds.
Therefore care is with it along with the remaining care until he is cured.
If Albucasis cuts through an artery then administer cautery together with lunar cautery in this manner.
Cautery is a tool used in two different ways simultaneously, one being to control bleeding and the other when a wound becomes infected
If the head is pierced by a sword and destroyed completely at once, then you must immediately apply pressure to the wound with a clamp from a lead weight so that it may be held firmly against her.
If the blow struck on the head or upper part of the body and did not result in death (as it would if a fatal blow), unless the victim was wearing armor that protected him from such an injury; then when this happens, you must immediately apply pressure to the wound with a thumb cramp from iron, so as to hold it firmly against her.  If the blow struck on the lower part of the body or the hand and did not result in death (as it would if a fatal blow), unless the victim was wearing armor that protected him from such an injury; then when this happens, you must first apply pressure with your thumb cramp to hold it closed against her.
If discerning who struck the blow is difficult due to the head being covered or obscured in some way, then you must apply pressure with your thumb cramp on the hand from the shield side, as well as against her head/face. This is because when someone wields a sword with great subtlety, there's a risk they may inadvertently strike the opponent in such a way that it pierces their armor or strikes a weak point of the body
Afterwards remove both your thumb cramp from the shield and the hand from the face with a linen bandage soaked in cold water so that they don't stick to each other anymore.
After this you will treat him with wine or some other beverage until he regains consciousness.
Title 72
For the sake of education and the care of them so that they don't make mistakes.
Circumcision is not a solution to continuality like other wounds; however since it comes from our own action and use, they wish that we teach them how this procedure can be done better and safer so as to save their lives.
Therefore I say that ancient authors did not write about circumcision in any of their books; because it is not used according to their laws and is only something we have acquired through experience.
To cut is because I have made the greater part of my art and phlebotomists' work more effective by making incisions with a blade or other instrument around a wound while holding it closed with forceps; so that they are opened up, ligated with thread, and incised with a knife.
And I have also tested all these methods but was not able to improve the work of phlebotomists more effectively with forceps and thread ligation.
Because when making incisions around a wound while holding it closed with a blade or other instrument, too much skin was removed. There are two layers of skin; therefore one must make a transverse incision into the upper layer and leave the lower layer intact so that an additional incision can be made for further treatment and future pain. And when making incisions with the aid of fingerstiffs (also called suture needles), that is to say, those used by surgeons, it is not ensured that the incision at the end of the wrist will be made without injury; for fear may occur from piercing its hole.
However when making incisions with a knife (or other instruments like scalpels), there is sometimes the risk of staining your operation and causing children's skin to become pale due to its nature, which often leads to such injuries; I have already heard about this occurrence.
The experiments with forceps and thread were good for me as the incisions made by them are proportional; therefore because the higher acuity is like that of the lower acuity. Therefore when you use both hands to make the incision and they are proportioned according to one operation at a time; and there is made a similar compression that holds back the skin from all sides while no mistake occurs in any part of it.
The method of the operation itself is as follows; to extimate the boy especially if you can learn from those who are more skilled than you, that is unless you ligate thread only into its own hole and then release it until another day.
Then make him enjoy life in all ways possible through what he has received from his intelligence. "Then place it between your raised hands and let it not lie down; secretly open the fingers of your hand or under your foot so that no one else may see them, except by means of an instrument.
"Then take hold of his arm with your hand and apply the bandage around it tightly so that when you pull him up he will be freed from the wound. "Then cleanse the same thing which has been collected into this bandage by means of a tube (lit., 'sordice' - a small, thin tube).
"Then tie it with double cord. "Then tighten the lower part of it more than its upper part. "Hold on with your thumb and forefinger; secure the lower ligature firmly while holding both ends of it tightly together in between. "Then apply pressure to the wound or you may lift him up by his arm and out of the bandage. "Then gently run the blood for a short time and remove some of the excess fat; cover it with another bandage which has been soaked in boiled water, vinegar, and oil, and secure this bandaged part to that above it until you are free from care.
"The shape is formed so as to facilitate the cleansing of these things which have been collected into a bandage by means of tubes (lit., 'sordice' - a small, thin tube).
"There should be two fingers and they are bent; so that the length of both of them may be equal to the length of their corresponding hands.
"A mistake occurs during the cleansing when some skin is torn off completely or a part of it at the incision.
"Therefore you should push her out when your thumb is on and before the application of the ligature; cut it off in equal parts.
"If you are unable to hold her with your thumb, then pull her out quickly using a finger and cut it off.
"If three days have passed and there is still swelling under the bandage; then release it so that cold may come upon the wound, loosen it gently with oil and cut it off in accordance to what has been prepared for you. "It shall not harm him.
"Therefore let the surgeon proceed with him as he heals a wound inflicted by cutting above the line of measurement, and let it go to the top if the cut is made that way; but still do not harm him.
"Therefore proceed with him as you said, until he is healed.
Eighty-eighth head.
"Of the retained urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is treated by removal from stone, or cold blood, or pus, or formed flesh; and just as you have provided remedies for these methods of curing in another part
And if the bladder stone cannot be removed and you believe that his retention is caused by it, then he should lie down on his knees to cure him. Then both of his feet should be placed on his back and the upper part of his back should be stretched out to stretch as much as possible his longing for healing. He will then proceed with the bladder stone towards its removal from behind, because the retention was resolved.
If not resolved as he had said and the bladder stone is still a problem for him, then you should proceed to administer its removal with an instrument called siringa, which has this form; it is long like a pen's tube but slenderer than one palm, smooth, and made of such fine steel that needles could be drawn from it.
The mode of exiting the bladder through him is like taking hold of a double thread and tightening it at both ends to make a knot; then inserting one end into an inferior part of the siringa and cutting off with fingers if anything comes from the wool as you would do when you are weaving, but you should put it in the cannula just as before.
Then with oil or butter and white wax; make the bed of the patient comfortable, and bind up his bladder; then you should wash him with olive oil from above downward, or with butter, or with almond water; warm the water gently.
"Next, place the instrument gently on top of the vein with ease and let it pierce its root.
"Place both ends on either side of the vein
"Next, press the instrument firmly into the vein so it pierces its root and feels for the artery, and if found, gently guides it to this, aiming at the matter, which is not according to this order unless there is a special reason why that particular point is good because it has a lot of tortuousness.
"Finally spread out the thread with gentle care "The vein follows the thread.
"Next remove the vein and lead it through a narrow channel for hunting (hunting the arrow), repeating this until you have found the vein and let the instrument gently pierce its vein.
"The quality of the instrument must be tested with the clepsydra
"The head of 39.
"When the instrument pierces a vein and there is bleeding or clotting of its contents, then gather together water and medicine to treat it with that which is called clepsydra (a device used for measuring out drops), so this is its form.
"It is silent "There are three holes (the artery and two veins), one on each side of the vein.
"The place where the thing pulls is measured according to the amount it exerts without addition (the quantity of drops), until something is drawn with it from dampness; and when it pushes out, with it pushed back to long ago: as clepsydra measures out the flow, that is, Greek fire in the face of men at arms.
"So when you want to apply moisture to the vein, put its extremity into the moisture and draw it with what pulls up to the top: for the moisture is drawn into the cavity of clepsydra.
Then insert his extremity between the thumb and the little finger After that, he applies moisture with him as what moved her to come quickly and immediately she felt wet.
With a soft sponge like this the sponge is made wet.
Let it be of silver or gold, whose head is larger than an egg and has a notch under it to hold the nose?
Then take the sponge to the fingertips, put moisture into it, with which you wet the sponge. After that tie the sponge between two strong stitches using a double thread, and heat the moisture more than oil.
Then put the extremity of the sponge between your thumb and little finger, then tie a strong thread with moisture on it and when he feels wet, that's already wet.
If you do not have a sponge at hand, then take the remnant of parchment paper and make a circle with it, and perforate it from all of its circumference. After that tie the strong thread between them like how they go together. Then you wrap it around, just as the rope is wrapped by oil and water.
Then tie it to an instrument and do with it like you did with the sponge using your hand, until the moisture is added to the sponge.
Head 60.
From the extraction of parchment
We have said about the use of parchment, and its care with medicines: and I have mentioned a difference between those made by artists for writing or sewing, and others used only as a sponge; and I have spoken of the signs on it in general terms, and I spoke of the parchment where the operation is performed using the hand and cutting. And thus we have said about the generation of the parchment itself: and this was done with an open display and abbreviation.
"Therefore I say that the stone generated from water has caused most harm to children.
"And from these signs it comes that urine is generated by water similar to how water is in its subtlety and appears as a white foam on the water's surface; when it strikes, it makes the man with whom it had intercourse weak, and hard at work, and often drops. "Then afterwards arises, urine from it, as a result of which many people become ill.
"The healing of children is easy, resulting in some cases even up to 14 years. "And it is difficult for the elderly. "In children itself there is a medium degree; it is that which is between the two extremes and whose lapis (stone) is greater in size - its care is easier; if small, then his care is cheaper.
"Since therefore we come to the care of children, it is first necessary, so that we can cleanse them with the help of a cloth; for this reason he sometimes prohibits the stone from being inserted into their bowels during examination.
"Then the patient is taken with his own feet and moves towards the lower end; so that the stone descends into the water's depths or comes up in some cases from a high place.
"Then they make him sit between your hands and set his feet beneath the crossbar of their bench; so that all the water may be directed downward towards the lower end.
"Then question him from outside.
"If therefore you hear the stone as a space, then immediately apply the cutting instrument to it above and cut off the stone.
"If it does not fall under your touch at all times, then you should remove the finger indicating a thumb from the left hand if the patient is a child; or use the middle finger if he is an adult and insert him into his anus, and question about the stone until it lies below your finger.
"Then press with your finger and pull it outward to the external part of its section, wherewith you will open an incision; and then take hold of the minister with one hand, that you may apply your knife with another, and strike downward on the testicle with your left hand, which lies beneath in the part from whence it is cut.
"Then introduce a blunt instrument into its section, whose shape this is. "And find within it what lies between the testicle and anus, but not in its middle; make an incision on the left side from anus to testicle; then strike downward upon it with a stone; your finger should be inserted into its opening; let there be two incisions made one above and one below, according to the quantity of stones that can be extracted downwards without injury.
"If you press too hard with your finger into the opening of the stone near its section and it slips out easily without difficulty.
"You know that from a stone there are angles and margins, for the exit of him is difficult because of those things.
"And from it there comes easily, similar to a glans penis, and round; and an easy exit for them.
"Therefore, add the incision with those angles and margins.
"If it doesn't slip out that way, then you should press upon its head; or tie it with your hands in a downward motion towards him, the extremity being like to the moon, which holds up to the stone and does not withdraw from it; or introduce some delicate instrument beneath it.
"If you cannot press upon its head, then make a wider opening in front of it. "If something comes from the blood, let go of him with your mouth.
"If a stone is more than one, then you must first press it into the female's vagina as much as possible. "Then strike upon him above. "Then press the others in turn, just as if there were two of them.
"If one's knowledge is great, ignorance ensues when he separates a large part from it. "When one has fallen ill with two causes or is destined to die of both, the stream of urine will be impeded by a strong flow of urine.
"Indeed, when one is expelled from office or has fallen apart along with its parts, he will be removed outside of his place.
"Once you have completed your operation, the wound will be healed with honey and aloe; also with dragon's blood; tie him down and lay a warm blanket over him, pour olive oil or wine upon him as it pleases you; also cold water to cool his burning flesh.
"Then the patient lies on top of his chest and is not supported by a single ligature until after three days have passed. "Once he has been bound up, cover him with water and olive oil.
"Then care for him with the unguent of Daphne and Basil until he is healed.
"If he is burned by the hot ashes of a victim and becomes corroded; or if his flesh freezes from being exposed to cold water and urine cannot escape out of him until he knows it through the egress of blood with urine. "Therefore put your finger into the wound and remove his blood. "If this remains, he will become corrupted with urine and decay.
"Then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt; bind him to everything that was used in his care until he is healed.
"It should be done throughout the course of treatment as long as two attendants are needed and all the equipment placed upon it.
"If a stone is flat and lies on the ground near water; if it is moved by that, urine cannot escape from it; then care must be taken of him with what he knows before dividing. Many thanks for excusing me from this examination, I have already tried that.
It is as follows: the instrument of perforation with a sharp point, whose shape is triangular at the ends and fixed to wood
Then take a rope and tie it around a stone so that it does not slip off easily.
Then introduce the perforator with ease into your hand so that it penetrates to the stone quickly, and return the perforator by using only one's own hand in the stone gently, until you make this perforator penetrate both ends of another part: then do you accomplish this perforation.
Urine will have been excreted immediately.
Then take your hand over the remaining part of the rope that slipped off from outside This one is broken and returns with urine, and heals any illness.
If this examination is not prepared for you due to something that prohibits it from doing so, then tie the rope under the stone and another above the stone. Then dry over the stone between two ties. Then remove it. After this, make the frozen blood thaw and free from the wound.
It is not necessary to tie the rope under the stone unless it does not slip off easily: and another above, unless when you have tied up the rope after escaping from stones, it slips back into its own place, and cooperates with the wound; and for this reason, if you tie the upper part of the rope, so that the skin is returned to its superior position, and cooperates with the wound just as we said.
The end of book 11
From the extraction of women's buttocks.
Nothing is generated from a woman by a stone.
If you meet one of these stones then it is difficult treatment and forbidden because of many ways.
"The strength of a woman is greater than that of a man.
Secondly, because a woman who has taken upon herself to be treated as a physician when she is pure and/or married to a medical practitioner.
Thirdly, because you do not treat a wise woman well in this art (surgery), especially when she is performing the task with her own hands.
And fourthly, there are stones of the deep pool that require sections because it is dangerous; and this is the fear.
If a need arises to do so, then you should take on that woman who is wise and skilled as a physician; only she will be of use.
If you want to ask a doctor of medicine and subtlety (a skilled physician), or a woman who has undertaken some part of the art of women's healing; take on that present woman who is wise, skilled, and well-versed in this field, as she will be able to perform everything necessary for her from an inquiry over stones.
Firstly, if you want to know whether a woman is married or not: then it is necessary for her hand to be put into his mouth and he should ask the stone.
If you have received him beneath your own finger and he has asked the stone after being placed over her weakened side; having set his left hand upon her chest and pressed upon her with a good compression.
If you have received the stone beneath her chest and she has moved him with all of her strength downwards towards her lower abdomen; having then pressed upon his head so that he would move his whole body upwards to meet the pelvis.
Afterwards she should place him beneath the pelvis with medium-sized obstacles on his path to the root of the pelvis; from wherever part he is brought out and feels it into that part; and her fingers do not move away from the stone, but hold onto him under him until a section is made first. Afterwards she should enter the womb for performing an operation on her.
Afterwards she should enter the womb for performing an operation on her. If a stone was felt by touch, then he would place it in the incision secondarily based on its proportional measurement to which it is reduced from that
There are many kinds of stones. From him there arises a small one and a large one, a soft one and a rough one, long ones and rounded ones having hair.
Therefore you know the kinds of it so that it is understood by this in regard to what follows.
If blood flows into you then apply a tourniquet immediately and hold it tightly for one hour until the bleeding stops.
Afterwards you are to proceed with your operation until the stone is removed and do as I instructed for holding a stone in the veins so that you may assist through it during your operation.
If blood flows into you then know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery which was cut and place a pad over it tightly and tie it with cord securely not to let go: and release the stone do not remove him. For fear may death come upon the weak woman Afterwards care for her
When the heat of blood is after days and putrefaction arises then proceed with your operation until the stone is removed.
The 62nd chapter.
Of the incision above the hernia.
An egg is not called a siphon unless the collection of moisture in its base is white and is under the control of the scrotum testicles which it covers and is called siphon.
And sometimes it is located inside the scrotum by itself which nature prepared for him in part therefore until it puts on that which is different and its skin between the siphon white as I said and he does not do this except rarely.
The generation of these rams is from weakness that has struck the testicles and therefore leads to them this matter. Sometimes there is a bruise from above the testicles
This causes much dampness The blood may turn reddish, or it might be a bruise caused by feces, or it could be a greenish one, white or black, depending on the cause of its color
Signs which indicate where there is an aggregation of water are these ones. If it is a scrotal abscess as we mentioned earlier, then an opening will be made in the shape of an oval extending in length somewhat like that of an 'O', and you won't see the testicles because the dampness will cover them completely.
If there is dampness only on its own part, then the opening will be round with a portion of it projecting out like an 'O', and this is because something else exists.
If there's dampness between the scrotum and the testicles but white in color, then it falls under the foreskin.
When you consider the color of dampness, if there is an opening between the scrotum and the testicles that causes this, then it will show as a square-shaped opening whose shape comes before it. According to that, if you consider the scrotum and testicle being inside each other as a reference point, what must be considered is between them.
When we come to the treatment with a tool like an iron, it is necessary for you to remove as much of this as possible by using phlebotomies if that can be done, and also make sure his body is filled up fully.
Then it will be placed on top of his back over another part to some extent, and he must put a lot of padding under him.
Then you should sit on the left side of him and prepare to place your hand gently as it sits down towards his right side while extending your arm so that it is touching both sides of the scrotal area, and also make a gesture with one of its parts towards the inside.
Then take a narrow strip of cloth and run it from the middle downwards to near the scrotum, so that you make a cut along an equally straight line which follows the scrotal area until it reaches under the foreskin; then remove this one piece and observe or examine it in order to see if you can separate it: but also take another piece of cloth with your left hand from the part that is hanging out more, and scrutinize it carefully while using excision according to how much you are able.
"Remove completely a large piece of flesh from its blood supply by making a hole in it and then withdraw all the water.
"Cut between the two lips sections with a hook and extend the flesh to its superior position, but do not cut through the testes that are comprehended: And make an incision in the place where you can cut it, either completely or partially according to your preference. "If you do not carefully examine it before making the incision, then there will be no security for its water when removed.
"If you proceed to cut off your own flesh outside the time of your operation, then immediately after having completed the incision remove it. "After that, gather up both lips with a stitch and the testes.
"Then take care of it as you would of any other wound to make sure it heals.
"If there is a risk that your own flesh might be corrupted due to negligence or other reasons; then it is necessary for you to use the veins which are safeguards and protectors of the flowing blood.
"After that remove the testes with a stitch and then take care of it as you have described in previous instructions.
"If the water is gathered into two parts; then you know that there are two veins. Therefore dry out one half just as you did with the other.
"If both of them become equal to each other; then make your operation into one piece and afterwards remove the blood. "And if the flesh is submerged in oil or a mixture of different oils; then put one of them into oil that you have previously used and expand it above two testes [testicles], and place the other over the same spot as before, on top of two folds and there are bristles: And tie them together with a thread which holds six in this manner.
"After that are gathered up two pieces of cloth and the one is put on with a stitch; as for this similarity: And the extremities to which it [the cloth] reaches are brought together above the buttocks from one side, and they are brought together below the other side by the same thread.
Upon occasion and artificially applying this ramekin with caution to the affected area using a knife: it is as if you are burning (or cutting) the gauze in order to remove blood from an abscess containing water; until when the abscess is taken out of its contents, then take the ramekin by that shape.
Greek letters were assimilated.
After taking the ramekin by that form and applying it to the affected area, it is as if you are pouring (or dripping) water onto an abscess until all its moisture has been burned off.
After taking the ramekin by that form and applying it to the affected area while holding it with a small, burning knife, you should cut into (or slice) it until all of its moisture has been burned off.
And cover it with your hand so that it doesn't burn the patient's skin.
You know this procedure is more advantageous than one involving bleeding and better still than surgical procedures.
If a contraindication arises at the time of bleeding or burning, or at the application of cold water, or from another source: in that case you should apply something which counters the contradiction by using what you have with care to counteract it according to how it was given.
If the patient is timid and does not anticipate this procedure due to its terrifying nature: in that case administer a hole according to what I mentioned earlier, and it's done.
When you are informed by me of the meaning of that ramekin which is made of water and its purpose: in that case it is necessary to place a bedpan over an elevated seat so that the patient can sit on it.
After placing a small hole at the bottom of its side with a small slit, make an opening according to the length of the body and be wide enough so that all the water can flow out freely.
After placing it on a bedpan and tying its top securely so that the water can flow out freely, you should attend to it for treatment until the wound is healed.
If there is a difference between the flow of water during withdrawal and the time of perforation, that is to say when you withdraw it, then do not let anything else occur except for this reason, because the white sheet (panniculus) creates an opposition in the exit hole and prevents the outflow of water; therefore at that point you must insert a straw into the fistula or use an instrument with which water can be extracted from hydropics.
It is known that water returns after six months, or in a circular manner around them Therefore it is added at this point as before, and the sick person will pass away within seven days
Chapter 63
Of the cure of the flesh wound.
It is known that the flesh wound will suffer from a fear of death multiplied by many factors. You must be released him free from his fears of death as a result of this.
And I am a reminder of the surgery on that day and the signs of the disease.
Therefore I tell you that there are many signs on bodies from which testicles are formed; and this occurs as a result of these causes.
Or through the sudden or sharp abundance of fluids, which flows into the testes. Or by a blow.
And the signs of disease are according to the color of the body and do not feel pain for him; but they have a greyish appearance.
Or there may be a stone sign, whose color is dark and does not sense to them.
Or sometimes it happens through a knot in the arteries or their swelling; as I have mentioned before to you; or from an excess of urine.
Therefore it is from them through the compression of their signs when you compress with your fingers. Do not let anything touch it earlier.
That is to say that nothing can escape from the urine swelling when you compress with your fingers.
"And it is possible that a section should be made over this part and above the rest of the meat; and there is to cut off the testicles. "Then stretch us upwards and remove the skin with a knife; and free the suspender from inside, and tie it up; and cut off the suspender when you have freed it from all parts.
"If our hands are tied with the flesh of any animal, then let us take hold and cut off that thing.
"If there is an obstacle between something and the rope or inside it; then you must let go of all that, and cut off that thing with a round knife.
"If there is no life left on the part of the obstacle that is behind; then let you cut off all of it and take hold again as we mentioned.
"When your work is done then you should wash the incision with wool soaked in sweet oil and vinegar; after that take care of it with what remains of the curing until it is cured.
The end.
"Of the cure for testicles which is with semen.
"The testicles have been softened by a certain softening, similar to that of the horse, with a cure for them; and it is difficult movement from being sick or tired, and walking.
"And there is fear of this because the one whose remembrance precedes has preceded a thing.
"The truth is that we should say what they did at the beginning as far as possible.
"Therefore I am saying that it would be best to let a sick person sit on an elevated seat. "Then pull the suspender of testicles downward. "Then hold the skin of testicles with your fingers and keep them near to the body; let another person take it in turn, and then stretch it out smoothly.
"Then cut off with a sharp, curved knife the suspenders as far as they are pulled up; until they are drawn out.
In the meantime remove everything from every part
Next, you will tie a second knot (a figure-eight knot) around the part where there is a doubled piece of string, and then tie it at the first places from which the arteries come out. And then finally tie another one as you did before for those that come last. Afterwards, cut through the middle of each part along its length and remove any pieces from sweat or other bodily fluids that may be rotten or spoiled.
Afterwards, you should cure the ulcers with treatment of their sores, which can generate semen and thus bring death to those that feed upon one member. It is not a bad thing.
If all the veins are damaged from that, then it should be done so that those testes with wounds can be removed for food, due to cutting and bleeding, or drying up and rotting; and not be eaten by them.
Chapter 65.
The cure of the intestines of the rams.
The removal of the ram's intestines is done by cutting through a slit that goes from behind to before on the inner side of the tail part inward toward the anus.
Therefore, they fall out of the rupture towards one member. And this rupture can be from a slit or an extension of its length.
And these two species can happen due to multiple causes such as impact, shock, beating with a heavy object, or the tearing of very heavy objects and similar situations.
The signature is when it happens from an extension slit. It happens slowly over time and not immediately; it is an equal wound on the surface of the intestine, so that the slit compresses the intestines.
The signature of it when happens from a slit is because it causes immediate severe pain at the beginning; and it is different in appearance and beneath the skin while protruding further to cause its exit from the intestines and course towards the outside slit.
On one occasion when I am treating an abscess of the intestine and at another time when I treat a fistula with feces (i.e., a condition where there is leakage of feces).
And when the stone runs into the intestine and is held there, it has caused the nurse to be injured because it causes a pain in the groin and especially when it is pressed down.
When practicing medicine with fear of the sharpness of this instrument, one must be careful that there may not be a cut from it (i.e., one should use such an instrument carefully to avoid injury).
The method of treatment is that it must be used with great care so as to reduce the intestine by his hand into its own interior if he manages to remove them from within (i.e., a surgeon should insert their fingers into the anus and rectum during surgery). After that it is put back on his chest between your hands, you will draw them out with a pair of forceps.
Then stretch the wound that follows the wound upwards and dry the skin on both sides completely along its length (i.e., a surgeon should dry all of the scrotal skin from top to bottom). Then make a two-hand cut of the circumcision with scissors in order to open it and complete the incision; then do this so that you can remove the skin by quantity, whatever is possible until he gets out of that way.
Then scrape off the skin under the scrotal wound until it reaches the white sheath (i.e., remove all of the scrotal skin from top to bottom).
Then move with the right hand to the interior of the scrotal cut (i.e., a surgeon should insert their fingers into the incision on that side).
And you seek with your finger to make sure there is nothing from the intestine stuck inside of the white sheath (i.e., a surgeon should check for any debris or feces in that area). If you find something coming out, then pull it downwards towards the lower vent
Afterwards you take a thick rope that is 10 fingers wide and insert it into the anus of the patient as far as possible, which involves removing his clothes beneath the testicles down to the underwear section: then cut through his four fingers from one end to the other Afterwards you complete the cross-shaped figure of them around certain parts with a rope as described earlier, which is beneath the testicles' ligature and can not move from one side to another unless something is pulled out from within them, which feeds them in order to prevent it from being cold Afterwards you put a second ligature after the first one beyond two fingers' length Afterwards you remove both ligatures from beneath the testicles in accordance with their length as digits and cut what remains all according to its roundness, leaving out one of them.
Afterwards you dry the lower part of the testicles' section from which blood flows and veins run, just as we did with what was previously mentioned.
Afterwards you administer a wet bandage into olive oil and put it on the wound: then administer the ligature that we did. And when the white ligature that was mentioned is being used to stop bleeding after cutting into it, you must be careful not to let blood flow out of it. Indeed many times this occurred. Afterwards you remove the ligature until it is cut through completely.
If however, his case takes longer than expected and delays in the bleeding, you administer a cold olive oil bandage over it until it stops bleeding.
Afterwards take care of the wound with the remaining treatment for wounds until it is cured.
Chapter 66
Farewell!
In this chapter I did not find anyone who had been cured of his ailment with iron.
But the first ones said that it is like what we have seen on Chapter 66. "When it is necessary to cut off the vein above the incision and below it with ease; then dry in the middle, and care for it after that when it has been opened, until it falls down. And care for ulcers as we said, until they heal.
The 67th chapter
"Of any injury to the urethra.
"When a rupture occurs in the urethra as we have described, and its place remains; but it does not go to the testicles anything from inside; if it goes down, it is only for that location, returning [to normal] throughout all hours; and if the emission is prolonged with time, there will be added an opening at the glans of the penis until the intestines return in the urethra.
"And this happens from extending the glans of the penis as we have described. "Because it extends the glans; then it becomes soft and moves [to a new position], and comes to be.
"And its care is with caution as was described before in that way.
"Sometimes it is cared for by a steel, according to this manner; and it is as if he lies [on the floor] between your hands. "Then dry the place of the ruptured part and make it to become high; slice transversely by a distance equal to three fingers.
"Then you will draw the foreskin back and when it has been drawn up [to expose the glans], what is below your thumb that follows it.
"Then you will take the beam and place it above the high location from the foreskin, and press it towards the depths of the penis.
"Then you will pull two locations above the ends of the radius from the foreskin and bind one with stitches to another; then remove both ends.
"And do not cut the foreskin completely, nor pull it out, nor anything like that; as I taught you [before] when treating the intestinal muscles.
Therefore (or in other words) attend to those wounds When you have cleaned it with a file and restored its structure, then it will be consolidated
After cleaning the wound properly (i.e., when there is no more dirt or impurity in it), it should not get worse (i.e., it shouldn't cause an increase in damage)
The cautery is better here because of its proximity to health
Chapter sixty-eight
The treatment for the skin testicle
The treatment of the skin of testicles on some people causes an improvement in their flesh that is visible to them,
Therefore it must be given to him who asks for the care of his testicles, that he may make a hole in their flesh and penetrate completely into the skin which has been mollified over the natural skin.
After that, sew up two lips with a stitch and if there is more than three sutures on the skin of the mollified testicles, then four sutures are required; otherwise only one suture will be enough.
Cut through the stitches.
After the care of the remaining wounds has been completed until everything is healed and the stitches fall off.
Chapter sixty-nine
The castration.
I am aware of the fact that castration is forbidden by our law and for this reason it was allowed to me so that I wouldn't forget his name in my book; however, there is no need to remember him unless you want to do it two ways.
The one that is necessary so the doctor knows about this when asked by a patient; and so he may know how to care for him who has been affected by it.
Another way is that we practice castration on various animals for our use of it in the same manner as with other animals such as rams, goats, and cats, and others from different animals.
Therefore I say that castration will be performed according to two ways. Through attrition Through splitting and cutting.
If through attrition something is done surgically (i.e., for skin grafts), that which we do to prepare the animal in warm water until its testicles are softened up and fall off, then you take them with your hand and wait until they harden back into place, not appearing under touch
For castration through splitting and cutting, it is necessary for you to hold the animal down tightly while removing its testicles with your left hand.
After the suspensor and drying all over with a towel after each section is complete until both testicles are cut off at once; then you strike them down as they fall out so that nothing falls on top of it except for a small amount which should not be seen (I assume this means something like "except for a small piece, don't drop anything else onto the animal").
And this method of castration is better than that through attrition because in the latter case there was a risk of losing something from the testicles which would have been bad for the animal.
Then you will cure his wound.
The 70th chapter.
Of the two methods of treating Hermaphrodite wounds.
Hermaphrodite is treated through two methods The wound is that which appears when following the gap or holding the testicles between two testicles where there is a figure like that of a woman with pubic hair and urine sometimes flows from it.
In women there is a single kind of figure which is like that of a woman above the nipple so as to resemble the testicles of men in every way; one of them is like Priapus and two are like two testicles.
The care of three types or that from men and two from women is as follows: you must hit the added flesh until the impression of them is gone. Then cure the remaining wounds.
In the second species of men from which urine is derived when it is in the mouth of the testicles, there is no operation to be done for that, nor is its care complete
The seventy-first head.
On cutting off the scrotal skin and erecting the male genitalia
The foreskin is added to the natural part of it only when it is stretched and erects itself; and sometimes in some women greatly so that it extends as much as in men, and it remains until copulation occurs.
Therefore you are advised to hold the foreskin with one hand or with a bandage and cut it off; but not finally at the incision itself, especially at its deep root (the frenulum); so that the flow of blood does not occur.
Then after curing the testicles
The anus is born from the womb's opening and extends itself; it may be likened to a tail, for that reason some call it 'the tailed anus'. Therefore you are advised to cut off the anus just as you did with the foreskin; and cure (treat) it until it is cured
The cure for a virgin's urine which was not discharged through the vagina.
The seventy-second head.
The urine of a virgin is cured if it does not pass through the vagina or has passed through an opening in its passage (the vagina may be blocked). Or it can also be natural (from a blockage) or accidental (such as from being caught by a man's hand).
The accident (accidental) urine is cured if it has passed by force; and the same also fits into any of these ways (the womb or uterus, or its passage, or the upper or lower part of it); and prevents pregnancy and childbirth, and sometimes menstruation too.
The knowledge of how to cure such urine is obtained through its appearance during childbirth (the appearance being the midwife's knowledge).
"If it is not apparent, then seek [it] with your fingers/hands, or by touch.
"If the examination is done skillfully through the small finger, and it [the object] lies next to two lips, then remove/take her away.
"And place on top of the two lower lips.
"Then with both hands simultaneously take her by the side and let her fall forward onto your back, stretching out her limbs on top of yours. "Then extend two lips forcefully until a skillful examination is apparent/visible, and the object may be seen.
"Then take hold of her hand and drink/swallow [her] into oil; place her there on the ground next to you, that she may continue to be with you every day until another place is not solidified.
"If the finger is large and bent/bent back, then it's necessary to cut [it] off with a sharp knife that is similar in width.
"If the examination is done through/on the body of a living being, then suspend her by her nails and strike [her] off; may you take upon yourself medicine that stops blood flow without cutting into any tissue, such as acacia or dragon's blood, and thus gather together with white lead.
"Then administer a large leaden rod to keep her from being taken by [someone] else; she will be held in place for days at a time, and then apply dry liniment so that any remaining injury may be cured.
"And sometimes there will be birth of the fetus that was conceived as carrion by others; it is therefore necessary to cut [it] off according to this manner: until no part of its head is severed, do not let there exist a contradiction with iron at all.
"Chapter Seventy-Three.
"Of the cure for hemorrhoids and red veins on women's [lower] limbs.
"Hemorrhoids are the opening of the veins' orifices until/when blood flows in large amounts.
As regards hemorrhoids, they are cured thusly: and I have said concerning division of their types, and the signs thereof; and I say this to you what receives care from them, and what does not
Therefore, concerning those hemorrhoids which are within the mother's vagina and do not appear to anyone; then there is no care for them with a knife
Those that are from them into the vagina and fall on what senses can be cared for.
Therefore it is fitting to approach a cold woman's house. Then you extend the athelil with hooks or a cloth and strike them out of their roots.
Then wash the athelil with one incision of the veins and without biting or cutting; just like the acacia, dragon's blood, and similarly for them.
Then you drive his feet to the wall after an hour has passed. Afterwards, lay her into a cold water.
If the blood flow ceases; then make her sit in a decoction of wormwood and saffron, and of the grains, and of the galls, and similarly.
Then you take the plowshare, and bind her with wool and vinegar; and make a frame of it over his back.
If the blood flow ceases with him; then it is good; and if not, bind her down to his back, without cuts or wounds.
Then you take wool and immerse it into the juice of tarahita or the juice of arnoglossa or the juice of ramorum aloes; that is to say, aloe-wood, wine pomegranate; bind her with this.
Then you take care of him as long as his wound continues until he gets well.
Alburcius' rule is similar to the appearance of those who have had a stroke or are suffering from apoplexy.
Therefore, it is fitting to strike what appears out of him, as I said earlier; and take care of him until he gets well.
Skull number 72
On perforations that happen when they occur in the matrix
They occur in the matrix from various causes such as cancer, and ulcers of bones or teeth, and abscesses, and bites by animals, i.e., herpes, boils, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and rectal prolapse.
Indeed I have already explained all the diseases and signs of those things; I will explain here only the cure for them, and how to make an opening by a metal tool when they occur from the hemorrhoids.
Therefore you must pay attention. If there is pain when the opening of hemorrhoids occurs due to a blow or heat, it is acute with its own force, fire and fever; you will see redness appear: if it falls over him consciousness occurs at that time do not apply the perforation on him, but cure for him along with what causes injury above the maturation.
It is necessary to put a woman over the buttocks that are in two seats and reclines, or puts one on his back and brings his legs up towards the lower part of the belly: then the buttocks will expand, and he places both his arms under his thighs, and he ligates (binds) each other with a suitable binding to this.
Then the midwife goes on her right hand, and she administers the tool through which the opening of the matrix is opened.
And it is necessary when you administer this tool that the woman look deeply into the womb of a pregnant woman, so as not to be damaged more than what was caused by the tool itself and the pain is alleviated.
If the tool is more than deep, then it is necessary to place a cushion on the base of the womb so as not to allow all the way into the womb; and it is necessary that it puts the hernia which flows in the tool from above the left: and it should keep the tool, and it should revolve the ministering of the hernia until the opening of the deep womb is opened.
The excision is seen and grasped by hand, it is soft and gentle; thus you must remove this from its place on your head with a blunt instrument.
After the excision is done and removed from your head with a blunt instrument, you must place it back into its cavity submerged in oil of roses; either by using the oil for hair care (oil of figs), which has some stickiness to it; or by using the oil of love-apples, where there is no stickiness. In any case, after placing it back, you should remove part of it from deep within your roots.
And place an external coating over the face and nose with a solution submerged in water; this is where the harmful stings are located.
After two days have passed when you apply ointment that suited it, until it becomes healed.
And when the cloth and wound is washed through with water and mud; then you apply a solution that dissolves it along with water and mud or else with water where the root of lily or long-flowering aralia are located, until it returns to its place after being applied on top of it.
If the removed wound is embedded within a clot inside the cloth, then you must remove it with care using iron, after which you should apply the same treatment as before (in division).
Caput Lxxu
Regarding the childbirth doctrine, similarly to how embryos are delivered from the womb in a unnatural manner.
It is necessary for an obstetrician to first understand the normal birth form.
So if you see a woman being held down by her lower limbs and desires to breathe air; after this is done she lies on the same object from birth which suffocated the child at birth, and then the child's exit occurs above her head (or in any other unnatural manner). At that time you know that this birth was according to a natural figure of childbirth.
So when you see these signs, it is necessary for the obstetrician to restrain his belly so that he will descend or sooner drop from it.
When he lowered himself on his head it descended from him and was separated by a good separation of its contents
Who is beyond this birth is unnatural and admirable
When he sometimes descends upon the feet of his own and descends him before its head, and then turns them away; or the foot becomes one with the hand it has become one and the hand is now a foot: or perhaps it will be carried to his head, but similar figures are made by very admirable people.
Therefore the Obstetrician should be prudent and knowledgeable of all things related to childbirth, so that he may save himself from error and death: and I am showing you all figures from there, such as his genius in them is, and it signifies through that, and stands upon itself.
When he descends the fetus onto his own head with a natural exit and is lifted by it to another woman and makes childbirth difficult for her and makes its power decline; then she sits upon him or holds him: and there are carried away with the foenix fruit decoction and with humid oils.
Then the Obstetrician inserts herself between her fingers and finds with him another one, and holds it out from underneath; until she reaches what is within her by moisture, and frees both women so that the fetus can be lowered.
If he does not descend, then it is necessary for the woman to be carried away with a foenix fruit decoction and with humid oil.
Then she loosens him after the basket so that he may be compressed; and makes her straighten up with the conditions, holds his mouth and nose together for one hour. The fetus is quickly descending.
If two hands of the fetus are descended first, then it is necessary that they be lowered with great haste and ease. If she does not enter into the delivery, then let the woman sit upon him and raise her feet above; afterwards place the head over the earth; and hold the woman so that she may not fall from shock.
"If the hands do not progress and the fetus dies; then he shall strike off the hand along with the fetus, and extract what is left of the fetus while holding it with a cloth and extracting him while maintaining equality.
"The death of the fetus by means of his own feet. "When the fetus descends upon its own feet, then it is necessary to push them downwards with all one's might; after that gently turn the fetus over.
"Then he shall take hold of his foot and gently pull him out.
"When they reach the hips, he shall grip him so that his body is compressed; if God wills it, then he will ascend.
"And if he does not ascend with him when we have lifted him up, then gently lower the fetus while maintaining its normal posture. "Then let him go forth easily at that time (i.e., after the fetus is extracted).
"If that be permitted with him entirely what we have lifted up; then take hold of his feet gently and apply pitch, and gum. And when they are well soaked through, strike off the whole into a mortar and crush it thoroughly in a good stroke: after that bind her [i.e., the woman] tightly to prevent her from descending, and tie a knot to prevent her from ascending. "Then let him sit for a while in hot water until he is heated up.
"When they are heated through and the lower part of him is soft to touch, then let her (i.e., the midwife) gently apply myrrh and tie him. "Then gently place her upon his feet. "After that gently turn him over, tie the lower part of his mouth and nose tightly together; then press upon the lower part of her abdomen easily. "The fetus will ascend immediately (i.e., after it is extracted).
"Death of the fetus by means of his own legs. "When he descends according to this manner, then gently put your hand inside him slowly. "Then the woman lies on her back and brings up both of her feet to an upper part; then she rests upon a board with her face downwards, her hands supporting herself. "Then he (the surgeon) gently raises him from underneath in the slowest manner possible. "Then, by means of a cord beneath her feet, she is raised onto it (a board) from below upwards to the lower part. "If not born prematurely, then take his feet in your hand and gently move them with a slow motion upwards. "Then the surgeon gently raises him from above downwardly to the upper part. "Then he puts his hands on it and gently holds him down; then assists the woman to hold up her head so that she can be compressed.
"The child's death hangs downward from the surgeon's hand. "The hand of the surgeon is loosened up so that he can be pulled downwards. "If she cannot be drawn down then take her away and make her walk.
"Then if walking is not possible, she will be put on the board face downwards with her knees drawn up.
"Then he applies a medicament that you have prepared from herbs.
"If she has given birth to him then make her sit upon the chair. "Then he puts his hands upon him and gently holds him down; then assists the woman to hold up her head so that she can be compressed.
"The child's death happens above his own back and is brought to the mother's back. "The midwife holds him with one hand of the fetus and then gently moves him slowly along to her.
"Then he puts on it (a board) over his own back that we have prepared from oil and herbs.
Therefore gently press him down. When you have done that, then lie the patient on his back and gently press him downwards so that he extends both of his arms out to the sides. Then gently press down on him in order to compress him while maintaining a certain level of tension.
The fetus is lifted up from the lower part and placed over the head. When descending into the second hole through which way you came in this manner with your finger, until it is opened by moisture.
If the fetus is placed above face then its neck and back are cut until it doesn't hold on any longer and dies.
Then pull the fetus towards inside until you place it in accordance with what is necessary and press down on a woman so that she compresses him for as long as possible, at which point he will depart in death.
Death of twins or multiple fetuses It is known that twins are often born and sometimes three and four are also born. However this is unusual and rare.
Certainly one of the five is outside nature and does not move freely but continues to be held by the other multiples with a cord from his umbilical cord that distinguishes between them which separates through forceps while distinguishing among them what is connected to each one of them.
And sometimes a fetus departs as easily and naturally as the other does by death through an open exit or easily and easily by desirable death like we said before.
If any of them are difficult to find near the birth and so they can be brought together by those unnatural figures as we described before with care for them like we said, then let there be a soft death that allows him to do what he does easily and slowly while making sure everything is done according to all shapes along with what has been prepared for him from his mind leading to health.
This was the formation of this one out of the embryos and their abortion.
"When one clot is formed in the matrix, and two clots are made, and three clots, and four clots, and five clots, and six clots, and seven clots, and ten clots: And it has been used on me by a woman who aborted and emitted seven, and another dozen, all shaped.
"As for the measurement of the glorious wise men.
Therefore everything must be related to obstetric knowledge "Otherwise, he would not compete with her on that matter.
The 76th part (chapter).
"Of the extraction of a dead fetus.
"When you are treating a dead fetus with the same method I mentioned earlier and it does not work out as expected, then you should operate with your hand in order to succeed.
"If the woman is healthy in virtue and does not have any accidents that she fears to be deprived of her: then it should be ensured that she puts her head downward on a surface, put both hands over her breasts, and lift up her feet so they are elevated above them: and she should hold her with two sides or bind her onto the breast in order to prevent removal from below.
"Then, by using the mouth of the uterus and with the help of a woman who is a nurse: she should lubricate them so that they pass down to the lower part of the womb in order to expel the fetus.
"Then, with her hand and using these oils and mucus, she should put it into the uterus gently. "And then, as soon as she is at a place where the fetus is coming out: bring her to that location.
"Then consider that if the fetus is prepared so it descends over its head: then put the eye on him, or his neck, or mouth, or palate of him, or under his beard, or in his wing, or at a place near the ribs and under the breast.
"If he fell from above his feet, then onto his chest and ribs.
"And let him hold the right hand with his left hand and place a bandage over it on that part of his body where we mentioned (i.e., chest or ribs). Let him enter into contact with his right hand as easily as possible, and remove from there to what is at the end between the left fingers.
"Then let him hold onto his right hand with another or third finger as much so that the grip is equal and does not go to the end of it.
"Then let him stretch his right hand with equal force and not according to the straight line alone (i.e., in all directions), so that it reaches all parts equally, lest he die; thus is it done when tearing out of his mouth.
"And let him soften the stretch on what is between them (i.e., chest or ribs) so that it is easy for use to open and close. "If any part of the above is held onto by his fingers as he falls from it, then let the Obstetrix place her fingers with oil on that side and enter into contact with them in order to use what is held.
"If the part of the fetus comes out first, then let the fingers be changed to another who is higher in order and this must continue until the whole fetus has been removed.
"If the hand comes out before another and it is not possible to reduce (or lessen) its movement because of its hardness/cohesion, then let him enter into contact with a bandage. "Then pull her out until the whole of her has been removed; you can either cut through a strap or use an instrument to cut off and then let him do this with his other hand and both feet.
"If the head of the fetus is large or if it has been coarted by its own weight during delivery, and a mass of water gathers at his head; then let him enter into contact with the fingers as sharp as nails (i.e., the Spatumile spinosum), and find it together with the head, and remove from there the water or remove it using an instrument called Almisdac: whose shape is similar to that of all other instruments in the chapter following this one.
"If a fetus is in its natural state with large head size, then it must be extracted by cutting through the umbilical cord as we have mentioned. After you extract the fetus from the umbilical cord, remove the bones using tongs or forceps.
If its head is removed and placed within a womb (of the uterus), then it shall be found there after being cut open by moisture which exists in the breast.
If the head does not adhere to or slip off of it, then strike its head forcefully until it separates from there as is possible for you.
If the fetus is located below the ribs and there is no water inside it (it has been removed from a womb), then you must remove it forcefully until moisture flows out of it as mentioned before.
If the fetus is above its feet (meaning in a womb), then the removal thereof is easy and directing it towards the mouth of the mother is done easily.
If the head is caught within a womb or breast (of the mother), then you must remove it forcefully with a cloth that you placed over your hand and find its womb or breast until moisture flows from both of them as mentioned before.
If the remaining parts are removed and the head is obtained, then an obstetrician should insert her left hand within to extract it as mentioned before. If the mouth of the mother is opened (meaning she has given birth), then an obstetrician should insert her left hand deeply within to extract it forcefully and hold onto its head until water flows from both inside it as mentioned before.
If the mouth of the mother is caught (meaning it has not been opened), due to a cold and harsh wind that hit him, then there should be no attempt to force it apart from its moisture as mentioned before, instead administer a soothing drink for his body and mind: then extract water to fill its void and soothe his thirst.
If the fetus is above its own height, then it is possible to equalize (meaning both are at same level), so administer what we mentioned as amniotic fluid for the fetus.
"If it is not possible for this thing, then it will be done with force and removed.
"You should ensure that nothing remains within the second chamber from now on.
"Once you have completed your surgery, then administer what we previously mentioned for warming the arteries that happen to go through the veins.
"If a blood flow blockage occurs, then it will descend into the arms and you should administer any remaining cure.
"I have just heard of a woman whose child died after being pregnant with another child. Afterwards the other child also died. "Therefore he had a very long post-term pregnancy and became swollen after a while until it was opened, at which point it started to emit pus.
"I therefore called for the cure of his disease and was treated with long time care until the wound did not heal.
"Therefore I put it over him from certain strong attractions, but he was expelled from its place. "Afterwards a few days passed and the other one came out. "I am amazed therefore when there is no longer an outlet for the disease to come out of his belly.
"I thought then because a child had died from the bones.
"I therefore called for a cure and removed many bones from the woman who was present among better dispositions. Afterwards he remained so long that it released only a little bit of pus.
"And I did not establish this here for nothing because of the knowledge that was within him and assistance to do what the medical expert does with his hand by using a cure.
Chapter 77
"Of the forms necessary for the extraction of the child.
The shape of the needle is perceived as a matrix.
"This is the form of the stricture below, whose books are equal to those that have two equal veins on both sides of the two stems. "However this stricture should be of a more delicate kind and it is required to make it either from the belly or from the two stems.
The breadth of the two arms is as much like the length of two fingers; and each one has a margin that is just half the size of a finger; the length of both of them together adds up to half of their breadth; and in between those two limbs there are two additions from the same type of wood, which have already been shaped into hooks. And the breadth of either side is as much like two fingers, or less than that.
Those two additions are inserted into the mouth cavities such that you may perceive them when you want to pull out two needles
Another shape resembling it (the needle), more subtle and lighter.
The stick must be made of ebony or boxwood, according to the resemblance of the handle. However, there are two additions at the end of it (the handle), as you have seen here above; and the length of all those additions is like half a finger; and the breadth on either side is just double fingers.
When you want to remove a needle from it (the handle), then let the woman who is standing on her back above the board support the feet of that man, holding with both hands the part between his legs. Then insert those two additions into the needle together; and you hold on to its lower end between his thighs. Then open your hand with the instrument just like you do when opening your mouth; and equally in proportion to its quantity as much as you did from opening your lips, until the midwife does what she wants.
Another shape of a needle that was mentioned before; the shape of the forceps with which the fetus is pulled out
The shape of Alcindus, from which a large head is taken; and its resemblance to forceps that have teeth at the end, just like you mentioned it.
And when there are difficulties, as the forceps follow this shape, just like you mentioned it; and the teeth of such a forcep is the same as those used for incision and counter-contraction.
One feather per person
Two feathers per person
Two scissors for cutting off one's own head.
Form of the two scissors and also lators (scissors with long handles used by barbers)
These implements are used for all kinds of work and their various species increase; they are also found in the hands of artisans and artists as well as men because of its quantity (referring to the scissors).
Therefore, do not take away from them an implement unless it is prepared by you. It is inexcusable to be lacking anything necessary
78th head
On the removal of the second
When the Second is held at birth, then it must be as weak as possible so that its desire to stay may prevail over any resistance Then let him make a knot with his hand on the ear of the one who is holding it and then tie its mouth to that same ear. If therefore this becomes necessary, it is good (referring to a medical procedure).
If not, then take an implement for cutting holes; and perform this operation in the workshop's entranceway, placing herbs that open the mouth of the patient on it, such as calamus, rue, and mint, and others, and camomile, and centauream: take all these herbs or those you find them, and submerge them with water, and place them over fire.
Then put the ear of the donkey over the entranceway hole and fix it with its other end on the mouth of the patient; then hold it until his water is flowing into the mouth of the patient.
Then let him make a knot as described before. The Second will be easily held on its own.
"If this preparation has not been removed and does not heal (the wound), then apply obstetrics to make the hand wet with olive oil or tallow. "After that, insert it into a bladder and let it remain with her for a second time. "So she becomes wet with it, then she takes hold of it and spreads it evenly.
"If it is inserted into deep [i.e., the uterus], then insert your hand according to what we previously showed you, until she becomes wet with the Second Lady, and extends her evenly on both sides as much as possible. But be careful not to let her fall at a strong attraction in the opposite direction, lest this leads to an unwanted pregnancy: it is necessary that you allow her to move gently towards your right and left, then add the required amount of oil. "Once she has been taken hold of thusly, be prepared for it, and guide her away from the edges.
"If the uterus is cramped up (i.e., dilated), we have shown you before how to care for her with a gentle stroke and by using oils or herbs.
"If she does not heal according to what we have shown you before, do be cautious so that you don't drag her too hard during the process of getting out.
"It is necessary to make sure she is wet with it at the opening of her womb and guides towards a woman's side. "After that, wipe her off with oil or ointment. "But if she gets spoiled after a day and dissolves away, then heal (her).
"However, when it becomes spoiled and emits a bad smell to the stomach or head, take her away. "Therefore, let people administer appropriate fumigations for this purpose.
"Some ancient men have become experts in fumigations of musty things and of dry ones.
"The form of the instrument used for fumigation to be applied at the time when menstruation begins or is held back by the Second Lady (Second Lady's period).
"Let the hand be cut off like a limb (amputate), or let it be broken so that an open space is made at its tip; and then place there fat over a fire, and the smoke will enter through [the opening], until the limb is consumed.
Chapter 79
"Of Ani's cure: not perforated.
"Many boys are born; and the Ani of these boys remain unpierced, for they were healed by a subtle Sifac. Therefore, the midwife is advised to remove her finger from between their thighs, and if not, pierce them with a sharp instrument; then let her hold tight so that it may not touch him.
"Then place over his body fat from wine and oil. "The cure is given to him with the children until he becomes well.
"However if there are many days of illness, then bind him to a bed with a leaden band and let the nurse tend him.
"And also the Ani was struck by the swelling of the belly or the buttocks. Therefore, the midwife is advised to attend upon his consolidation (or the swelling); and then continue with him as we described in the previous cure.
Chapter 80
"Of fistulas that occur at the lower part.
"The fistulas that occur at the lower part are nodation and grossitude which occur near the anus; or one of their parts; and it is a fistula, either one or many.
"As time passes, the nodation comes out, and flows from her a clear white water, or a subtle pus.
And sometimes they are penetrative fistulas. Therefore the penetrative fistulas are recognized through this which comes out from emission and from a discharge; or it may come from them because of their weakness.
"And fistulas are sometimes until they reach the vulvae and up to the vaginae of man. The penis penetrates up to the scrotum and down to the base of the tail
From this also the fistulas penetrate up to the anus and down to where it is not penetrable. If you want to introduce your finger as an indicator there, try to gently insert yourself into the fistula with a small tool (such as a probe made of iron or other suitable material). However, if there's no tortuousness in inserting anything else, then you can use a long and slender instrument like a finger.
If there is tortuousness within it, then I insert myself gently into the fistula with a small probe or hairpin.
If you don't feel the same penis as before and nothing comes out of it or it doesn't become smooth like what I mentioned earlier, then that is not penetrable; in such a case it would be appropriate to examine further.
And when a fistula is penetrating up to the urethra or bladder (in women), its meaning is the death of urine from it and it's forbidden for that location to be cured with medicines.
If it penetrates up to the scrotum or the anus (in men), its meaning is that you should try and reach as far as possible without tortuousness there. You must investigate pain in nearby parts and always note pus from it. And if medicine can't be used, neither does ointment cure it nor is it consolidated with anything else.
And for all fistulas that penetrate in these cases there is no universal cure and the care of them is work and time consuming with the use of medicines to make it into shape.
In the case where it is not penetrable and no cure has been found with other methods, you should try to get a firm hold on its back between your hands; then stretch one hand up towards its tailbone and the other down towards its scrotum as far as possible so that both sides can be pulled apart. Once you've inserted yourself gently into the fistula and felt for any tortuousness (if there is one), try to find out how far it extends with your finger or something similar as an indicator.
If someone is suffering from a broken finger, then it must be treated by inserting your index finger into their mouth
If you are trying to insert your finger into their mouth, go ahead and try inserting it as far as possible through their nose (or any other part of the body) - but know that this will not heal them because they cannot be healed in such a way, as we have stated earlier.
They also said that sometimes healing is possible through food and medication for a wound; therefore, use subtle cautery as described before to insert the flame into their anus until it reaches (the finger). Then continue with this method once more or twice until you are sure that all the flesh has been burned off and is like a fistula (anus).
Then continue with the treatment using a spatula to spread it onto the flesh until all of them are removed; then continue with the treatment using ointments to apply meat and bind wounds, as we have described before.
If that method heals them, this is good news.
And if not, then it cannot be healed using any other treatment ever.
And if you succeed in inserting your finger into their anus (or any other part of the body), and it is between your finger and the fistulas or between your finger and another area that hurts - then wet the cut on the fistula with water until it heals, and afterwards pull out your hand as soon as possible.
Then wash off those burned pieces of flesh that become fistulae (anus), so they do not remain on them anything.
If your finger bleeds while inserted into you and the slit (or incision) where it was inserted to cut off the flesh - then do this instead: use cautery with fire or sharp medicine as we have described before, until that part heals.
"When a cautery is attached to fire and it has the ability to damage good tissues but not bad ones, burning of certain parts will remove blood from those parts, and cooling them.
"Then apply it with ointments or cloths soaked in vinegar until the pus comes out, and then remove those swollen pieces of meat to pus.
"Then apply a treatment with solidified ointments that harden the meat, and these are medicines which contain stiffness and cooling.
"When they finish cooking, then they will be finished eating; not more iterations.
"If the fistula has already penetrated through to the depth of the arm, and is extended by excess body fluids; then insert your finger into its opening, and examine it with it.
"If you feel a temptation to do so, between you and it is through flesh or skin, then the operation on that part must not be made, except according to how much trust and hope there is.
"This is because one of the three ways to administer it will be cautery as we said before, or you cut her so that she can follow him and his ability comes out, making it possible for you to enter his opening. "Do not proceed with the cutting too much so that you do not cut off the consciousness of his arm or hit him as he falls and falls out of exhaustion without will. "Then apply it as we said before.
"In other words, it can be applied if he will be healed; stretch his hand until the excess is removed and extends to his arm as we said before, or with a temptation or using another acute extremity. "Then make those filtered pieces which are in the cutting until you can with purification.
"Then cure the ulcers of all by cutting and fixing up above where it is consolidated; and remain the fistula open on the inner part anus, and there will be a lot less over weakness.
And when you encounter a fistula in this manner: and it is, when you attempt to penetrate into the fistula: and it is at its side about the surface of the body with a cut and edge of the finger: then take the attempted perforation of the extremities, which is as if a needle, that is, by this form. You insert five fingers into it around and about. Then I attempt with the thread to penetrate into the fistula until a resulting injury occurs on him.
If then you penetrate into the finger's edge on the inside near, then remove from it a thread by that means and take your finger to the anus, and extract the extremity of the filament, and collect both extremities simultaneously: and hold one or two strings, and let go at once or after two days: and if there is any penetration into the flesh with the filament, tie him well so as not to occur those cuts which are between the two extremities of the filament. And then apply a remedy for healing until he becomes consolidated and cured.
If the opening of the fistula is not penetrable: then do as follows for you until it becomes deep enough. There isn't something there so that you don't cause injury to him.
Then do as we have said until he is cured
The form of a fistula found in the body which has a sharp curve and one part is not acute to prevent injury where it's not necessary as you would say.
The end
Suture hemorrhoids from which the blood flows out by incision of them: and the remedy is to be made for fissures.
hemorrhoids are two ways Or they may be within the anus like black charcoal or coals of hell, or as if they were warts on them. And from them there are small ones and big ones too, and the blood flows out of them always, and it is one and many. "There are others beyond him, and at his extremities.
However, those which are beyond him are the least abundant of moisture, by means of which flows bitter water or by a very slow course of blood; and they are according to the color of the body.
The care which is within him is such that he becomes most weak and is expressed until the anus opens up; after this expression occurs, they appear to you. Therefore, suspend them with your fingers or hold on them with your nails. Then cut off those at the roots of theirs.
If your fingers are unable to hold them due to their moisture and softening, then cover them with a bandage or cloth; or if you cannot do so easily remove them with your thumb nail. Then cut off those and burn some of the hot coals on top of them after cutting to prevent their movement in that place. Or burn them according to what was mentioned before in the chapter about cautery. Then care for them with any remaining care until they are healed.
If the anus did not open quickly then use a small ligature of a type that is used for cutting off the finger to hold it closed while you express yourself with what is inside your anus and obey the command given to you when you express yourself forcefully.
However if the hemorrhoids are external from your anus, it is easy; and you can catch them with your finger or nail, or cut them off. Then care for them as mentioned before until they are healed.
If someone is holding the cut with a knife then you should apply sutures to hold them according to this way. Take the thread and introduce it into the anus. Then take the hemorrhoids out on top and let it penetrate with a sharp needle from one side to the other; then tie off both extremities of the thread, beneath, and bind them together tightly. "Then remove the knot and pull out the abscess.
"After that, take it all with both hands, release one of them, so that blood may flow out from the excess.
"Then put a cloth soaked in fresh oil on it, or grease it with olive oil, and place it over the wound so that it may rest. "After that, remove it so that it might fall off.
"Thus the others are cared for with ointments and the remaining part is treated until they become well.
"And about the healing of wounds. "Many a wound results from the action of pus and constriction by nature.
"Thus they are treated to prevent them from becoming dry and hard; the upper crust is removed which prevents their joining together. "After that, cure them so as to be healed according to what must happen.
"If they do not join together as before, then the following time you must use a more severe treatment so that much blood flows and the rest of them are cured afterwards.
"About the cure for abscesses among people but not among animals; of those affected by them and the poultice.
"Chapter Eighty-Two
"You know that an abscess is a rounded knot of the body color resembling the top of your head; it occurs all over the body, especially on the feet and fingers, causing pain during walking.
"It is therefore necessary to seek out what is on the outside and hold it with fingers or nails, so that you can remove its root.
"After that for this, if he cautorizes it according to what was previously mentioned.
"But one of the dry abscesses is called a prominent pustule, rough, filtered and rounded on top of the body. Many children die from injuries
His care is to stretch him on a board and hit him until he dies, or strangle him with a cord, or strike him with a staff until dead. And if you are unable to do that with a board and strike him, cauterize him according to what was prescribed by fire or an acute medicine; until they are burned away on the board, not having been strangled with the instrument I call for.
And the ant is also a poisonous one, large and covering the surface of the body, going into its depths; when it strikes him with cold, there is felt by it like an ant sting, and it falls on the whole body; and many are injured from this in their hands.
His care is to capture the ant with an arrow from a pheasant or a strong goose feather; and fix it on the ant until its circle of the feathers surrounding him is contained. Then move your hand with the stick until you separate what is around the ant; and place her in a deep part of the body, and kill the ant from its root.
And if you are unable to do that with an air feather or iron according to this shape
The stick is placed at the top of the feathers so that it reaches over to his hand and he can reach back to release him from this shape.
And if you are unable to cauterize the ant according to what was prescribed for Athelil's cauterization, in chapter on cautery.
Chapter 83
In this section are described the instruments which are used to treat the boils and ulcers of Ani, as well as remedies for them.
Whenever the boil was caused by silver or gold dust, or air bubbles, or metal flakes.
And whenever it happened with these instruments which are used to treat them (the boils and ulcers).
That which is administered for infants' and children's use should be a pure medicine; and if they are delicate or ill, it ought to be milder
The greatest remedy
The remedy is to apply a compress made of the upper part of their head and attached with thread; it should be loosened as gently as possible so that if inserted into their mouth or anus, it will not cause pain, but rather gently stretch them open without causing excessive trauma: each ear has two foramina on its side and one on the back.
The compress should be of such size that it can easily fit through the smallest part of the ear canal; but not too large lest it might cause damage to the inner ear: and if applied from a bladder or piece of linen, its root (i.e., the thread) should only have one finger's breadth.
The compress will be inserted into each ear opening as many times as necessary until the space between all foramina is filled with a finger's breadth; Afterwards thread firmly inserted from 10 threads or otherwise, and tied into the side of it so that there is no space between the compress and the ear canal. Afterwards when applied to their head as a compress with thread tied around its circumference, it should be tightened by compressing gently between two distinct points using strong compression. Afterwards the compress is bound tightly around them.
And this is how one circle has been depicted in these drawings and foramina.
The quality of the compress when bound around them is as follows: that it may be cool from a cold remedy; or applied with warm water from medical substances which are heated to the extent of being comfortable for use; and that it will not burn or freeze.
Afterwards the patient is placed prone on their back and their legs are extended upwards; they then place it under there, that is, over men's skin or a linen cloth.
Afterwards with oil, or alum, or the juice of fenugreek, or similar things; In the beginning put it (the object) gently in the arm. After it has entered, let one of your assistants hold onto it with both hands and the other assist by applying pressure from outside, until it is completely out through the esophagus into the stomach.
After removing the instrument, remove the used pieces of your assistant's arms to one side.
If you need further help in order to push it out, hold onto it as strongly as possible until it comes out completely And if it falls asleep during the whole night without coming out, then do not be discouraged and try again when you wake up the next day.
If you place it into a solution of vinegar (or other strong acid) and the vomit comes out as well with it, then use another one until that one is done vomiting.
If hemorrhoids or anal fistulas are present and causing pain, then use a very small, gentle, and narrow instrument for this purpose, such as one that children would use to clean their anus.
And in order to avoid any injury or damage, the instrument should be soft but not too flexible.
The 84th part of the treatise.
I have already spoken about the treatment of wounds and how it should be done with both hands, as well as in combination with medicines.
I now say that wounds will be treated according to what they are and where they fall.
Therefore, when many wounds occur, they are treated with a variety of things such as incisions or cautery, or strikes with a lance or stick, or using a blade, arrow, or bowstring; and similarly in all these ways by various things.
Wounds that occur in accordance with the location of the body are treated similarly to wounds on the head or neck or chest or stomach and similar from these areas.
And I am now explaining treatments for the remaining wounds in order to complete my discussion of wound treatment.
I begin with simple cuts on the heads of those who have forgotten their composition.
Therefore, When a simple cut on the head occurs without breaking bones; then consider that it may be from a stone or one of those things and immediately apply some ointment to stop the bleeding: but do not delay, as this could lead to death by prolonged bleeding. Also, if there is no prohibition against phlebotomy in your text (bleeding through veins), you should also remove the blood slowly with a thin needle, taking care to avoid injury from excessive pressure on the vein walls. And if there is bleeding due to the opposite side of an incision or a cut.
And if there is bleeding due to the opposite side of an incision or a cut. If he drinks heavily and eats large quantities,
If the prohibition on drinking or eating is in effect, then decrease his food intake, but avoid using excessive force when drawing blood from him, and also do not cut open his veins to remove the blood unless it was specifically allowed for phlebotomy.
And if a cold ointment is applied over the wound and he drinks something containing alcohol or an astringent, then let him drink this mixture with oil alone (if there's no alcohol), or mixed with wine containing some astringency.
If you are sure that the bleeding has stopped after applying a cold ointment and he is drinking something containing alcohol or astringency, then place this same ointment over it if there is his own blood; otherwise, you should apply some other unguent to stop it.
If the wound is large or of another nature and cannot be closed with lips or a similar method, then close it as I will show you for closing wounds on the inside.
If a bone is already removed and he still bleeds and there is no retention of the blood after trying to stop it with an emesis bowl (a type of container for vomit), then cut him open immediately. After that, cure the wound with medicines and restore flesh to where it was cut from; also prepare food for him if he is weak so that his appetite may be restored, as you would do for someone who has lost weight, until he can eat normally again, like those of us who are well.
When pus enters into a wound and does not go away from the bone, then cut out all the pus at once, and throw it away; after that take care of the patient
If there is an artery within a wound from which blood flowed; and it does not come out through medical means, then examine the artery. Therefore, if you cannot cut off that thing (pus), dry her with a sponge, or tie it up tightly. If the need arises when you cannot perform what we have said (perform surgery), then burn it off until blood ceases to flow.
If those wounds are simple and easy to heal, then you should wash over them a poultice (poulticing material) so that the swelling is reduced; for once it has been bound up before it can break through the skin.
Method of poutering an infant Grind up one olive part, and the parts of a dragon's blood two times; do not use any calcified parts three times: make it all together in much quantity, and have it ready for poutering over his wound, and bind him tightly with good binding until he holds well on to himself, then coagulate with blood.
After that bind him tightly above with poutering materials, and let him go down gently so as to prevent him from staying on; then cut off the pouterings when he has gone away. Therefore, there is no medicine to get rid of it until it heals.
And sometimes when he does this alone with olive oil and the blood of a dragon, where you do not have what is needed at that moment in healing wounds, when he puts it on top and ties tightly together; there are recent wounds from its own blood which have not changed the air.
If that thing in the air has already changed due to some alteration, especially when you are in a time of autumn; then there is no intention of our poutering on this matter: therefore take care of it with what we have said so that you put something healing over his wounds, such as olive unguents or pouter materials made from barley flour and water, until pus comes out. In the meantime, care of that which remains to be cured shall continue until they are healed.
If a man falls and breaks his leg bone, it is set, then afterwards I say to remove that which was fractured while using the gesture; and now, after saying this, I shall proceed to fracture the head bones of him who is to come next [i.e., the patient].
Of the collarbones.
If the man falls on his collarbone, then there is no difference between him and someone else as far as treatment goes; but when he has broken only a single bone of the skull.
If the first bone of his collarbone has already been broken (artery), then if he is broken in that way; there is no difference between him and another unless he receives treatment with someone else's assistance to bind up his wound severely as they do when a man is falling, saying 'Bind him up!' until similarly. Because the veins are being hurt, and they fight back against them
Do not apply anything cold to the wound at all; because the substance of veins is cold, and its continuation is with brain, which is superior among members; and that by which healing takes place from drugs alone, as a stone put into sweet wine, or oil, and turpitude when washed away with sweet water; and the remaining minerals according to this mode, and wet unguents.
If a man's wound is large, then apply sutures; or let him breathe with his lips closed. In the meantime, keep on caring for that which remains to be cured until they are healed.
If a man's wound is deep, or he has broken his nose near the bottom of it where now pus gathers; then dig out all that you can from there with greater care.
If there is already an incision in the vein of his wound, and he has been bled; then separate or dry it up with a bandage, bind her on, or burn [cauterize] her if there is no other choice available.
If the epiglottis has been incised or completely excised and you have no alternative, then cover the hole made with sutures over a needle in the throat and do not cut through it; rather, sew up its edges to match the figure of the healthy one. Afterwards, gently stretch the incision along its line, and in time it will heal on its own. Afterwards care for it with ointment to remove swelling and itching until it heals
If a hole has been made in the bone and you cannot remove all of it, then leave only what can be removed; until the wound is no longer rotten or separates out on its own.
If a wound has been cleaned up as much as possible and you have another one ready to use, then cover the first with it (the second), sealing them together tightly. If you find a fistula in the wound and remember that it was mentioned in his chapter on fistulas (or perhaps some other part of your book).
Of wounds in sponges.
If the lance has hit something and you know its depth, then consider this carefully. Therefore, if there is a smell coming from the wound and you suspect that it might be fatal, then know that the wound is deadly.
If its depth is not known and it only has its own blood, then do not put the second one into it right away; nor sew it up or stretch it, so that there will be no blood trapped within it and it won't become an abscess, but instead apply a lubricant to it twice daily.
If you do not have lubricant at the moment, then insert it into the wound with your own (or another clean one), so that whatever comes out from its moisture can be applied to the hole; and let the patient rest on top of the wound until what is added to it drains away.
"If after three days of rest no worsening occurs and there is no weakening of the limb, nor tremor of the heart, nor any restriction in breathing, but only good dispositions remain with him; then you know that he has a cure. "Therefore treat and care for him along with remedies and the rest of his treatment until he recovers.
"If the healing of his disease is complete and always open thereafter; then you know that a fistula has been made. "Therefore treat this fistula separately from its opening.
"And if it is from a cut into the arm or armpit and is simple on the surface of the chest; or from the back; treat him with that which preceded his suture, if there was one, as before he did. If not, then separately for each according to its size: either when you have inserted it, if it's small; otherwise together with what went before.
"If he has already made an incision into the bone and a fistula is formed as a result of this; then investigate the fistula separately from removing it. "If they are not separate, then let them be separated until putrefaction sets in and their removal is necessary.
"However the judgment regarding his disease and its accidents should be given to us [the translators] by examining him along with other members of his treatment.
"The following is about hernias in the groin, their exits and their exit; namely:
"The rupture that occurs from the inside is great or medium in size; small.
"However on occasion when this large intestine comes out and it becomes separated at a place where there are numbers of intestines.
"This is why an introduction occurs for them; the suture around their opening is stronger and more difficult than that which surrounds the large intestine.
"However, a rupture from the outside can also be very difficult. "Therefore, if you do not promptly restore them to their place after they have been introduced, because of the swelling and closing off; for this is why an entrance into him will be very difficult.
For this reason therefore a better division of parts is made; because when it could not be reduced to the intestines as was done for the dissicilis, two species were applied instead.
Sutures are placed according to four methods
The two common sutures join to the suture of the belly and the other one joins with the ribs and others on their own side. Nevertheless, a more personal connection is formed through the suture of the belly; I am speaking to you with one and only one exposure, and declaration.
Therefore I say because when a fistula is formed and something comes out of it from the intestines; and it was difficult to reduce this one; then that is done by means of one of two methods. Or because of the pain from division, as we said before; or when there is an inflation in the intestine due to cold air.
Therefore if that happens then you must warm him up by putting hot water on him and by plunging a sponge into cold water; or a wet cloth soaked in lukewarm water can be used. Or you could pour warm water over him and cool his body down with ice; until the inflation is resolved.
Whenever you do that with a drink that has starch mixed into it; and it's better than just water alone to resolve the inflation.
After you have already resolved the inflation then warm up the intestines by using a drink that has been boiled or with oil. That is because of the entrance into him due to the fistula.
If however after this treatment has been done and he improves then seek out for a division with an instrument that deals with hemorrhoids.
The first cure is better when prepared than the cutting; and there can be no cooperation to deal with things that need further attention or a defective instrument after necessity.
One part of him is thin and sharp, the other part isn't so; but the subtlest part is not with the softest thing as was previously mentioned; and that which is similar to the Caiad [a type of surgical instrument] like you said before is more obtuse than any others.
"When the ulcer swells and enters into the intestine, at that point one must reduce it back to its original shape within itself in its own place if possible, because it is better.
"When the disruption is broad below the stomach, then you should cause vomiting to release it from its back towards itself. "And if it is above the stomach, then place his head and elevate his chest higher than its lower part.
"And similarly if it is a disruption of both parts below the stomach, then place your intent and your consideration always here for it so that the part containing the ulcer should be higher than the other.
"And thus you must administer this to both large and medium ulcers.
"For small ulcers, place it according to what has been prepared for you.
"Then make sure that the present one is placed in your hands so as to be a more efficient minister of the whole disruption while keeping its mouth wide open. "Then take away from him who follows sutures one after another, and this is the common mode of sewing for one.
"And it should be so that you take care to receive it with both hands or count its size according to the size of the ulcer. "Then subtract the amount from the hands of the surgeon as a doctor does, except that you must stretch out one thread between two cuts on both sides with both ends over the inside and then make it penetrate into another part until you have reached four orders.
"Then tie with double thread around both parts at the same time and then gather together two flaps of the ulcer neatly.
"Then subtract its size with both hands and then tie another knot in them also after this thread as you did the first one. "Therefore you must not make incisions with that which causes pain when applied to the parts of the body where itching occurs, until complete cessation from constriction.
"The middle of the needle is between thickness and subtlety; for the needles are sharper and easily penetrate meat; but the thick ones are difficult to enter into the wound due to this.
"It is not desirable that the needle be placed very close to both sides of the skin; so as not to penetrate flesh easily and open up before the completion of its own wound, and also not to extend after suture has been applied, lest it prevent the wound from closing.
"Next strike the extremity of the needle so that they do not fall off when placed on his body; and place them from all sides with a little piece of linen held by both ends of it: and remove them as soon as you know the wound has been closed.
"This is a more convenient way to sew when using needles with fewer points. "Since one or two needles are enough for sewing them, or around them.
"The second way of sewing is common; to make the stitches with four sides as follows: four sides, two cuts and two slits in one piece, each with an equally fine thread between thickness and subtlety.
"Then when you have penetrated with the four sides of the needle, remove it from the part to which it was attached and make a thread tight at the upper part of the wound; so that there is sewing as in clothes being sewn together, placing an amount between all stitches according to the lesser thickness.
"This kind of sewing people know how to do.
"And with this kind of sewing I did my wound that happened by the sword inside my thigh; it was made when I was wounded together with a tool and there was disruption to the hand as big as one palm; and outside from the middle of the belly two palms from the middle part of the belly, and there was disruption in the middle of the bowels.
Therefore it was necessary to remove a part of his intestines through an opening in 24 hours.
It was necessary to make an opening and wait for 15 days before removing a part of his intestines; I operated on him during that time and he recovered well; it has been many years since then, continuing to live in good health, accustomed to his circumstances.
The doctors thought he would not recover.
And it was a miracle that I was able to remove it with the ointment. Because there was no unguent where I was working and nothing from the medicines available. Therefore, I bathed his wound with a mixture of water and honey every day for two days until he was healed.
I call the two types of sutures mentioned in the following story.
And one is to use a sharp suture: it goes inside from the outside towards the inner part.
When the needle penetrates into the wound and comes out through the same point as it entered from outside towards the inner part; release the loop at the end of your hand where you introduced it, so that another thread may penetrate to the other side starting from the inside towards the outside in a different spot.
When you have done the first one to penetrate, then do the second one according to this; release the end of your thread where it emerges from outside towards the inside and make a new penetration starting from the other side towards the outside until both are completed
After that begin also on this side with the same thread and proceed as before with the end of it at the other hand where you introduced it, until both are completed.
After that, remove the thread from this side and its end where you introduced it; proceed as before with the other hand until both are completed and then one by one and then the others: continue like this until all parts have been penetrated according to the same example.
The suture of this incision is that you must sew the skin around the wound with stitches; in such a way that you remove part of it from one side and leave another part to heal by itself on the opposite side, until both are healed
The second type of suture mentioned is Gale's
The following passage describes a type of suture used in surgery, as described by Gale; it is performed similarly to how certain medical practitioners sew together the parts that are brought near one another due to nature: they apply the ends of the stitches to the opposite ends and then connect them with each other. And this type is performed similarly as I described it to you.
It is permitted that you bring the opposite end of the wound near to the inner part and then make it penetrate into it alone; after this, remove both ends with stitches. After that, return to the first step and make it penetrate from the outer part into the inner part using both ends with stitches; after this is done, remove them all.
After that, return to each of the two steps and make it penetrate from the inner part towards the outer part with both ends using stitches; after this is done, remove them all.
And that type of suture is superior to the common one in terms of speed and efficiency, and it is the method used by those who have forgotten their previous method.
That is therefore Gale's method.
And some people said that it was better to use the other type of suture mentioned earlier, which has no specific name given in this passage. The suture used on the inside is done with two needles. It is that you introduce one of the threads into both of them; and begin with inserting one needle from what I told you earlier, then make it penetrate until the other end comes out in accordance to how they sew together their eyebrows equally well.
And you know that when there is a disruption inside the suture, then it becomes more difficult than in any other part of the body to repair it.
The judgment of wounds is more important than that of ointments
Because when you have treated a wound with its own blood before it dries out and you remove the intestines along with it and treat it, then place it on top of a heated surface for drying.
If the air has already dried out the wound, then place it on a certain ointment that you have in your possession and let it heal without any pain or itching: until they stop flowing, soften up the tissue, and calm down. Afterwards the treatment should be just like that for treating other wounds so it can heal completely.
But if you do not have any medicine present, then place it immediately on top of it and quickly start emitting pus with a tool like that which you use to treat yourself so it can be treated twice within the day as much as possible until it heals completely.
However, if there are many wounds nearby when a simple one is present, you should not search for another medicine to bring in more variety because that would waste time and resources.
If a wound communicates with another part of the body and it is close to an artery or vein, then you should put the affected limb into hot olive oil to be warmed up until it can no longer move freely.
If it feels pain or itching (which often happens), then apply a plaster with wine vinegar, soothed by black pepper and heated until the putrefaction is expelled from its intestines: especially if the putrefaction has already set in and an exit penetration occurred all the way to where the poison entered.
You know that when something has come out of a large intestine, it is easier to heal than if it came from the smaller ones; and vice versa, it is more difficult to heal.
The part of the intestine that is called the jejunum does not heal from a wound in it at all; and because of its multitude which comes out through them, and their magnitude (which means how much matter they expel), and because of the subtlety of its body structure, and closeness to its own nature's nerves.
"If this procedure came from a wound it is necessary to reduce [to heal] the swelling by reducing its length according to your method of equalizing intestines when you cut them up equally.
"But if you do not have a wound or it is already done with an injury, then proceed to apply the bandage over that spot where a vein has been cut through from him [the patient], so as not to let any blood flow. "Inside the swelling there are veins and arteries.
"Then cut the ligament that is above it [the swelling], and attach two ends of thread from below your wound outside him [the patient]. So as to let go of his pull downwards and extraction at the spot of the swelling, and emission of pus from the wound.
"Remember that it happened inside your intestine.
"When the disruption happened inside your intestine and it was small: then it is possible to restore in some people because I heard of someone who had a wound on his own body from a lance and there was a wound at the right stomach [right side] and it has healed: and the fistula has been made, and the discharge has occurred from him.
"I therefore put my care until I was not cured of his disease neither did I cease to gently touch him [the patient] until he was healed and the place became solid.
"After I had heard the place become solid, I feared that a bad accident would occur on top of his weakened body and it did not happen to him [the patient] from the bad accident. "And he regained his health better with food and drink, and became strong, and entered the bath [water], and trained himself on a healthy diet.
"And some doctors said when the disruption happened inside your intestine and it was small: then it is necessary to tie it [the patient] up according to this method. "It is that you will apply large bandages on their heads. "Then remove two lips with a knife and one from within them, put it into their mouth above the two cut lips. When this is done over her, she will open her mouth and pull out her head from there with both hands, keeping it steady, for fear of falling off; but if it falls down or turns away then that would be the end of her.
"Then remove a second one closely following the first, and stop cutting after removing it from above the cut lips.
"Then reduce her anus. "If the head remains attached to the intestines, until it is eaten by the intestines, and treated with medicines that will not let go of its hold onto him because he was too weak.
"It is also possible to tie the intestines with a thin thread; which has been taken from an animal and attaches itself into this opening.
"...and it is so that you take the extremity of this thread out of the intestines and remove much flesh from it. "Then tie up the end of its thread tightly into place with a thin thread. "...and insert this thread with him into his intestines... "Then reduce her again to the first reduction.
"...but it is only after removing with trust and care according to a certain way of faith and prudence...
"You know that which is large and broad especially if it is in a very thin intestine; then there's no strength to it but the subtlety of wisdom, not all its health.
"...on the cure of ulcers and fistulas...
"You know that any ulcer which does not heal and become a scar is called an fistula, no matter where it may be in the body; we call this one Ulcer of Zuchemen.
"And a fistula is the filtration of knots hard or soft and white; without which there is no pain, but with it is there comfort from one's hands.
"It is in certain hours that are humid and emit pus. "However moisture may be found in some of these hours. "Sometimes the humidity is abundant and thin; sometimes it is thick and smooth; sometimes it is delicate.
"I have spoken of wounds that do not heal; neither are they formed in the flesh for no reason at all.
"One cause is either due to the scarcity of blood within his body; or it may be because of its malice; or from an obstruction between him and the upper lips that is hard, preventing his life-giving spirit from entering; or perhaps a large number of sores with foul qualities; or he might have putrid matter in himself, causing material for bad quality to come out to him. Another cause could be unhealed wounds, where the remedy was neglected.
"I have also displayed all these causes and signs to you with remedies; now it is necessary that I explain the method of treatment for Fistulae and Zuken.
"So understand that a fistula has occurred in every part of the body. "There are fistulas that connect to veins and arteries; or the nerves; or to the intestines; or to the urine; or to one of the back bones; or to a junction of the muscles composing them: just as the hand and foot do.
"What else is there in these fistulas? It makes the cure for them very difficult; it does not receive treatment and neglects taking care of itself with its occupation being work and ignorance.
"If there is from one of these fistulas whose depth has not reached those places I mentioned; and if you are trying to treat it with faith; or trust in its treatment; then take hold of the skin around it with your thumb, or with a knife, depending on which fistula extends along its course. If it moves towards its proper direction, seize it firmly.
If there is a fistula that is tortuous, then you should examine it with a delicate probe Because of the leniency (gentleness) in handling one's body, and regarding the tortuousness
If a fistula has multiple openings, it is not possible for you to examine her with forceps. Therefore, from the mouths of these other openings, extract (remove) one of them using your own mouth.
As you remove one opening with your own mouth, in moist conditions cause the remaining opening to move out.
Then inquire as to the manner by which it is possible for you: whether there is a long fistula or short one, or both openings are close together and in one place; or if there is a single opening with multiple openings nearby, and this covers everything completely, using your strongest strength when asking about the pain of compression with your hand above where, and also examining it through signs and causes accidents.
After being positioned over all these, then proceed to examine her with confidence; and it is that you consider at this moment if there was a nearby fistula appearing, or if it has slipped away from union, or from the artery, or from one location, or from several locations which I told you about: at this point dry the fistula according to what was mentioned earlier in my narration, and take out of her what is inside through filtration, and putrefaction of the flesh, as a result of it being born in its opening with flesh, or the rupture, and many others. And care for her until she becomes healed.
If a fistula is of great depth and according to rectitude (correctness), then you should extract her with all the force that it is possible for you. Then cleanse her with all the corruption on his body.
Then administer the strong medicine until it reaches to the point where you comprehended her with iron; and let him do this frequently, until the corrosive medicine is completely eaten by the acute medicine that remains from the corruption.
"After cleansing with a mixture that restores health until it becomes healthy.
"If the patient does not become healthy through what we applied before (the mixture), then cauterize [it] according to what was used for application.
"If the cause of Fistulas is known to you (the patient), then check it with you and inquire about this: Then cauterize him according to what was shown to me: if he does not prohibit anything from a vein or artery, burn [it] using our method.
"If it is discovered by you that there is some corruption or negligence within the patient and he has not completely recovered from this yet: Then cauterize him until he fully recovers. "After cleansing with what brought [the patient] to health, until it becomes healthy.
"If this did not become healthy and emitted pus as before, then you know that you did not fully eradicate the corruption.
"Then seek further more deeply into this matter and inspect his cause with utmost diligence, also purifying him with your ultimate force (or strength).
"After cleansing. "If this becomes healthy then it is a good thing; if not, you know that the corruption has gone very deeply into his body and you have failed to overcome it. "Therefore there is no wisdom left for you except to let nature take its course alone.
"If the patient has a fistula and it is possible for you, cauterize him with subtle methods that lead to this.
"If there are many bones: then seek all the attachment of them one by one and do not let go anything from these with your strength.
"If something contrary to your wishes arises from humidity and you are not afraid of cutting into them or making a mistake, then cut through those humilities and meats if they exist there, and release the bones.
"If you do not have the means to release their bones when it is your time (hour), then place over [the patient] what will rot him: and let go of him until he has rotted from around the bones and the humilities.
"Hold wounds so that they don't solidify. "Sectional incision should be held fast, as you held it with your operation. "Apply oil above the oil (ointment), if you have it; otherwise use another ointment's stick.
"When the mentioned parts become rotten and separate from each other, their removal is made with a special tool; then they are attracted to one another.
"If a tooth is large like the tooth of the heel or buttock (genital), as for those parts, it has become part; and then, when this last reason [is] given, blackness and corruption will befall that one. "Then restore the wounds.
"If the one in it has become a large part and corruption is already taken up to the marrow of the bones, then it is necessary to fasten it tightly and strike all the way down to the place where corruption occurred; then care for it so that consolidation occurs.
"And I will show you what happened to the knife in your hand; so that you may place it as a model and tool over your operation.
"He was young in age, about thirty years old, to whom pain happened to his arm due to the cause that went inside him and reached the body; that is, from within, until matter reached down to the shoulder, it was called a great betrayal.
"Therefore time with his error and then when he opened up, many matters followed him. "His care was set up until his hand reached the shoulder; and many openings were made in him; all of them emitted pus [and] body fluids.
"Therefore he [the patient] was attended by many physicians over two years; and it wasn't in him a wise one with regard to the art of hands until someone called out to him, and heard his shoulder; and the matters that were after these openings came in great numbers: also all matter of body had become tabulated, and color on him was already yellow.
I am trying to insert a needle into one of the openings (orifices) and it has reached the target.
After examining all the orifices, I have inserted its point into itself from every side of the wound.
I have therefore succeeded, and pulled back the point of one of those orifices until it reached a part of its body: and I entered this corrupt one; for which is now corroded, and covered with black shit, and putrified, and perforated, so that it has penetrated up to the middle.
I have therefore seized what was detected by me from the rotten bone.
And I detached it, which was not on that bone except for its corruption, and I severed it off. I have therefore removed her/it.
Then I placed the restoration on a long bench, accompanied by medicines and bandages. And it was not settled/bound up.
Then I tried with the second one above and beyond the first detection; and entered into its continuous corruption, accompanied by it/it on bone, and severed that which appeared to me also from that corruption.
And I have therefore sought the restoration of him/her/it. And it was not restored./bound up.
Then I tried with it again and did not cease to insert the particular part; but I strove for its restoration; and it was not restored, until I made an incision from bone around one of its palms, and extracted that with its middle.
Then I restored him with medicines, and it was bound up quickly and became healthy; and this iteration in his operation was not necessary, except for the disposition of the weak, and the scarcity of his strength, and my fear over him from death: because he used to fall on every side by the excess removal of syncopic evil.
And he became healthy through whole restoration; and flesh hard on the bone was made, and a good arrangement of his body was done; and its strength returned to him; and in disposition were set/established; and no contrary state came upon him while walking or movement injury, by any means.
If the swelling has already occurred at the site of the body part, it is necessary to secure it as follows; first you must grasp and hold onto the swollen area using your hands in such a manner that you are able to stretch out the swelling by pulling on it with both hands from the top. After you have stretched it towards the top, gently apply pressure at this point until the swelling subsides completely. Then secure the swollen part onto your body above it and extend its extremity so that you can pull the meat towards the lower part; then grasp the meat in front of the place where you want to tie it down, so as not to let go of the tied-down flesh.
Use a stick or a collar beneath the lower part of the body so that when you do this it is not allowed to slip off the spoiled flesh
It is necessary to have the tie above the spoiled part so that it does not slip off with the help of your hands and also prevents any slipping or sliding on its own side as well as preventing you from tying another knot right next to this one.
If the swelling is spoiled and not swollen yet but is about to become swollen then you should continue grasping it along with a portion of it; the corruption or injury will be in the middle of it or in one of its parts, at that point grasp all around the body part completely. Then use a stick beneath it.
After securing the first part with a corruption on it you must continue to secure it from another side until the tie is made according to its length and as we previously said.
If the corruption or injury is at the junction then cut off that junction of it; and secure the swelling from another part as we previously said.
If the corruption or injury is at a place between two connections then there should be no intention except for an incision in that part.
If the corruption or injury is at a place between your hands and feet then there will be great difficulty It is necessary that you understand how it appears to you. And when you are able to grasp it in whatever position or way is possible for you and with every kind of ingenuity that is corrected to your mind; but if it does not do something contrary to the vein or artery then do not let go of it.
The incisor teeth and the molars to cut into these bones are many, depending on their position in relation to each other, and preparation of them and the nature of them, and their sharpness and size, and their strength, and rarity Therefore it is necessary to bring together all the tools needed for that specific surgical procedure.
And you know that these operations will show a greater significance in front of an instrument whose edge is sharp when you are intently focused on its sharpness. The knowledge of the modes of this art is a witness to their eagerness; for at that point you will have come across what was made by them with all their tools towards every ailment.
And I will be firm on the number of instruments you put together that strike with them and the trial over others which you will practice.
Shape of another molar.
The shape for joining together two rasors The head of this rasor should be shaped according to the star-shaped form of a spear tip; its points should be shaped according to the shape of the points I showed you earlier.
And it will not work unless when they are joined together their heads move against each other as if in a fight and the mouth is large and strong.
The larger rasor shape.
Shape of a rasor with wide blades.
A shape for one where the gap between the blades is narrow.
A different type of rasor with thin edges.
Shape of a rasor with curved extremities.
Form of grasping tweezers
This resembles the Radio, and thus is as if it were a lever: displaying from bones many reasons [or causes].
Tweezers with which it coincided that of its perforation was made on the bones.
His extremity triangular, sharpness of extremities.
Fit from India. And similarly should be like it that all we have mentioned as reasons for the tweezers and scissors may be performed with these [tweezers].
About the cutting of extremities and serration of bones
The extremities become putrefied: either from an external cause or from within.
Since then you are to be treated by the physicians of the corruption with their medicine, and not provide care: and let that the corruption falls on the member as it did nothing: then it is necessary for you so strike at this same member up to where the corruption follows until death or malice which is greater defect in the body.
And the sign to which it fell is that member degraded until the end [the sign of degradation]. Until then let he ignite him or decay after death: until that corruption follows that same member and creeps through all the body.
Therefore with the cutting of him and similarly if the cause of corruption is by percussion through all his weapons as scorpion to sea, and to a people, and a net, and similar ones.
If the corruption or percussion is on the extremities of the fingers then strike at the finger and not be from the other corruption until you reach the other hand.
And similarly if it was to the hand then strike at that with the root of a needle and not be from the other corruption until you reach the arm of the needles.
Remove arm from above and strike it at the joint where you make your incision
If a corruption occurs while passing through, then seek him around the elbow; there he is deathly sick To administer beyond that with care's help
And similarly do from the foot when a corruption occurs in the finger, then strike it at one of its joints; and if the blow strikes your finger to the joint of the foot, then strike off both feet. If it ascends to the knee, then strike below the knee joint.
However if a corruption has already occurred above the knee, there is no escape but to dismiss and release the sick man.
And how you strike a member or fasten him up is to bind it with the lower cord and strike off there; and with another cord above place And when extending one's hand downward, bind it with a lower cord and fasten him up there; and when extending the other upward to the top. And you separate the meat that is between two cords with a strong pull downward until the whole flesh is separated. Then strike or bind up.
It is necessary that you place the linen blanket around all sides and it does not touch any of the good places; and put on a cold dressing after an added injury and anointing with oil.
If you have a bleeding internal from within during the operation then burn up or apply pressure to the wound immediately; or put above those shedding blood and place them aside. Then return to your treatment until completion.
And if the member is injured with a cord fasten it up and care for it until healing occurs.
I will tell you what happened from striking your finger; the same happens when striking yours.
That is because it happened to his finger with a blackening and the accompanying burning; and the corruption first struck him by striking his own finger until it began to strike off his foot completely.
The surgeon therefore cut off the finger as it had become corrupt and painful to him due to his injury; he cut through this at the junction of its tendons, and so it was cured
And after a certain period of time had passed, he experienced the same corruption to his finger on his own index finger.
He then came to me and expressed a desire to recover that excess of fluids which he had placed upon his hand after the completion of his body's treatment; but it was not reabsorbed, and so he started to flow out into another finger until the corruption spread throughout his whole hand.
He then came to me with the intention of cutting off his hand; and he did not want this excess which flowed from him after the treatment of his body, hoping that it might be reabsorbed by me - but I was afraid as well for fear that there would be death at his own incision. Because the surgeon's virtue was beyond measure
After he had come to me for this purpose and cut off his own hand, he returned back to the ground; and came back to me because of it, since he desired to do so - and then he cut through his whole hand until cured.
And do not twist this story so that it serves as a guide for what has fallen into the category of these evils - and let its meaning be conveyed according to how it is done.
Of the cure of the hand with the quality of healing using medicines.
When the abscess in some of his members has been protracted and is drained by the surgeon; thereafter it breaks off or perforates, and there remains a place which looks like pus - and the skin over that as if he had just emerged from being sewn up - but does not reach to the end in its corruption nor prints into the mouth nor into the anus nor into the ligaments: it should be called a sinus; although if the duration of the space is prolonged until a perforation occurs, then by this it may become fistulae.
His task is to cut off completely as though it was burned; and particularly when it's subtle, like a thread; And when you bind it with confidence because of the fear that you would have lost by mistake from its place due to the impurity
If the skin adheres to a blade, and does not result from that injury, the last consequence is death; if there is pus from the wound, then you should seek a barber to treat it; And when he examines him with a cleaver
Then if it is big and pus comes out from it, the smell of death arises; then you should shave him with a razor to treat it; And when he examines him with a cleaver
Finally, take from him what is necessary for you; and dissolve it with water and honey, shave him with a razor to treat it; And bind up the opening of his wound, and release the medicine given to you according to the two hours.
Finally take him out with an expression; do this for days until the odor of death is removed and it is gone.
And when you shave him with water and ashes, if the medicine is not present to you; and it is necessary for you to take firewood or charcoal, and pour over them water. Finally cleanse him with her, shave him with the ashes until he believes that the nose is clean.
If tolerance is not present over the medicine of ashes, nor water and honey; then shave him with water and honey as before, mixed with something from resin. Or shave him with honey and wine mixed; because of the property of the bees it will cleanse, and remove impurities from his nose; And give him wine to come off as he pleases when there is excess of stiffness and dryness in the wine.
When you do this repeatedly until he believes that the injury to his nose is far removed; then shave him with what makes flesh grow on it.
"It is necessary to soak the abscess with a solution of vinegar and rose oil, and apply wine as well; or you may soak it with some medicinal ointments, depending on which one suits best.
If the sinus is narrowed so that no cannula can be inserted through it, then you must widen the cavity by using iron rods; or you may apply a paste of Egyptian ointment and balsam as well, until it is widened.
And similarly if the cavity has already been enlarged, you must close it again with sutures; and remove as much of whatever is inserted through it without any additional materials.
And similarly if the cavity where the discharge comes from is very narrow, it has been dried out to the top; then you must apply a remedy of lower pressure in that location inside the sinus itself so that the discharge flows downwards, because when pus coagulates at the bottom of the sinus, it prevents meat being produced there.
If it is not possible to dry out the sinus from below as described above; then you must stop applying remedies so that a membrane can be prepared and the discharge flows through with help, after having been prepared for you in advance. When applying remedies, make sure nothing other than discharge is retained inside; and take the solidified medicines which are placed above the sign, along with what you need. And stretch them over the linen. And make sure the linen is of sufficient quantity to allow for complete communication through the sinus. Then strike with a rod at the direct opening of the sinus; widen that opening of the sinus further. Then stretch over the linen with another rod according to the size of the opening; and place it upon him in a long position above the sinus opening so that his discharge may flow out through the discharge from there; but you will not use a large linen unless after several days one is used.
That one who is above the opening of the sinus, that one whom you remove at all hours so that it may return to where it has been collected from pus; and so you know, if this thing which flows out through it is much or little: whether digested or not.
"And having considered this spot further, the master of that place felt his pain, or if there was no pain in it he would not be able to endure it and therefore become insensible.
"And if your treatment is done with such care and the mother of what has been poured over that opening becomes clear, then you know that this place will stay on until it falls off or parts away: so therefore put a strap around him one day or another, or when he has finished his urination, change the cloth for another and wash the wounds.
"If the discharge from your place is very long and subtle, then you do not need to worry about it falling off because his treatment will approach him; for there are men who make the generation of flesh in their veins slow-moving, and those who drive against them.
"If discharge from your place is many days long and remains undigested, then you know that the opening will not stay on.
"So if the time for discharge is long and the rest of him remains so as well, then you should give them medicine to excrete their urine and let doctors do it with a wet towel, using water that has been boiled: just like when an unguent is added while there are excessive additions from urine.
"And at the end of your treatment when you put on the unguent dyafinicon and it is rinsed with boiled oil: and afterwards there should be poured over him an equal amount of old wine from his own substance.
"Then wrap him up tightly after all that, and use him immediately.
"And this is similar to the treatment when there was no unguent dyafinicon for you at that moment: after he has been washed until it becomes full and used. "Or take myrrh and aloes too, and olive oil; put on everything and wash it while you are over fire. "Then tie a cloth around him and put it over the place; and tie with that cloth what you washed; until it becomes full: and wash it with water, and then put on the cloth again.
When this long Aristolochia is administered, its heavenly lily roots and the flower itself are obtained; and the herb's flour, the Centaur's tail. For simple use (take) them separately or mixed together; and make a mash from the roots themselves; and grind it into meal that you may eat from it.
If the sinus (of a patient) is prolonged and does not heal with this treatment; then you know that corruption has already taken place within it; or may have made an impression in the bones, muscles, ligaments, etc.; at that point, care for him as if he were suffering from fistulas.
The cure of ulcers and fingers; the incision of the digits added to it, and the sectioning (of flesh).
An ulcer is an opening that occurs under the thumb or toe of a hand or foot; and often arises on other fingers as well.
When the matter is prolonged and not properly cared for by the ulcer; or the ulcer turns into a boil that emits pus until it has corroded its root; often this turns completely black, causing corruption to occur in his mouth as well. And if the extremity of the finger becomes necrotic, i.e., dead; then he loses control over him and he is unable to use him any longer.
When you cure him as we advised earlier, and do not fail to give your full attention; then it is necessary that you strike off with the iron any remaining excess from his finger. After this, cauterize the ulcer The cautery is an instrument of healing.
If his mouth is healed and also his finger; the excess water from his finger will be compressed into flesh on the inside, he will begin to feel pain in him again; then you must apply a small amount of radium beneath an angle that has been puncturing flesh and drive him up towards it: and strike off at once all that remains after being burned by medical compounds or corrosive substances. "In order that [the healing process] may be done with ointment.
"If a corruption has already set in, then you should strike out that mouth and remove it; otherwise [the corrupted material] will never be healed while still within the affected part.
"If you see a corrosion or corruption affecting the finger, then remove it from one of the fingers that remembers its memory; [i.e., if the affected finger is remembered by another finger.] "Afterwards heal him.
"If the finger is injured or broken, then let it be first attended to by a phlebotomist [one who performs bloodletting]. "Afterwards dry the finger with an acute cut made from above downwards.
"And let the cut be kept from reaching any part that is under the finger; otherwise it will cause great pain to the limb as a result.
"Afterwards heal the place where he sits [i.e., where the healing process has been performed].
"The fingers are the most useful of all members among men; [and] some have bones and others only a finger; and there is one who has his life bound to certain digits. "He [i.e., the person] who is born into some of the digits, will not die; and he who is born at a finger-binding place will be saved.
"Those whose bodies are so [i.e., the bodies to which this passage refers] have cuts easy to make. "This is what you should do when making a cut on his own finger with an acute blade.
"The cure of those who have their lives bound to certain digits [i.e., the person] will be difficult. "Therefore let there be a restraint from cutting him.
"If the person is born into one of the last digits, then you should strike out his flesh with a blunt blade from below upwards to the mouth. "In order to cut these tools with one's own sword. "Afterwards apply the remedy.
"The consolidated injury is often difficult to heal, especially if it occurred due to a fall of the human body or by heat from fire.
"Therefore, in order that the consolidated injury may be separated once again according to its own original shape. "After this has been done with the appropriate oil or bandages soaked in olive oil to prevent them from sticking together and separate them; either use a thin strip of lead to bind them back together once again according to what ought to be.
"And similarly if the consolidated injury occurred due to a blow with a palm, then dry it off and restore its shape according to what was prepared.
"Regarding the treatment of a broken bone.
"The veins that are torn and injured with too much melancholy humor and the result is bleeding from many parts of the body; especially on the arms, face, hands, and feet.
"Therefore it is necessary to administer a strong emetic for treating excessive vomiting from black bile many times over.
"Afterwards, the procedure of taking blood from the patient in order to draw off black bile is done on the right arm just below the elbow.
"The cure for them with iron, it can be done according to two ways. "One way is for them to bleed by using a lancet and remove the black blood. "Another way is for you to draw off the whole vein and remove it completely.
"The procedure of cutting off their head according to this method must be done carefully. "Firstly take a warm bath with hot water until the large amount of blood is resolved. "Afterwards tie down his feet to above his hips and from below his knees to the upper part of his leg with wet cloth so that he does not move. In a single vein or two veins or three veins spread out
Then you must first extract blood from the hand near the groin using one vein or two veins and then proceed upwards until you reach the top, after which you should apply the tourniquet to the upper arm for the patient who needs it first. Then you should withdraw blood until a sufficient amount has been obtained from the hand up to its lowest point and according to the strength of the patient.
Afterwards bind her tightly so that she does not drink from the night-dealing spirits and vomiting and phlebotomy when necessary until a vein is found, at which point you should stop to avoid harming the patient.
The extraction of his blood will be according to this manner. Shave the arm if there are many hairs on it. Then insert him into the bath; or you could warm his arm with hot water until he starts to bleed, and then apply pressure on the veins; or if there is no present vein perform a forceful massage that will heat up the member (I assume this means the arm).
Then you should dry him off directly from one vein along its length; or at his elbow or near the calf depending on where there is dryness (I assume this means veins).
Then gently remove the bandage from all sides until it is visible to the senses; and you should look for where she bled at her elbow or near the calf so that you can lead her towards the night-dealing spirits. Therefore after removing from his bandage gently wipe him off as if he was almost clean.
Then insert beneath the radiator until when she is extracted and held in by the bandage; bind her tightly with a blindfold gently.
Then dry another nearby three fingers away from that area. Then gently remove the bandage from the upper part one at a time until it becomes visible (I assume this means remove each section of bandage one by one). Then extract her with the radiators as you did before and bind her tightly after that just like you did first time.
"If you need another incision (cut) elsewhere on his body or multiple incisions if necessary. "After that, make the last incision at the heel.
"Take it out and perform the incision above it.
"After that, take it away from the upper incision or any other incision you may need to make, until you have performed all of them completely; then perform the final incision.
"If it cannot be removed from the upper incision or any other incision, then introduce a double-edged knife and tie it securely with cord; take out this one as well, either you go under it on the radius of your hand: otherwise turn to the opposite part [of his body], until everything is done. "And so, no incision should be made. "If an incision is made, you will find it very difficult to remove the blade from its place and return it safely above the affected limb.
"When you have taken out everything completely, then put the wound-dressing over the place where the limb was cut and apply oil or ointment to it; if the latter is better, cure him.
"If the veins are contracted and twisted around so that they cannot be pulled out in one piece according to our description of their path or order: then it is necessary that you find a way to reach them all over his entire limb and remove the places where there were incisions.
"After that, tie it securely with cord until you remove the whole of it; and when you have performed your incision above this one, do not make another one, for it will be very difficult to remove from its place or take out. "Therefore use prudence in everything you do.
"Shape of the incision where he is treated.
"The shape for cutting open a vein.
"It is not as curved or acute a vein, and it does not go to the end of that part; but rather it has a large bend and length which makes it easy to remove from its place.
Extraction of veins from the leg
This vein is generated from the leg and on hot soil, like a lizard, and on arid soil that is warm but barren, without any vegetation or trees.
And sometimes veins may also be found elsewhere in the body outside of the legs.
The generation of this vein is through the decay that occurs beneath the skin, like how snakes and fleas become generated inside the body.
The sign of its extraction is when inflammation occurs on the leg veins from a severe heat. Then the location for its removal must be determined. Then the vein will begin to exit from that location of extraction like a root or an animal part.
When this becomes apparent at the end of that part or root, it is appropriate to close off a small hole in order to hold water until you reach the second and third holes from there (i.e., where the lead enters). And if the lead falls out of the vein into the body then you must remove it from the leg by using a drachm scale as much as two and a half drachms, all the way up to the next hole at the bottom of that vein or root.
Therefore, if anything comes out of it through this small part into the water below, you must plug that hole shut right away to keep from letting any more lead out or fall out with a seal made of wax and pitch. If it has become much longer than this part allows for, then you must cut off that part of the vein itself and plug up the rest of it to keep any more lead from coming out with a seal made from wax and pitch or some other substance. Do not cut off that root before all of it has been extracted completely, unless you want to be cutting up parts of your own body while trying to remove the lead from within veins and roots in a dangerous situation where there is little time for careful work. If you cut it off, however, and if the lead falls into the body with that action then a wound will occur at that place, decay of flesh will also be present along with that infection (ulcus means ulcer or sore), making for bad news all around.
"He should be carefully drawn out, and extracted quickly, so that he returns to his original state, without leaving any trace of him within the body; and from this vein there is one taken which goes into certain people, namely five palms long and ten. And then he was brought to me because his right arm had been cut off at five palms
If you are to be operated on at a certain time during your medication; then lead him into the cavity of his body with great force and perforate it from head to toe, until you have completely evacuated what is in her because of the matter: And administer putrefaction and decomposition to the location where he was placed for a period of days. Then attend his care with great attention.
And this vein sometimes has many windings, especially when it appears near the foot of a man, or at his own foot; and they are made for him many openings, and are taken from all of them by one winding.
Therefore take great care of it as we said before about the division, with what has been removed.
Of a removal beneath many worms in the womb, and is called "the vein of the liver".
This is called "the vein of the liver" among us on earth at Aegritudo bouina; because it has been struck by many worms and is very thin in relation to its birth, born between the womb and flesh.
It is given to the body whole, ascending and descending; and it is shown to the sense of a man while walking from one part of his limb to another, until its course has gone through every part of the womb, or until the course is complete in the middle of the body and it is taken.
And its generation is from the corruption of certain humors. As worms and snakes are struck beneath, so the legworms (roundworm) and hookworms at the womb.
And it is feared from its evil. When he himself had inserted into the body and was lifted to the head, and settled at a place; then surely opened up there, and returned, and destroyed the eye; and fell that one many times.
Because of which he cared for him, and brought it out from there; then only that happens to him, except when outside of his movement, an appearance is given to the senses.
So it may happen, so you are bound what is above him and below him with a strong tightening tie. Then dry up from above him, and brought him out of that.
If it penetrates into the body, but not within you; then set up above the place with a cautery and fire, until he may die.
And greater what is feared, damage to him, which corrupted his eye, as we said.
If you want it already from head towards the eye, then bind below on him above eyebrow tight. Then dry up from above him, and brought him out of that.
It is necessary so that the weak one becomes made sick with its own body, by the remedies of medicines dead evil things.
And let it happen to him from food and drinks who generate decay.
From the incision above the Nakir.
This Nakir is called in our land, and it is pain that was inflicted on certain members; then goes from the member to another member.
And I myself already heard this one, according to what I tell you. I am summoned by a sick woman in certain villages. And he gives his arm out, and heard the swelling of the forearm in a rope of an arm.
After the time of one hour remained, he heard a swelling to fall with fire, as it fell from wounds; going up towards his arm or place where you can be; so that is like gold flowing, when it runs from location to location.
The pain therefore recedes from that place and is fixed in the arm.
After a short time has passed, it falls off the end of the body onto the forearm, so then it drops into another arm.
It was handed to me since he fell completely within his own body as I had heard.
I am amazed therefore by the transfer of its place from one limb to another. But I, in turn, had not witnessed this manner of gentleness with my eyes before. However many others had witnessed the transfer of pain from one limb to another, but I did not see it with my eyes like I saw him in a woman.
But I do not consider this to be the case unless it is because a woman was among those who are detected by signs of their sick bodies, so therefore there appears to my mind that feeling transferred from one limb to another.
It is necessary for them not to appear according to this reason among those who are delighted and of the bodies of men, hidden from sight.
Since you are caring for him and he is a patient suffering that pain, then if it appears before your eyes as I described earlier, then hold it above his body and beneath him too until the transferred feeling returns to its normal state again; in this way it can be cured of its affliction and place will be restored.
If however you do not see him with your eyes: then care for him along with an excision of the body and what expelled feelings, and drive away those with poisons from the breasts of women, and poison pills also, as well as others similar ones.
On extracting arrows.
Arrows are divided according to their kinds and the places where they fall from the body.
Their diversity is because some of them have large points and blunt ones, hooks or broad heads. These are those things that have three angles. and from them come languages And from these comes the stars
Those veins that are divided into parts where they fall down have two modes according to them. However the parts of the veins are divided into main partitions as in the case of brain and heart etc., similarly the veins of liver, spleen, intestines etc. If therefore a certain member of the body falls down and shows you signs of death as I tell you after, then it is necessary for you to cut out the arrows from those veins as cause of his death was in that place because he was in multiple positions. However when the arrows are not visible to you and have already been cut off from deep in a member then take out them immediately so that it is seen as a wound.
The arrow to the brain when it falls into that is an arrow which penetrates the eye and causes sight loss and vertigo and redness of the eyes and inflammation of the tongue and spasm and mixing of the mind and cholera death Perhaps blood will be extracted from the nose or ears. Perhaps speech is lost and the voice is destroyed. Perhaps it causes a white discharge from the nostrils similar to mucus. And an exit with similar water loss of limbs.
If therefore you see those signs then refrain from the treatment and take out the arrow if it is not extracted.
The arrows to the heart when they fall into are: that which is close to the left breast and feels as if it were fixed on a hard thing but not on a soft one. The arrows may be like movements similar to those of the pulse and run out from the wound black blood. It follows with a severe chill in extremities and cold sweat and syncope (seizure). Therefore, death comes near doubt
And when the arrow of Sagittarius pierced the lung, death came from blood spurting out through the wound: and those who follow behind are cut off, and their bodies change color due to injury And death takes away great breath as well, high up: seeking the attraction of cold air.
When the arrow falls into a man's chest, that is when death comes quickly near at his back, and great desire for breath with pain strikes him as he gasps, and all limbs move in death.
If the arrow falls into a man's stomach, then quickly it will come from the wound by food to something unchewed.
If an arrow falls into the windpipe and sticks there, then it will come from that wound to something of excrement or vomit which has already been disrupted. Therefore no hope for him is there in his care nor the arrow's extraction.
If an arrow falls into the bladder and comes out urine: it proceeds to something outside of that, and the pain is greater upon the sick person; then you know that death will come soon.
After all the limbs of a man have fallen away according to many dispositions as mentioned before when Sagittarius did not pierce an artery or vein: and the arrow is not successful
And I tell you that which I heard of these arrows so as to signify it for your care.
It was because one eye of him was killed by the arrow at his lacrimal canal and nose root Therefore he took that out of one other side under the ear of him, and was healed, and did not come to his eye any more harm.
Therefore he took another arrow which had killed him at the eyebrow of his eye under the lower eyelid: and that arrow was hidden, and I did not take it off except for a little part of his limb with which it adhered to his wood, because that arrow held on strongly in its bow, being made of iron, without any ears.
The Jewish man is healthy and has not suffered a misfortune at his eye's level
He extracted another arrow from the gut of a Christian.
The arrow was Arabic and is in his ears. Therefore I pulled him through the two guides; he was already submerged in his gut. I became subtle with her and when I extracted her out of there she became healthy again; becoming a Christian too.
He extracted another arrow that had entered his belly and we pondered because of its death; it was about to die from it
After thirty days passed over him nothing had changed about his disposition; I pulled the arrow out from where it was and the intelligence of my mind with her and extracted her; he became healthy again and did not suffer a misfortune at his eye's level
I heard of the man who had an arrow in his back; he was cured because it was pulled out. After seven years the arrow left his heel.
I heard of a woman who had an arrow that entered her belly; the wound was healed over her and remained inside her but there was no change to her disposition and she did not suffer from any misfortune caused by her own actions.
I heard of another man who had an arrow that entered his face; the wound was healed and remained there, not causing him much pain; these many are similar.
He extracted the arrow of a king from his middle nasal bone; it had already descended towards his right side and was concealed altogether.
Therefore, I called on his healing after the three days were over. But he did not die from the wound of the arrow.
I spoke to him with subtlety and he did not hear me; but the same man was experiencing pain and torment beneath his ear from the right side I pierced it (the arrow) at its extreme point
I drew it out (the arrow) from the bandage where its virtue was contained and digested; trusting that the place where it had been removed would be shown to me, so that I could remove it myself: but did not fall at a place indicating where the arrow had fallen.
I persevered with the bandage on him for many days; and did not fall at a place indicating where it had fallen; but was healed of its removal in the meantime: and remained weak from having been taken out of his space during those days, until he felt an arrow one day inside his nose. And told me that
And told me that I placed the acute bandage on it for many days; until one day was open up: and when I tried to lift him gently with both hands, I felt a subtle extreme point of his arrow hidden within the wood.
After that I put on the acute bandage in opening of the wound; until one day we saw it clearly with both eyes, and he left me with him for a time period of about four months.
After it had been enlarged and was possible for me to grip her with my fingers; and move her too, but she did not yield to being taken away: then I could no longer gently touch or try to lift her using the manner of children; until one day came when I grasped her forcefully with stronger tools, according to which form they had reached in the end of the chapter, until I took her away. After that I restored the wound.
And doctors say that cartilage of the nose is not restoreable. I therefore restored her and healed the wound and was healthy in health and whole again; no harm came to him at all.
And I told you the quality of extracting arrows some time ago, so that you put this rule and meaning above it which I did not say.
Although parts of this art and its distinctions are not comprehended with narration, nor is it comprehended by that book alone, but the wise craftsman compares them to little more than much; he compares what is present with what is absent, from which new operation arises, and a new instrument comes into play when they occur among things extraneous to this art.
Therefore I conclude that the arrows are not removed from the members in which they are fastened, except according to two ways. Or by an attraction from where it entered inside. Or on the contrary parts of another.
And that which is removed where it entered, or an arrow proceeding to a place of flesh; and it is pulled towards it, and it is removed.
What if it does not lead to the exit at a certain time when it falls; then you must wait until that same arrow has died for several days, lest the flesh around him putrefy and cause his death: And will cease attraction towards him, and his exit from there.
And similarly if the arrow is embedded into bone and does not lead you to the exit; then immediately remove that one as well for several days until this arrow with attraction and movement every day no longer stays there.
What if it does not lead you to the exit after a day; then you must remove from around him arrows of all parts with fine strokes skillfully until they become inflated. Then pull her out and remove her.
"If the arrow has already been extracted from its place within the body and is hidden or hidden away by touch; then examine her with your fingers. "If you feel it, then grasp it using certain instruments which are suitable for such an action of his.
"If you cannot reach over it due to the constriction of your limbs and the length of the arrow in depth; there is no mouth or vein nearby so that you can grasp her, but only skin: then find around her until she enlarges her limb which will make it possible to extract the arrow.
"If you have ears which are bound up, then release the fixed flesh from all parts and with every ability that you possess it, as intelligence if your limbs cannot reach over her to fracture her ear or twist them; until this occurs.
"And when you administer the extraction of an arrow wherever it is, then use the pressure of your hands with all parts; until this occurs: and finally in subtlety, so that she does not break apart, but there will be great difficulty for you to grasp her as well, and hers extraction.
"If you cannot reach over her from one side alone at first, then set her aside for several days until those around her are putrefied. "Then continue with her again; and let the tunic be loosened if she opposes you by a flow of blood, then administer what we mentioned from our chapter on care for the body: and take care to keep your strength intact from one incision or vein.
"And administer every ability that is suitable for grasping the arrow in any way; and it will be with ease and tranquility or delay and firmness as described to you.
"And there is the need that when you draw her back so she weakens according to the figure which was at the moment of arrow extraction; as it was before. "For it is more painful. If you are unable to do that yourself, then perform the task as shown in an illustration.
A light that is drawn from the contrary part of one another or has already proceeded by it to something external: or does it cause a stiffness in the extremities of the Archer through a feeling out of the higher part of the skin, and you see its excellence clearly defined: therefore it should be cut off with a line following the quantity that can reach it with hooks.
Then draw her out easily to come to an end.
If the Arrow is held on bone instead, then you should apply your hand according to its roundness until the Arrow is set into the bone and extends itself: after that draw her out.
And if not: then let her be released in a certain number of days; thereafter you will do the same to her until she is complete.
If the Archer's wood is within it, then pull her along with it.
However if the Archer's wood has been cut off and you are to administer its impulse - then introduce an appropriate tool so that its fullness may enter into her [i.e., fit] and then pull her along with it.
If the Archer is fitted, then pull her out with an appropriate tool inserted into her. The Archer is released through that.
If the Archer's wood has been poisoned then you must cut off all of its flesh that contains venom - if possible do this Then care for her with what matches it
If the Archer falls into the chest or the belly or the side or the thigh - and she touches by her tentacle what is near to it - then you can cut off above her if possible: after that let a hook take hold of her and draw her out.
And then apply your ointment, if you see fit, until she is healed.
This is the shape of a needle trap, which can be used for drawing arrows out
The extremities are like the blade of a knife; when they grasp onto an arrowhead, they do not let go
There are various kinds of needle traps with different sizes and shapes based on the length and breadth of the arrowhead; they adjust to the strength and flexibility required for gripping it tightly and releasing it quickly.
The shape of a snare which is used to catch or hold something, often in hunting or fishing.
The shape of a hook that can be inserted into an animal's mouth for capturing it, typically used in fishing and sometimes in hunting.
These extremities are like a curved arm, so that on inserting them into the arrow, they can be withdrawn and then used to pull it back towards themselves
On the subject of phlebotomy for veins.
The needles used for phlebotomy are thirty in number.
These needles are six decads long; two for the veins behind the ears (the auricular veins); and then another two veins from each of the eyes, which are called the aspicientiae or "tears" veins. And one more vein is found on the face between the eyes. There's also a vein at the end of the nose These needles have two guides for use with a guide-wire: one in the neck and another behind the ears. These needles are of two types, used in the upper lip of the mouth. These needles have two types that are used at the lower lip of the mouth. These needles are called "Algeric". These needles have two types used below the tongue.
The veins used for phlebotomy are five in number throughout both arms.
The brain is called the uppermost part of the skull and Cerebellum And the cerebellum (also known as the "middle brain") is made up of two parts - one from the base and another from the top part of the skull. And the cerebellum is placed at the back of the house (or base) and also called "titicollis" (meaning "little tail"). It is named as "the brain of the skull". The brain stem (also known as the "funis" or "funicle") is placed above the eye socket and is that part where blood is drawn from a vein; it is also called "the one below which you see when pressing on your finger".
The salutation (or "salute") is placed between the annuli (or rings) and at its lowest point; it has two parts, one above and one below.
It is present in the neck and foot each with three parts. The brain is below the finger, at its side (or base), from the top part of the skull. The second one is "sapeha" and its location is at the heel or ankle, coming out from the back side (or base). The third one is "nensee" and its location is at the ankle (or foot), also coming from the base side.
And in the neck there are three similar parts to those mentioned above.
About the drawing of blood from two veins after the ears.
About drawing blood from two veins behind the ears; it is customary to perform this task with an old-fashioned tool, a pair of tweezers and a lancet for cutting open the vein at its base or top, but always causing damage to the head's scalp in the process.
The quality of drawing blood from this source is according to how narrow it is. It is necessary that the head be held gently and the neck of the vein must be gently squeezed with a good cloth to prevent it from moving around while drawing blood. Then the veins will become visible as two pieces when the patient raises his arm and pulls back on the cloth holding them. In those ears are placed after the auricles in two depressions of the heads Seek therefore these ears with your finger and when you feel the pulse in them place a mark with ink
After that take hold of the phlebotomist's arm, and if he says 'Incidens' let him know. After that lead him down to a bed with arms outspread, so that the phlebotomist may approach you from below. After that take hold of your hand and place it upon his upper arm, and strike this with a stroke downward toward 'Incidens'. The length of the incision must be measured by the number of your fingers joined together, or around it, and remove from this as much blood as you wish.
After that stretch out with a pulley, and then let go, so that they might be released.
And there follows the opening of this book on ears, and their cautery
Of the two arteries that are in two times of phlebotomy and the old one, and the fast one, and the most frequent one, it is to the eyes' sharp flow and excess flow
The quality of phlebotomy for them is according to what you have spoken. If a man is greatly sick then he should stretch his neck very much, so that the two veins may be clearly visible to you and there will strike the pulse of them under your finger. Then signs with ink.
After that take hold of the upper arm with your finger and lead the phlebotomist downward toward 'Incidens', then take hold of him at the top. And strike with a stroke downward upon her as you did on two other veins, and let blood flow according to the amount of your need.
After that break open the obstruction for him, place your finger upon her one by one hour by hour. With a knot at its base and a loop at one end, tighten it with an extremely strong cord (or something like that). And then release the knot to make him/it stand on his/its own two feet.
Now let's remember what was said before and their incision as well as the extraction of the book at the beginning.
The bandage on the arm after venepuncture is to be applied once the cephalic vein has been punctured and before moving or lifting an arm; it should cover any bruises, scratches, or wounds that may have occurred during the procedure.
The quality of venepuncture is to be determined by how narrow you open your vein. The arm must be raised up off the bed until it appears one's head. Then take an instrument called a foal or an apice.
Take the instrument and place it at the top of the foal or apice (a small loop used for venepuncture) on your arm so that its sharp point is directed towards the cephalic vein you just punctured, either striking upwards through it directly with a pectine (a curved blade), or to one side in some other way. And then release it from the blood flowing out as much as possible according to the quantity of blood drawn. Then make a small incision near where you inserted the instrument, and tighten it so that your arm is supported in place.
And when venepuncture was made to one side. However it is not necessary that the venepuncture be at the extreme point of the arm, as with other venepunctures made on both sides, in this case we should aim for a point on the opposite side. The venepuncture will be made on that side of the arm which is closest to you, unless it would make the instrument too sharp when it's very soft and flexible, in that case move across a little further.
The bandage on the arm after venepuncture of both lachrymose veins is to be applied when you leave your eye and wipe away any bruises or scratches from that area, and then cover it with a bandage after covering the eye itself.
The quality of their phlebotomy is such that they raise (or pull) the sick man's head back with a stick Afterwards, the phlebotomist should place himself above his patient's head.
The phlebotomist must perform it downward and forward along the length of the stick, using a small quantity of phlebo [or perhaps phlem] on the end of the stick, so that he may not touch any part which is precious If the phlebotomist's stick is too thin, it will break.
After that, draw out from his blood according to necessity. And place him above them and pull them up once at night and release them.
Venous phlebotomy is a treatment for the fever and cold sweat that causes redness of the face, just as hemigration does [or perhaps, hemorrhage], especially when it is ancient [old].
The quality or effectiveness of their phlebotomy is such that they raise up the sick man's head with a stick. Afterwards, hold his nose with your left hand and take a thin stick of phlebo (or perhaps phlem). Press the end of it into the middle of his ribs where you distinguished his nose according to its line When one side does not show itself to him at that place because the blood starts flowing immediately.
And you should take it from his blood according to your necessity with a little phlebo on the end of the stick. And pull her up once at night and release her. It will be restored immediately.
The other kind of phlebotomy is a treatment for the itchiness and itching in leprosy, melancholy sadness, jaundice, ulcers caused by worms or snakes, and corrosion of flesh from bites.
The quality or effectiveness of their phlebotomy is such that they tie him up with a cord on both sides to his head and stay the artist above his head while he lies down under [his] belly.
After making an incision at the length of the phlebotomy, it is wide Afterwards extract from the blood a certain quantity, either according to what you desire or as necessary Afterwards make in the same way with another vein.
After that, tie a ligature on both sides of the middle third of the veins to prevent them from collapsing. And let go at the beginning of it. Clean out the wound.
The phlebotomy of veins by Albucasis The equipment for phlebotomy by Albucasis is this: one puts a piece of cloth into the mouth and cleans out the tongue, wipes away the blood clot, cleanses out ulcers, makes cuts on the veins, makes cuts on the ulcers as well those in the nose and around his face.
The quality of the phlebotomy for them is such that you should do no harm to a sick person in front of you; and tie his neck with a rope. Afterwards return to the mouth of him and look towards two veins; one is on his right hand, and the other on his left side; and demonstration by means of both sides through the darkness is done. It was like this: because there are small veins around them that are dark. Therefore, strike with one incision both sides.
If there is doubt on your part and you do not know what those are; then intend towards a greater incision for them, and their more evident ones.
And do the same with two veins that are on the upper lip; and it is a custom to run down as much of him, because he has them on the lower lip as well.
The phlebotomy after the cephalic veins in the throat. The equipment for the cephalic veins is this: one puts a piece of cloth under the tongue and cleanses out ulcers, cleans out phlegm from the throat, and cleans out the phlegm in the mouth.
The phlebotomy procedure must be such that the patient lies between your hands and looks at the sun. Also, place one vein in each hand under his tongue; then you should gently close his mouth so he cannot see them with his eyes while you hold a finger over each vein to prevent him from seeing or tasting them.
Phlebotomy, therefore both of you: and guard that your hand not be held back by the patient while performing it. There are arteries below him; so there is a chance that blood may flow from them into his veins if he moves suddenly.
The three veins that are used for phlebotomy, there being a custom among all men of using them.
And the phlebotomy procedure can be performed in two ways: The first way is by cutting through the vein with a phlebotomist's knife to its side; or by inserting it into the body of the patient and gently closing his mouth so that he cannot see what you are doing while holding one finger over each vein to prevent him from seeing or tasting them. This is how they do it.
The broad and narrow veins of these are as you see them: the procedure for phlebotomy is done with a broad one when there is room; but if not, then it's done with a narrow one like this, in order to make sure that he cannot see what you are doing while holding a finger over each vein. The procedure for phlebotomy was also established so that the veins which are open and visible may be used when they are convenient: large ones, those that contain blood in bulk; also those that are turbid or full of blood, according to their size and character.
The phlebotomist is smaller than the broad one in terms of its breadth and the sharpness of its point.
It was established so that the procedure for phlebotomy with a slender vein should be done when it is convenient: those that contain blood in a fine manner
The three major veins that are used for phlebotomy in the basilica are: "From the veins of the chest and neck it draws blood; by following this vein to the mouth; when reaching it, let him take hold of a phlebotomist with both hands so that he may suck from her/it as much as possible, for beneath it is hidden an artery. If there is a mistake and the phlebotomy was performed incorrectly, then he will hit/strike her artery and blood will flow. So that the phlebotomist may suck from her with both hands; for this purpose [i.e., to avoid hitting an artery], let him be near/beside/close by.
If the Basilica does not appear [i.e., if there is no external guide to follow], then at that moment he must seek another one and exchange/transfer her to someone else, or ask for a second assistant; whatever you do, be sure to leave one of his arms with him so that he may continue working on the vein (the left arm). This is clear and straightforward; let her be sucked from by/with the phlebotomist as we have said previously [i.e., with both hands].
If the phlebotomy is to be performed by/on this same assistant, then at that moment he must place his hand/arm in front of her so as to prevent/avoid hitting it; until you find a clear indication of where/when the pulse occurs [i.e., until you identify the point on her body where there is pulsation]. After placing his arm in front of her location/point [i.e., the point where pulsation occurs], then with the help of a marker and thread he will make an incision along that line to remove any necessary sections or cuts as we have previously mentioned with the phlebotomist Alnesil, as I said before. And be careful not to hit the artery by mistake/accidentally.
When you have seen it [i.e., when you identify the point], with the help of the thread and marker you will inflate that area; if she has pulsation this indicates/means/shows that there is an artery present, so remove her at once/immediately/right away.
If you see blood rise from the phlebotomy incision just as a child's urine does when it is full of water and the urine is sweet [i.e., if there are no complications], then you know that there is an artery present/presented at this point. Then press with your finger on it for a long time, and then lift off your finger If the blood is detached at that moment then tie off the arm with it and let it go down; and he who moves him will fall under his power.
And do not move him for a certain number of days until he is cured.
But if the blood does not detach at that moment then you should strike him; and there is no present medicine to you now so as soon as an artery appears to you then cut it. His extremities will be detached and the blood will detach
Or if you take the fist bone and find him, or if a vein is found then take one meal-strip tie it over the fresh wound with good cordage, so that another day may be needed for its removal.
When the blood has detached itself, this is good news. And if not, then he should be cured with the memory of what preceded his detachment from blood vessels, and lifting off the blood itself is not difficult at multiple places due to a small opening in the veins, and the possibility that a cordage can be made out of an arm.
The treatment of new veins is as follows; the blood is drawn from the upper part of the head and lower body through it because it has been made out of the branch of the basilica and cephalic trunk just like I said earlier.
And when removing him so that he is above his power from the vein because under there lies a nerve If he adds to this injury that the vein is injured and the nerve was hit so it falls into a stupor and its treatment becomes difficult and perhaps not curable.
This nerve appears frequently to someone. Or if the nerve is hidden in some people and it is subtle and not visible; then you should put down your phlebotomy with that phlebotomy when they are cut off with the sickle and lifted up with your strength.
When one nerve is between two nerves, then it will find a name along its length
The tenth book on surgery The artery of the front part is connected to one that descends from the head.
If you want to do so, if you press the artery with a phlebotomist and the one descending from the head or with a myrtle phlebotomist: because it is more salutary than all others, since it is not a vein nor a nerve.
However it was necessary for you at a phlebotomist so that you could press only the head's artery gently and find its place more easily: and if not, then you must strike it with force once, and then proceed to hit it multiple times with a phlebotomist or myrtle.
But for some people, when they do not strike it with force initially but not cause harm to it anyhow.
The utility of phlebotomy and the caution in its observance. Quality of phlebotomy and its accidents due to it, with which you should reflect on its correction.
First of all it is necessary to know that phlebotomy should not be done unless for the sake of health and with care so as to prevent damage from occurring.
So that you may phlebotomize one vein out of three veins such as the front part and side and back part. So that you may phlebotomize at first upon fasting and upon drinking water, then after eating as well, when the signs of repletion become visible.
So that you may phlebotomize on the first day or third day when three hours have passed since the previous phlebotomy.
The phlebotomy that is done on veins does not have a determined time interval but when it is convenient and necessary to do so, in the night or day, and at all hours, and during all times.
Do not let children be phlebotomized before they have reached 14 years of age A woman should not be phlebotomized unless she has been pregnant for at least four weeks up to seven months Do not let the elderly who have passed 60 years of age undergo phlebotomy
Only if someone is experiencing a severe deficiency should they undergo phlebotomy to get rid of excess blood, and in case this occurs within the bowels (intestines), it will prevent putrid substances from escaping through the main veins into the body's organs, so that they do not come into contact with them.
Do not let a patient be phlebotomized until they are full of hunger and have ceased vomiting; neither should he drink water excessively until the condition is removed from them. Do not let one who is ill with fever undergo phlebotomy.
Do not let phlebotomy be repeated after passion/love, and a person's death, and excessive drinking of wine, and multiplication by intercourse, and labor, and exercise, and fasting, and the abuse of food and drink, and all that has been dissolved out of their power from the body whether human or animal.
Next consider in subtlety the qualities and humors before that; if the blood is thick with your food and drink or medicines; if it may be possible for him to have phlebotomy done.
Then enter the bath (water), unless something is forbidden or some exercise must be applied so that blood may become thin again.
And let phlebotomy be applied to his heart three days later as we said, and he will purge the pectus from all accidents of animals in that day; so that distress, rage, fear will come away: and from all accidents of bodies, so that labor, punishment, excess, and like things shall come away.
And let his servant do what is customarily done by men from things which are used with the use of aromatics and odors and with the noise and similar things according to amount possibility.
In such a position must be the phlebotomist higher than that of the vessel to be phlebotomized; then he extracts his own arm and flexes it with both hands alternately, or in any other way After tightening the ligature, he releases it twice.
If the ligature is not of equal tightness, either it will be removed due to excess or because of its inequality; otherwise it may prevent blood flow either by relaxation (mollification) or because of its tension (stricture).
After ligature removal, the phlebotomist must simultaneously flex his hand to the vessel and apply a tourniquet; then he releases it and announces its pressure on the patient's wrist.
After releasing the ligature with little oil or in any other way, the phlebotomist is done.
After placing his index finger on the hand of the patient in the place where phlebotomy is to be performed (on the wrist), he applies a tourniquet lightly so as not to cause any pain and may not strike percussion; he does this gently Because the tourniquet is tight when tightened against the patient's hand as with a stretched chord (a tourniquet too tight), it remains full of tension; and when it is placed over her/his arm, it tightens further under the phlebotomist, and the phlebotomist must tighten his arm to release it. If released by the phlebotomist, she/he is restricted: therefore if loosened, let him relax all his muscles.
After removing tourniquet If one of the vessels is released from tension because it has been fully relaxed (the patient is not unconscious or dead), then it's good. And if the other vessel remains tense nearby (or above) because of its position or friction with the ligature; then it must be loosened more in that place
If released (or loosens) the ligature to release him from death or disability then he releases that vessel on one day; for two days if the first vessel is also released (and not tightened). Fortasse indeed receives hot blood It does not receive cold water.
Then it will receive a drawing of the veins if it wants to.
If the opening is small and only allows blood to flow gently, or if the veins are thin; then a further drawing of the veins into this place according to proper procedure will be made as an addition during the surgery itself.
And perform this with a finger first before sealing off the opening, for the seal is not secure on many people after surgery.
If you want to seal this up already, then do not repeat it all over again; for otherwise there is nothing else that can be done on you. And place something above it from olive oil so that the blood course may continue to flow. It is better here than oil alone and with any other oil left over.
And similarly administer olive oil to your veins throughout all your operations wherever the flow of blood is prohibited; and they will do this with their fingers as an addition when it is placed above that place
The blood becomes thin and resolved after being thick.
If a drawing of the veins is made large into that opening where blood has been lost, for many times this occurs especially to those who are not phlebotomized unless they had a very small opening; or if it is an extremely small opening then immediately place and bind a sponge soaked in water and salt around it: and you will do so after the hour when done.
And it should be so that you make this afterward by yourself with your own complement or from another person.
If there is something left over in that place after the days have passed or a night has come, it does not harm to do this; and if you are able, then place above it something like olive oil or Myrrh from those who sell them: or put something made of honey water which is either scented with scents similar to theirs.
"Many a time it happens that a vein is cut off and a notable person dies at the Phlebotomy of the Basilica.
"As for your hand upon this spot, if you fail to apply gentle pressure over it during the compression on top of it, that is when she becomes the bad omen. "Therefore, as soon as you place something from what we have said upon her. "For the blood may flow out of this vein
"But you must keep your grip on it while there is a stiffness. "Then take care of him with the remaining treatment, until he recovers.
"And you must remove from every man as much blood according to his own strength. "And what shows through a reddish color on the veins.
"If the blood is black, then you let it run out and until he becomes pale; similarly if you see a thick one in front of him, then you remove him until his color returns to its normal state; similarly if you see a thin one.
"You must do this to him who is full and strong, so that the bloodletting may be done once over it, increasing one's strength of veins; and for him who is weak, the opposite.
"And you must remove him from the hands and so make the opening narrow; better it is that treatment done for one bloodletting than to make a cut.
"The way of bloodletting is safe with the flow of blood and from cutting; it's better than doing one for a long distance and width.
"And to one who was cut off by bloodletting suddenly, you must apply a small amount of warm food soaked in water before the bloodletting and if it's heated, remove his blood from the hands four times.
"And if his complexion is injured, he should apply before the bloodletting a food soaked with my syrup or with a mixture of spices.
"If the vein is struck by a snare and death results from excessive blood loss, then it is necessary to insert water into the body through veins while applying a sweet-smelling syrup; furthermore, the application should be accompanied with aromatics such as those mentioned in this chapter on syncope.
"Whoever strikes their own arm with a snare and blood loss occurs because of the removal [of blood], it is necessary for them whose phlebotomy has been weak due to excessive withdrawal; their strength must be restored so that they can bleed more slowly over time.
"Whoever strikes their own arm with a snare and blood loss occurs because of the removal [of blood], it is necessary for them whose body has been strong; then they should make an appointment to have their phlebotomy done again after seven hours or within one day.
"Whoever pulls blood from their own body to the opposite side so that it falls down; then they should have this done again within two or three days.
"For those whose body is already heated and has become acut [i.e., feverish], and they have caused this to happen; it is necessary for you to extract the blood from them quickly, in one go, so that their opening can be reopened: as long as all conditions of phlebotomy are observed by you; and then put your hand over his chest while he is at rest, so that death does not occur due to syncope. "Indeed, it happened many times when the phlebotomist was ignorant and negligent.
"It is not necessary when you are removing the arm and bleeding blood for a second time while there is already an opening in one vein; it can become difficult to extract blood, so that he has to struggle with excessive strength. "This is a bad thing for the phlebotomist who did not do this properly; let him be released from it when another phlebotomist does it.
"Or remove with the aid of phlebotomy that which has formed from blood within one vein's opening; and then place something salty dissolved in water on top. "Put something from a tyriac onto it or a sageneum and then press down on it with pressure to make blood flow out.
"The seal is ready now; please release (it) and do not hold on tightly, until it is released completely.
"If a need arises to remove blood from the second location and it is not allowed due to some exception, then either use a phlebotomy on that same place or move your hand with another arm.
"In such cases the arm used for phlebotomy would be the one of the veins (Fuscae) and the basilica (Basilica), since they are closed off due to being composed out of them.
"The quality or effect of phlebotomy is as follows: the patient inserts his hand into a warm water until it feels cold and shows visible evidence.
"Afterwards, tie on that with medium tightness of the bandage only. "After that, apply the phlebotomy from the same place gradually and not longitudinally or transversely; make a wide opening and let your phlebotomy be above the band with more than medium tightness.
"If the exit of blood is prohibited, then repeat this action by placing your hand into warm water and releasing the flow of blood into water until you have fulfilled a necessity.
"If you are exhausted due to the weather or other factors, please release your hand from the warm water. "Finally, after doing this for a long time into the warm water, it may be wise to put the course of blood back into cold water gradually.
"The phlebotomy of this one is more beneficial to all veins compared to any other, since it is not weak in pressure and does not collapse.
"Phlebotomy by the left hand of Salamella would be applied with the aim to treat internal hemorrhoids.
"The quality of this phlebotomy is as follows: tie it with a bandage or your own hand after you insert it into warm water until it becomes cold and visible. After removing blood vessels from that area If the whole vessel is completely removed, it will not die to some extent
Hold on with your hand while removing the blood vessels. Do not cut off the fingers of the hand when removing flesh along with it.
Repeat this process for each subsequent finger and release its blood into that area If you do not repeat the process with another artery heated to a warm temperature, then the blood will clot inside and be prohibited from flowing.
After removing an adequate amount of blood with all necessary effort, then place it over a fire or frying pan to prevent coagulation.
And similarly you should do this with every branch tightly closed.
The hand of the patient should be held with the left hand; this is because it is being connected to spleen pains and similarly you should do it for him as you did in the second case.
The hand of the patient should be held with the left hand; this is because it is connected to spleen pains and similarly you should do for him as you did in the second case, and retention of menstrual periods, weakness of kidneys, ulcers on the thighs, old wounds and sores on the buttocks, and similar ailments from the diseases.
The quality of the phlebotomy should be such that a weak patient puts his foot into warm water and makes it to strike above him with friction until he faints; then lift up the leg holding the correction with both hands. The veins at the foot appear above the heel and will give rise to multiple veins in the face of the leg.
Therefore, remove it from a larger vein or under his heel if possible; this is better and more effective.
If removing it from the veins of the leg is not possible, then cut through them beneath his face to reach him.
Hold on with your hand as you remove the phlebotomy from above, just like when you aim to cut it; this is a phlebotomy of Nesil.
If blood loss is prohibited then follow this procedure for taking a blood vessel and withdrawing the blood from that vessel until he has lost enough
If the phlebotomist encounters an upper vein and does not find any obstruction in it, then he should proceed to the next one that is higher up
Similarly with both feet
The sciatic vein is located at the back of the heel.
The tool for withdrawing blood from this vein should be applied to the ankle when it's due to a cold or frozen blood.
The quality of the phlebotomist is important so that it can be used by an injured person and it will work well. It should hold the foot from ankle to above the calcaneum with four fingers using a long thin tool, otherwise nothing appears when needed.
When this appears then the phlebotomist should use it according to your best knowledge or by incision and removal of the tool if necessary, whichever is better for you. This vein is superior in many people but hidden from sight in others.
This vein is superior in many people but hidden from sight in others. If you cannot see the vein and it does not appear on all sides of your foot then the phlebotomist should choose someone else who can find the vein in the back of their foot for use and draw out an amount of blood that is necessary.
Then apply a stricture over the location where you placed it on top of the vein to hold it in place. It will heal itself
The use and quality of this tool
Blood will flow from veins and arteries and veins
Venous or arterial bleeding. Bleeding can be controlled with both incision and extraction of blood, or without cutting the vein but removing it.
The operation that is performed without incision has two ways of doing it Or else Or else, without fire
And the operations that are performed with incision and extraction of blood have 12 locations in the body. The first one is the operation of the nape of the neck after shaving it off; and Alkehel means the middle ear which is done with an instrument used to remove wax from ears, and Alhagdahim refers to the removal of a tooth in the lower jaw by using instruments on both sides at once.
It also does not remove blood from you with tiny cuts into the flesh due to that reason your strength was lost as it is a case of phlebotomy. It is not necessary to perform the operation with fire or without fire if any part of it will occur from using force due to that reason it must be applied throughout the body completely.
If the need arises for performing the operation due to force or custom we apply it at all times from the beginning of a month until its end and also through any other time period.
It is because with humans there are those who when they multiply the blood within him it must be extracted from them through that operation and it injures to his head.
And among these there are those who have hurt the face, head, and neck due to excess wax build-up. And among these there are those who have had itching on their face, forehead, and darkness and greyness in their eyes.
And among them there are those whose spot for that operation is injured. Among these there are those who have had a lot of swelling occur. And among them there are those who have had excessive taste for blood in their mouth; or the tongue is damaged and it loses the blood. That which increases sleep. And that which causes blood and mucus to flow through one's sleep, cuts, bruises, and wounds, similar to what is mentioned earlier
Therefore when we wish to obtain something from them, the proper time is after two hours or three of wakefulness (i.e., during the third hour of wakefulness).
The ointment for Venasation (a procedure to cure headaches) is this: because it is applied to the head and brings relief to the eyes. And so it should be used after the complete evacuation of the body.
And this is the ointment for the head vein (a procedure to cure headaches).
Do not use it if you have a cold or a dry complexion. It will cause great harm to him/her.
Do not use it if the patient has a cold or dry skin on their head.
If someone is very diligent in using this ointment, they will be covered with a rash all over their body.
And so it is important to use this ointment carefully when performing Venasation (a procedure for curing headaches) in order not to injure the hand while applying more vigorously towards the bottom of the face out of fear of an allergic rash (urticaria).
Venasation or Alkehel is the ointment for curing the veins in the head (a procedure to cure headaches), and the veins on the back of the hand; it also helps with constriction, the desire for cutting (the desire to cut something off) and the need for tools.
It is important that the ointment of Alkehel be applied more vigorously when placed lower down towards the heart and stomach.
The procedure to cure headaches (Venasation) can cause pain and accidents on the head, as well as paralysis of the limbs, perforation injuries at the roots of the teeth, and it is an ointment for curing veins on the back of the hand.
"It is necessary that you do not touch the hand with a cut when performing surgery, in order to avoid damaging the artery and causing blood flow to stop.
"The blow to the mouth should be given by a hook instead of a knife; and also when giving any other injury or cut on the tongue, it is necessary to give another place for blood-sucking insects that are in the mouth.
"The blow to the eye should be given by a hook instead of a knife; and also when causing any injury or cut on the eyelid.
"The blow to the inside of three nostrils should be given by a hook instead of a knife; and also when causing any injury or cut in the ears.
"It is necessary that you do not cause much damage to the cut; because the location has been stripped of flesh and there are veins and arteries underneath.
"The blow that is given above the anus should be aimed at hemorrhoids and ulcers below; or it may be aimed at the skin around an anal tear.
"It is necessary that you give a strong blow instead of the mild one; and it must be aimed at air because the location requires great force to remove the delicate blows; or the cut may have been large.
"The blow to the head should be given by a hook instead of a knife; and also when causing any injury or cut on the ears.
"However, they may cause great harm to the body, and make it fall down many times in different people.
The blow given by a hook is close to the blow given by two hooks for cutting; as well as when giving any injury or cut on the ears.
The quality of the blow is such that you should strike first with a quick blow and use an intermediate blow to remove any remaining resistance; do not prolong the position or keep them there too long so as to make all hearts rush towards their location equally: do not repeat the blows, but strike quickly once or twice. Therefore consider the body's arrangement
The tender and fleshy parts of a man must be offered to sacrifices frequently, but not too often; otherwise the place (of sacrifice) will not remain whole.
And make use of the Ventosator to intensify cutting and to deepen it somewhat; so that he will control the flow of blood with a gentle touch, making him easy to apply and remove from any location.
If there is too much blood, then sacrifices must be offered twice. At first the delicate art of bleeding is revealed to him; and secondarily he learns about extracting the purest blood from a great vein.
If only the foul-tasting blood is present, then sacrifices must be offered once more; so that it will finally end.
And at last when we want to extract blood as quickly or even faster than usual, one sacrifice is sufficient for us. If we wish to perform many extractions of blood with sacrifices, then let the sacrifices be made more often.
And if we wish to measure the quantity of blood by sacrificing deeply; and then reach an equal end in sacrifice as well with the depth of cutting, it will be sufficient.
What is to be done with those oils that must be applied near the position of the Ventosators, and what will they accomplish?
For a man whose skin is thick and tough with many pores that are strict; it must be given oils in abundance to the Ventosators with gentle application, soft, quick removal so that they will soften the places of the sacrifice as if using oil for anointing or anointment (oil of the head), or for applying sweetness from the amydala or seeds of cucumber.
If it is in a time of death; then use oil of Narcissus or Lily, or Camomile, or Sarbatim (a mixture used for anointment). And they are similar to those oils mentioned above.
If there is too much thick blood; then use oil of the Bitter Almonds or Balsamum or Alben (a mixture used for anointment). And they are similar to those oils mentioned above.
"The veins should be opened with the aid of large forceps, for delicate flesh: when this is done, it must be forbidden to use oil; and it must be that they may pass through the veins after the application of heated or cold water, or warm wine, or cold cucumber water, or portulacae water. And similarly there.
"Whoever whose blood is very wet may open the veins with vinegar or water of myrtle; and so there.
"Whoever has excessive quantities in their veins may open them with old wine or water of myrtle, or with the decoction of aniseed, or with the flowers of chamomile; and to them similarly.
"It is necessary that the opening of veins take place in a bath or by a bathing tub; and when it has been done after leaving the bath for one hour, or two hours.
"And it must not be that someone falls asleep after the veins are opened.
"What is needed to regulate Venous and Phlebo-matus before opening?
"After that it is necessary to consider first of all: if Venous or Phlebo-matus becomes choleric and pain arises in his veins; then he must be given a cold remedy as quicklime: and also with vinegar and lettuce, and secaiabin, and iuleb. And similarly there.
"And put food in his veins; let him eat his fill of it; and give him cooked foods with vinegar; and similarly.
"And whoever's complexion is cold it must drink syrups from acacia or almond; or else from the seeds of secaiabin; and he may drink fragrant wine that has been mixed with vinegar; and he should be given little food. "And put food in his veins; and let him eat fish; and you will be wise, namely by eating a small amount of bread; and the bread of doves is also good.
"The doctor must know how to make a vein of the same diameter as his finger and also how to tie it securely in order that nourishment may be taken from it, both for veins (venae) and arteries (arteriae). Furthermore, the physician should ensure that there is enough space within some men in order to perform surgery on their thighs with a knife. In other words, they must make an incision before taking nourishment or blood, either at the beginning of the operation or after; so as to relieve pain and alleviate discomfort. "It is not recommended that he apply heat to it.
"Without incising (cutting). "Furthermore, those veins which are placed on the ear or any other part of the head, they do not need incision (cutting) because their skin is very thin and they can be tied directly.
"It should not be sought through them unless there is a direct connection between the vein and the member of the body, such as tying the veins around the nipple during breast feeding. "We should tie them so that cold nourishment is poured into the member through it. "This would cause the body to relax and be freed of pain because it had been relieved from nourishment.
"When a stone is found within them, they are placed over one kidney or the other (left or right). "The attraction of his finger would open an incision and remove a stone from its place.
"And similarly when they are placed on the ear or elsewhere, he ties them to drain nourishment into each of these two places.
"These veins only receive water with very little cutting made in their surface. "And sometimes they are given with fire (scald).
"And sometimes they are given with full hot water into the ears to ease pain and swelling.
Formose venosi administrationis cum igni.
Insert the bone through its opening with two fingers of its thumb and forefinger, as we have shown; then place it so that one end is at the lower side near the middle of the windpipe, the other in the upper part by inserting it into the windpipe: and let it be held in the middle where air enters and leaves.
And now we have made it large enough to be larger than what we had before; and only slightly smaller from the points of view of age and health: as is used in its position.
Its use for children, however, differs from that of adults; it is smaller and thinner than the one used by men or those with large bodies.
The quality of applying it when heated over the body is as follows: it can be set ablaze with a flame from linen; or by using a small candle placed in front of it so that one end is below and the other above, to ensure that only the inferior part of it burns without burning through the body.
Then place it on the body; put your finger into its opening until you have hold of the formose, at that point take your finger out and let it fall back through the opening quickly so that there is no delay in breathing.
Then light up its flame according to its own way; and again do this whenever necessary.
The formose used for washing with water is not to be held across the windpipe; it should not be administered unless filled with water and placed on the body as needed.
This is how we have shown its use.
Its size has increased more than before, so it can hold a great deal of water and is better for washing.
On the suspension of bloodsugars
The veins of more than one member are not opened unless there is a possibility for the position of the vocal chords within them, because of their harmony and pleasantness, as in the tongue, gums, and similarly to those. The veins of a member exposed to skin are not opened unless there is a possibility for the position of the nose within them, as with the finger and nasal cavity, similarly to those.
The quality of the veins for these is that they are easily extracted from the veins containing sweetness and not putrefaction.
They must be taken out during the day and night into sweet water until they are completely dried up, so that nothing remains within them. After this, the body is first evacuated by phlebotomy, as well as by bleeding. After this, the member must be cut off until it is completely free from all pus and blood. Afterwards they are placed on top of that.
Afterwards they are inserted and fall off and the possibility of sucking at this point is with the flow of air, then it's even more ultimate with vomiting if not, then go to the place with vinegar. After that with much water, he strains and presses out (the veins).
If the course of blood after the removal of veins is prolonged and remains there, then he introduces a cold pan into water and places it on top, until the residual drops out.
If the blood is multiplied, then he compresses it with vinegar or wine and similar things from the vessels until all the blood has been extracted.
Alternatively, they are placed on a cloth of medium thickness and are removed until the fabric adheres to the place because blood is being extracted.
It should be when necessary there is repetition of phlebotomy, that it may change them.
If veins are prohibited by suspension, then the place with recent blood must be removed. Alternatively they may remain until something comes out of the blood from that location. When they feel something from blood, immediately they remove it
When you want to die (i.e., when it is time for death), the pulse is taken from above and something from a wound, or saltpeter, or pitch, is applied; they quickly fall down.
This chapter is very useful for the study of Medicine and contains restoration of fractures as well as dealing with dislocations caused by accidents in bones.
Hear you children, because many physicians and surgeons learn from this chapter; and those who have never read any other book on the subject will not understand it.
And for that reason (that it contains useful information) this method is well known to the physicians and surgeons in our land I too have never learned from it anything good and I am not adept at all of what is said in this chapter; but when I took a long time to read the books on that subject, and studied more than my knowledge was worth, then I acquired some knowledge about it from those books.
Then I used experiment and study during my youth.
And I have described to you everything that my knowledge contained in this chapter; and beyond what experimentation was more than sufficient for me, when I showed it to you after reading it out loud, and gave it away from my occupation of reading books, and shortened the time to read fine points, and explained how forms were used by instruments as much as there are here above mentioned; so that in this chapter I formed many figures from the forms which are used in that field, considering declination added.
On the second head
In the second head, let us begin with an introduction to this chapter and its summaries, followed by the chapters whose intelligence is first in importance for our surgeon: namely those who are already proficient or will learn from it at your place
When someone experiences a fracture or dislocation or torsion or any other such ailment, the surgeon must first seek to extract blood from them through phlebotomy; and if necessary also administer a purge or emetic as appropriate: unless something is prohibited by weakness of will power, so that it may be one who has caused harm to another person in childhood or old age, or due to great heat or extreme cold.
Afterward he may be fed with cold water and drinks of ice and oil; and prohibited from drinking wine and fat meats and filling his stomach with anything that fills the veins with blood. After you have become secure from the cold of another person and do not experience any leakage to your member; then the weak one will return first to his own regimen that he is accustomed to, in order to be cured
When therefore the mouth is restored, then it should be fed with food and drink, in which there are impurities that come from cooked tripe and broth and head and feet; and wine and other such things as well: and heavy wine and similar ones. With this regimen comes the coagulation of the fracture or dislocation, which is better
And you know that if the bones are broken when they are in young men or old age and decrepit; it is not possible to continue as we wish for them according to their nature always, because of the exhaustion of their members; so they will be consolidated and continued which from those are at rest lenity.
Nevertheless, nature has placed something of this sort over the mouth that is broken from all sides and filled with thickness to which it adheres and tightens itself until they are returned together; and they are tied together in the end of strength and firmness as was mentioned before unless there is not prohibited by its own actions: and because of this cause, we must place food for them according to their weakness that has been described.
"Know that the species of fractures are diverse, according to the diversity of members; because a fracture of the thigh is different from a fracture of the skull; and a fracture of the chest bone is different from a fracture of the arm; similarly every member has its own kind of fracture except for the bones joined together in one part. And I am coming with an explanation of all kinds of fractures, set out in his chapter separately. "And there are also different species of fractures within each bone itself.
Because a curved fracture occurs without the stars falling out of it. And sometimes there is a fracture along the length of its bones; and there are fractures with hooks or spurs, namely stars and additions coming out as if from a hook, so that they can be written down by being scraped away while it is being drawn toward writing. And not coming out; and there is a fracture with a nail and disruption of the head; and there is a fracture through a hole.
And for every species, one own tool or means of restoration is needed according to what the recollection does not explain clearly enough, set out separately in its places.
And from the one through which a fracture of bones is known, there is its twisting and brilliance; and appearance to him, and sound when he is compressed by your hand.
When therefore there is no apparent twisting in the place; and there is not a sound when you touch it with your hands and agitation; nor does it cause great pain, then there was no fracture at all possible, either tortuousness or short cut through: therefore do not press on to him completely by hand and compression, but put some medical remedy over him from which the recollection did agree upon the place; thereafter a subtle restriction should be drawn.
"You know that when it curves and is divided into two pieces, apart from the hooks falling out of it; however all its parts are released one by one: then you should be to start with your hand at the time of his correction before he strikes him a cold hook.
If a patient's fever reaches a critical point, then immediately remove him from any heat or warm substance and allow him to rest until the fever subsides. Gradually reduce his temperature through gentle application of ice packs and intelligence (?), making it equal with whatever means possible.
And you should know that the restoration of him and his balance is easier than breaking those bones.
Then gently remove any heat or warm substances from him until he remembers your instructions.
If the bones are broken, then there is a necessity to extend this member through two parts if he has hands or feet; if the member is a leg and it's not available with his hands or both legs are not available, then you need to use both ropes or one rope with your hand.
And you should place the member on a level spot with your natural shape as long as the parts of broken members are extended; then you will have to apply them in different ways depending on where they can be applied and based on how strong or weak that location is: keep it simple, use one bone from both hands if necessary.
And at that moment you should stretch and pull him with your hand. If something else is necessary to do there, correct it and make it equal through the amount of your strength.
And use gentle stretching along with strong compression as many others do for their patients. And many people carry out the lowering of his temperature with your own heat treatment or through compression on a member; as we see that from their actions and methods.
Then fasten him after the balance is reached, and decrease the motion of his member, and tighten it up, and keep him calm and relaxed; but do not let a sick man go on top of him. And do this gently so that he does not move around in your hour of relaxation or when trying to sleep and doing your relaxation exercises; but make him rest quietly and remain relaxed until the last moment of his strength. "And let it be in such a position as follows: pain is not to follow. What this means is that when the pain occurs from a certain position of members, or injury, then it should be changed to another position which does not feel the pain.
And let him have his position back with equal force, straight; so that he does not run into the twisting of limbs when it is restored.
The quality of a member broken in many ways has been described.
Indeed, the limbs broken at different times and their magnitude and form are different.
Therefore, from those it is similar to a limb and finger and the like, then there should be the connection of soft clothes or thin material. However, from those it is similar to a thigh and leg, then there should be the connection large, strong.
Because of a long ligament connecting a big member and tightening it from all sides to an equal extent so that it does not tear the member.
Afterwards place the liniment on your evacuation from equal parts so that it is above the location of the fracture itself. Afterwards you start to pull the ligament above the location of the fracture with three or four pulls depending on what is needed for the member; and tighten your hand more strongly than before by using the ligament.
Afterwards you go to the top of the location from where the fracture occurred and tighten less than before because the place of the broken limb is still tense after the pull. Afterwards you go to the top of the location from where the fracture occurred even stronger and soften the tight rope gradually until the big thing outside the place is free again.
Afterwards you take another rope with more strength and start pulling it over the location of the fracture once more. Afterwards, go to the lower portion from where the fracture occurred. Translation of this Latin text is "Your operation should be performed on a incision above the first one and with alleviation.
Next, place the incision between the two incisions (if possible) or with some soft material to equalize the fracture's tortuosity if it is present; otherwise do not place anything inside of it.
Then make another incision above this one. After making both incisions equal in length and breadth immediately proceed to the second step if there is no inflation at the location otherwise do not apply any heat.
If there is inflation at that location or an abscess then place something above it to alleviate the inflation; and after applying heat remove the object within a few days Then make another incision above this one.
And the incision above should be longer than both of the previous incisions and shall have a similar shape as well.
However it is necessary that the incision above placed over this incision should be larger and broader than both of the previous incisions; also its length should correspond to its size as determined by the member's dimensions and proportion.
Then make another incision above both of them according to the first one. And make sure that your incision above is over the fracture location more; and as much as the fracture length becomes elongated its incision shall become longer while the smaller incision will become shorter
And it should be that there are three incisions: a short one, an intermediate one and a long one; all of them made with soft material.
Since if the incisions are large as can be seen in operations of the hard ones placed with cord and straight lines there is a great mistake because the incision goes beyond quality.
The incisions should not come together again since you will not be able to reach through the incision with what you have.
It is not permitted for a finger to be between two stars that are closer together than it is with another star.
If a finger is injured by the sides of two stars that are closer together than permitted by law (i.e., when two stars appear to be closer together because of the angle at which they are viewed), then it must have been caused either from grasping them with too much force, or from touching something sharp and woolly; otherwise nothing will happen as a result.
When there is a break caused by violence and the disruption of its hold, I will immediately repair it according to his special requirements (i.e., fashioning a splint for him).
It is understood that no broken part must be held together with a star on the first day. For when a part is very large, it should not be held together with the stars above itself unless at least five days have passed, or seven, or more (i.e., as many days as necessary to cool off the fire of your enthusiasm), according to my security guidelines.
And this is how splints are made and used by those who restore fractures and dislocations.
The common mode of using splints is to bind them in several layers with bandages and especially for women (because it does not cause overheating) or children, so that they do not cause either heat or cold.
It is also done by binding them with the bristles of a broom and attaching a small feather to each corner so that they can be easily moved around; and bind them as tightly as necessary (except for holding their ends together securely), avoiding excessive tightness or looseness in both cases, lest the splint itself should not be too loose nor too tight. In conclusion
Another way of using splints is to restore fractures and dislocations as well as twists (torsions). Use aloe, and laurel, and ivy, and mugwort; and as well incense of myrrh (myron), aloes of both kinds (V), and aloes of two different kinds or varieties (XX); they should all be mixed with water to cool them off if overheating occurs when being held together, either with bandages or with the bristles of a broom. "Then use this bandage. It is beneficial for good compositions and restores broken bones or wounds; it soothes many people (plural).
Another bandage that also helps fractures and torsion. Prepare the mixture of honey and water; they are beneficial for various ailments such as itching (V), burns (VI); they soothe and calm many people with their cool refreshing touch. They also help to treat wounds or sores and administer them separately when indicated.
Method for using the bandage to treat fractures in addition to bone injuries; it also soothes the pain of accidents on the bones and cuts. The wool is soaked in vinegar and olive oil mixture then applied to the place.
In this method of using the bandage there is no restoration of strength; however it is beneficial for soothing and cooling pains to eliminate them (the pain) directly.
Method for healing broken bones. Cut the wool from sheep and goat; mix it thoroughly to make a bandage of good quality for everyone.
Method for making a quick bandage suitable for fixing fractures in bones; it should be applied when there is still some pain remaining from the accident. Prepare a mixture of elderflower, chamomile, and laurel berries; it is beneficial for all to relieve various ailments (plural); they soothe people with its warmth when there is no heated membrane.
If a heated membrane is present then apply it with a mixture of damp vinegar and water or just with water; use that (the heated membrane) separately.
Another method for healing fractures is when the injury to the member is severe and painful; it is more effective than the previous one. Prepare a mixture of elderflower, linseed, balm of Gilead, mallow, sumac, and laurel berries; it is beneficial for all to relieve various ailments (plural); they soothe people with salty or sweet water depending on the severity of the ailment. All of this according to its temperature and a calm heat
Hippocrates did not say this in his book, that a fractured bone should be set back together with fire only from the wood and oil; instead he said it must also include calculation of both size and subtlety.
Galeno agrees that when a fractured bone is set back together for restoration of its owner, there should be included the cooling effect of myrrh and aloes as well as other similar substances we have mentioned.
A method to relieve pain and injury. Recipe with rue and cicer (a type of celery), as well as the hair of man's incisors or eyelashes, along with salt; they would be crushed, boiled together, and then a plaster made from this mixture applied to the wound.
The quantity should be according to how long the bandage will last; then it is soaked in something warm (like wine), after which it must be applied to relieve pain and itching, but not allow saliva or blood from the mouth to come out of its own place; thus it could not have been used repeatedly on many days. If the itching or pain worsens, then quickly apply it immediately after washing off the old one; and take a fresh one when needed, soaked in hot water to soothe the itchiness as well as relieve the pain.
If the itching or pain worsens, then quickly apply it immediately after washing off the old one; and take a fresh one when needed, soaked in hot water to soothe the itchiness as well as relieve the pain. After that allow the member to rest for an hour. After that apply a mixture of lanolin and oil (or olive oil) to it at night; cover it with a cloth soaked in vinegar and oil or sweet oil, until the swelling has calmed down completely and the pain is relieved from its companion with cold application, and it shall remain quiet and still.
After that repeat the process of application with a plaster made from soft material (like cotton wool); and do not bind it with your tight constriction first thing in the morning or at night; instead gently apply it by its own subtlety to make it whole again, until it is completely healed.
"If you see the arrowhead, the swelling, and pain, and bruising, and all injuries are remote from that point onwards, tighten the stitches as you did at first equally.
"If nothing happens to any member from the ones we mentioned, then bind it not until after three days or four days or five days or seven days. "And when that is done for a hundred days, until you see the dissolution of the member from the solution as we mentioned, so bind it, unless there is a fracture and the approximation of the flesh over it: add to this in stricture more than your first tightness altogether; and also add in the swelling of food, according to what preceded his remembrance.
"If you see the place of fracture is already opened up and extended more than it should be: then you know that food must not be allowed to come near it. "Therefore bind him with warm water around all the wounds wherever you find them, and let it remain thus for three days, and alleluia increase the tightness.
"Because of this operation food must be given to the member, or sooner recovered.
"This is what the restorers of a fractured member do by way of another method when they are unable to restore it immediately as we mentioned above. It is an error from their operation and great fear: if there was any rectitude in their book, they say this has been done by them with him.
"And I did not see from any of theirs the evidence in that all at once as we mentioned earlier.
"On fractures to the head.
"There are several types of fractures and their shapes vary greatly; and the causes of them are different.
"From the fracture occurs when it is struck by something coming to or from which causes a total collapse downwards into bone, such as an axe into wood; and for this reason that type of fracture is called the Axial Fracture.
A blow falls upon certain bones, and strikes his face, but the blow does not penetrate to his very end; it is called this species of fracture, i.e., the absolute rupture
It can be a small or large one.
And from the fracture is what is called recoil, or withdrawal; and cause of it is striking with a stone, or case over the stone, or similar.
It can also be a penetrating one, which is already approaching the bone; or it may strike upon the face of the bones; and from fractures there are two kinds, large and small.
And hidden within a bone by the subtlety of a hair is what is called fracture; and it may be small because that is why they call this species of fracture, i.e., the capillary one.
And among them is a fracture which may strike with the case or a blow on the stone; and from this they do bring forth threads of bone into the inner part; it may happen suddenly as when a stroke of fire occurs to people and the part thereof is brought into the inner part.
Most often this happens on the hands of bones or head; like children's heads.
These are to be distinguished into species of fracture with a separation of the game; and I am alone on this spot with the remembrance of all things connected with him.
We all know the species of fracture by inspection upon them and the examination of their threads; and the removal of the corrupted things above mentioned.
The species called capillary is known by this; it is detected above the eye and removed with a scraper and cleaned above itself with wax; for thus does the black fracture appear.
In the treatment of a fracture, first consider the accidents; then if you know what is meant by an evident sign above terror, just like cholerae and extension, misplacement of intellect, breaking off speech and syncope, fever and withdrawal from eyes, and similar things in many positions for curing far away. If however there are no accidents to be considered that may threaten your life, then begin with the treatment thereof.
"When a wound is closed and healed first of all; and that is done on the seventh day after closing.
"And if it is on the days of decay [i.e., after a meal], then you should remove the food before seventh day.
"If a fracture of the bones has already reached the skull and brain, then it is with caution; and after some time, after an accident.
"And it is that you should raise the wounded head; and cut above the wound according to what method suits you best; and according to the shape of the wound, and what lies above weakness.
"If you fall by the flow of blood from a bone or an arrow heated up; then raise him with that which is necessary. "And it is that you should place the wounded with wet cloths into wine and oil; and make them to rest until they are no longer heated by an arrow or the flow of blood, and remain safe from flowing blood. "Then begin in the care of the bones, and on the healing of it.
"It happens according to one or another way.
"One way is that you cut the wound with a straight and sharp knife; and this is its shape.
"Another way is to administer the knife after the incision, further away than that; and this is its form.
"Then you also administer another knife farther still, according to custom.
"The second way is that there be a certain number of different knives; some are larger than others, and some are smaller; and those near the end of the bone are sharp on one side but blunt on another; and you use them easily in hitting upon the knife so as not to cut off its head, and to let it bleed.
If the eye is strong, then it should be treated by a doctor of eye surgery before administering anything related to Incisoria or Terebra which are not deep (i.e., surgical instruments). And they are not called like that unless their own ends penetrate through the flesh into this place, which is below his head: for that reason, the Terebro is a rounded extremity above this, which is underneath his head sharply and similarly limited to a small circle by the edges around it, so as not to submerge or slip downward.
And it is advisable for you that you collect from these many Terebra a great number of them one by one and come to terms with the quantity of surgical instruments necessary at this time: whose sharp extremity in length and brevity should be equal, according to the measure of their cranial size.
And these are three types of trephining tools, or trepaning instruments.
The quality of penetrating through the eye sockets is as follows: so that you place a trepaning tool over your eye and repeatedly insert it with your fingers until you know for certain that it has penetrated into the eye. Then exchange the trepaning tool to another place and put whatever fits through all openings with a large diameter around it (?).
Then strike with Incisoria what is through all openings from bone and do it as delicately as you can above that by the limit of thickness, just like we said until you remove your eye or with a hand or something else taken from those instruments used to this: so that there are handles (?), and small edges delicate.
It is advisable to be cautious so as not to hit the trepaning tool or Incisoria anything from the siphon (?).
After you have penetrated the eye and separated from it by the siphon (?), if there was continuity with that, then you take away what remains of him, so that the handles remain on his part which is remaining in bone along with a similar Incisoria instrument. "However, it is necessary that the incisions be slender and delicate in other places.
If any part of bone remains after removing it from the bones, then take that with ease and as close to you as possible using the tools at hand. Then take care of the wounds in the area next to them, along with the ointments we mentioned earlier.
And another method of surgery is easy but long and filled with fear: this was said by Galen and praised it highly: and that is the speech he mentioned earlier. It is not necessary for you at first to remove the part of bone from its place where it has been broken more severely and visibly: until when removing that part and positioning yourself under its extremity this slender and delicate incision will be complete.
And the part of the incision is slender and does not cut anything; but it reaches to both sides of him like this so that it ends at his side as a sharp point facing bone.
Then strike above the incision from one side with a blunt object gently; until you have struck through it completely and easily as mentioned earlier so that you are secure on its sheath where it does not hit when striking at it again later.
If the medician were not sterner than most men and more ignorant of it, nor sleeping, then if any part of bone had remained after removing it from its sheath in certain places, he would strike at that with his extremity this slender and delicate incision as mentioned earlier and would release him off by ease. He is released without a burden and without fear.
If the fracture of bone does not penetrate to the sheath and that part which is removed from bone has its face toward him and remains in him with a roughness and delicacy: then it is necessary for you that you take care to remove this roughness and those details gently using the tools at hand, so that they are available as close to you everywhere among them according to their number and amount. "You should wash your mouth thoroughly before you remove food from it. "After washing your mouth thoroughly...
"You should wash your mouth thoroughly before you remove food from it. "After washing your mouth thoroughly... "...until you remove it gently with care and wash it thoroughly.
"...until you have carefully removed any remaining hairs and broken it gently to administer the remedy for its correction.
"...and there is that which you cannot conceal, with regard to any study or skill of this art, and it was set over the thing we have written about, and were shown in large fractures.
"...if the foreskin is detected and you remove it while cleaning your mouth: then you should take some linen to wipe it gently with, according to the quantity of tears, and immerse it in rose oil and place it over the tear duct. "...After that, take another linen or three and immerse it in wine and rose oil; then place it over the first one... And make this easier than you can do on it so as not to tear.
"...Then administer it over the broad ligament; and do not stretch it except to what extent the tear is stretched by you... And let this be removed with due care in one or two days, unless six men are secure from the cold. "...Then you should administer post this remedy with those in which there is too much dryness as are the roots of watercress and the wheat flour... And it is that you might make a purer juice from these remedies, as it was made on the tear so as to be similar...
"...And universally apply all medicines of which he is owner so that they might remove it not harm. "...According to your strength, may the tear be clear while you are caring for it; neither should there be any sour odors of ointment or grease.
"...According to your strength, may the tear be clear while you are caring for it; neither should there be any sour odors of ointment or grease. "...Do not remove the foreskin from its place at all times; because when it is placed over the brain tear, it corrupts and putrifies him... And there was great harm to his head after that bad luck: and already great harm happened on the head with the loss of care for him, darkening appeared on its surface.
Therefore consider that if there happen accidents affecting the patient who has heard our sayings, know that it is fatal to delay in attending them
And if death does not come by accident unless there is a medicine placed on him and it has the power of that medicine to prevent death: then you should quickly take hold with both hands one part from the garment of oil and three parts from the linen cloth, and bind them together with these strips. Then put him on a stretcher; afterwards attend to him with the specified treatments until he is cured.
When restoration fails.
Therefore know that the nose breaks only in two parts at once or one of them; moreover, because it is made up of two bones: its lower part is cartilaginous and does not break unless torn off with violence, roughness, and sharpness.
If one breaks off two parts of his nose then you should immediately insert your middle finger into the nostril of him who has broken and hold it with both hands while breaking that part with your index finger; press down on its edge until the nose returns to its natural shape: and make this so skillfully, quickly. And also do not let his pain increase through that operation.
If the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and you are unable to get your finger into it then you should stretch out your hand with both hands until you have extended its length so that there is no longer any room for error.
If the fracture is in both parts then do this to him; and if restoration is possible on the first day of the fracture take care of it as follows. And if not on the seventh or tenth after quiet hours you should come with both hands warm and gentle.
Then insert one strip of linen into the nostril if there is a fracture in only one part; or put two strips of linen into it if there are fractures in both parts and make sure that its width is so great as to fill up the nostril.
Some restorers of ancient writings said that butter should be abundant and changed daily This seems to escape me; it seems necessary for the supply of license to be abundant with white flour and beaten until a pulp is made from it Then let out the license, when he has eaten enough, and his mouth may stop and cartilage become firm
And sometimes when the goose feather pen is inserted into the nosehole of a person who has already eaten enough bread, and it touches that same piece of bread with gentle touch: and it becomes as if it holds tightly to the crack in the bread, so that it does not allow itself to be pushed away by inspiration.
This is not a necessary part. If you wish, make this happen; and if you wish, make the license (i.e., permission).
If Naso has already been warmed up by a hot towel and then applies the cold water, or if he sprinkles olive oil with garlic and coriander seeds, or if he gently blows on the water of the dish, let it happen.
If Naso doesn't get warmed up by the hot towel, then it is necessary that he cover him with white flour and beat until a pulp is made from it. Then let down on top of him gently, but not allow any other person to touch him.
If Naso's bones are broken and they fall apart or come off easily, then it is necessary that the knife should be used to cut them out of him, along with the implements that go against his will. Then take the knife and care for him so that he is washed with those things which are moist or anointed with ointment as appropriate to this end.
If Nasu's mouth is broken and it has been healed by a certain ointment, then you must care for him with the liquorice so that he may drink from the leaden goblet until he becomes well.
On restoration of the lower jaw bone
When the Mandible (lower jaw) is broken and the fracture does not involve the teeth; at that point it is a simple fracture of its root alone, but if it breaks into two parts, then there are complications
Therefore if the fracture is on the right side of the Mandible (lower jaw), you insert your left index finger into his mouth: similarly if it's on the left side then you put your right index finger in; and with both hands hold back the force of the fracture towards the exterior, gently supporting from within while using the other hand to support from the inner part, equally.
If the Mandible is already separated into two parts at this point you should administer an external rotation with both hands while maintaining proper alignment; until such time as it becomes possible to restore balance by its own accord.
If there has been a movement or disruption of the teeth; then you should bind them using thread from your mouth, cotton, or silk to prevent any further damage as they may move about. Afterwards apply a poultice made with powdered plaster over the broken Mandible (lower jaw). Afterwards apply a poultice made with double cloth and a large starched bandage; either of equal size to the sole of your foot along the length of the Mandible (lower jaw).
Afterwards you bind it over the top as prescribed by your teacher; and apply this bandage firmly until there is no longer any damage to be done. And after that gently feed him his meals using a spoon.
If you think something has changed during the third day; then you should reapply it again that very same way. Afterwards you correct what was altered from it and apply the poultice again after removing the powdered plaster; either with alum powder or flour mixed with water until you stop using the cloth. And afterwards you place over this bandage a thin linen sheet.
As long as the poultice is applied over it and doesn't change its position; you loosen it up so that there are no longer any complications. You either bind the fracture or else let it be. "Therefore, this fracture is divided into three parts.
"If a cold finger should suddenly come near [the patient], then administer to him immediately that which we had already mentioned for the purpose of bringing him out from under the spell.
"And if there is another injury along with it, consider that one as well. "After the bone has been separated from its flesh and there is no other injury, then consider carefully what was said regarding this matter [the removal of the splinter], so that you may deliver to her [i.e., a woman] with whom it came into contact in the process of removing these splinters.
"But if there is a narrow wound from which blood flows slowly, then expand it with the second syringe according to your need.
"When you have taken out the splinter and it has not released anything from them, then take care of the narrow wound if it is large: otherwise, put something over [the wound] from those instruments which are used for that purpose until it heals.
"Regarding the restoration of a splinter when it breaks.
"Many a splinter is broken off from the front part of the arm and its fracture proceeds according to one out of three ways.
"Or it may be broken off and separated into two parts besides what might happen at the same time [i.e., injury], which is easier for its restoration.
"Or as a result of an injury from bone or splinter, and that makes it more difficult to restore [it].
"Or if there is another injury with the fracture.
"And when the fracture is without an injury, it will be necessary to have two assistants present who hold each other by the arms so that one of them may follow up on the fractured bone and another may lift back his hand.
"Then make an equal [fracture] with your fingers until it becomes the shape which is necessary to fit into place, and there should not be much elevation or little.
As soon as the swelling has increased more than before, it is necessary to apply a compress with a wet cloth or wool, and its size should depend on your need; then stretch out and draw up the furculum from beneath the swelling using one hand only, until the arm breaks [i.e., the swelling subsides].
If you are unable to pull the arm of the furculum outside, then it is because it has gone deep; so that the patient should be raised on his bed: and place him with the palm of your hand in such a way as to support him on one side, until he can draw up the furculum which is inside his mouth towards the top. And afterwards you correct the fracture using your fingers.
If you feel any pain when pulling out the furculum or it moves, then at that moment you should find him upright and take hold of his head from underneath in an easy way
If the patient is retained by the bone and you cannot find him upright when pulling it out with one pair of scissors that you have prepared for this purpose; after you place beneath the furculum the instrument made from wood or iron which should then support his head: it's an instrument made from wood, or iron. And this is its shape.
The hearing organ of the one who lacks harmony should be filled in.
Its size depends on how much it swells from the extent to which your body increases and the force with which you push against it. Its length is also determined by what is possible for you in performing an operation.
It has two extremities like a human hand; the one extremity is broad and the other narrow.
If a disruption occurs when pulling out the furculum by your force, its size is broad and you will secure it with sutures using both lips; at that time gather the two edges of the lips together to make a suture.
If there is only a minor disruption or if it was not possible to use the sutures of the lips; then gather its edges using strips of linen and sew them together as you would for a small tear.
If you drop a heated stone into cold oil, then pour it out of the hot oil and vinegar and wine are added on top
A stricture in the throat when it is absent from nourishment and without a physician's attention may cause the food to pass through the nose instead of entering the mouth. And put on top a small amount After that you gently blow into it if it is ready. After that you gently blow into it if it is ready. And put on top a small amount of powder and the food item. After that you gently blow into it if it is ready. And place on top of the cloth. After placing it with a cloth, put the star next to where it fell and the spot. After placing it with a cloth and putting the star next to where it fell and the spot, place on top of its head and under a healthy breath and under an ill one: then move down from its whole part so that you know how the stricture holds onto the fracture tightly; and is this? That which was not hidden over you, but all in order as nothing can be removed above it. And for this purpose should aspire to breathe poorly every day. Whenever the ligament becomes soft and you can remove the star, then adjust that thing and tighten the ligament.
After that you put the sick person on their back and place under a breath near to their mouth from the night air so they can be helped by the side of them. Therefore, the fracture is removed through the removal of the shoulder blade.
Or tie it to the side with a ligature of the arm, and do not use it if it is not fixed immediately or by an accident from itching, or from a fall, until the 12th day.
"Then stretch the bandage until you can see its face towards that. Add a stricture and release it, so that it may be restored and coagulated.
And a fracture of the penis is stretched, and tightened according to the maximum in twenty days; and sometimes it happens with certain men for less than that.
Of restoration of fractures.
Rare the spatula is broken; and at its place it is broken only on one side of it; but not the other parts.
When therefore it is broken from that place, and the middle of it; but not known by touch alone this; then according to which figure was fractured separation prepare for it. And reduce its size to a natural form in all ways that you can do.
Then put on the surface of it gently with water and oil, and a bandage, and put two pieces of linen over it. Then put on top of it an arched star from the fine table in proportion to the spatula's whole size; or its upper end can be a bit more.
If the concavity of the spatula is too great for some place; then level out its concavity with gentle pressure until it descends in proportion to equality.
Then fasten down from above with long and fine linen, with gentle constriction, and firmness of the star; until it is not removed from its place.
And consider it every day. Whenever the ligature is softened, tighten it; and if it has to be moved from its place, then hold fast on the smooth side of your body.
And the spatula may be restored within twenty days; or one day and a half.
When that number is completed then loosen up the ligature; and you are at peace. The tongue is removed from the bones with which it has become accustomed, and there's no solution for them
If it arises out of a bone, though it fails to pierce beneath the lips; remove it above from the mouth and swallow it down. And do as we said in case of a fractured tooth: if anything strikes on that, wash with warm water and vinegar.
Of the restoration of a broken breastbone.
Sometimes it breaks in its middle and rarely occurs on that part. Extremities of him break off most frequently, and they fall apart from his accidents.
When the middle of him breaks down and leans towards inferior, with pain it strikes, difficulties in breathing, and thus; perhaps he bleeds, and a concavity is declared on the bone that has broken, and is not concealed from sense: Restoration is to be made as he lies upon his back, so he places between the tongs something like pulp.
Then stretch his upper arms and join the two sides with both hands and feet; balance on all sides until this figure is restored as it was intended to be.
Then he places above him a bandage and a small shield of wood or metal; on top also an astrolabe from the table, with its points arranged to show the signs of the zodiac; so that one can see her in the cloth after she has been woven into it. Then bind her around the mouth so she cannot fall out; and tie it down with a cord at its neck according to the roundness of its girth, and tie it firmly enough.
Then consider the binding at all times and whenever it relaxes, tie her down; if necessity arises to solve his problem in the place where he is, or corrosion may have occurred, or pain, or apostema: then attend to that quickly, and undo what has been done with the way of your care for him.
"Then make an incision in it if you wish; after that, insert a needle and sew.
After the costae have been torn apart.
It does not strike the costae unless it occurs at locations which follow the back; and from the extremities of those parts it separates them from their front part. And it does not break them off except because they are cartilaginous. And the knowledge of those is not concealed from you by interrogation using fingers.
Its restoration is such that if the crack has been made in an appropriate way with your fingers as permitted by nature and when restored, the figure should be as it ought to be. Then make a snare for its broken nose if you wish; after that stitch up with the star as shown below.
If the costae are torn apart from within; then it strikes a weak man with pain in his belly and punctures him where he has many veins, so that his nose is pierced with difficulty by this, and there as well as to the eye: therefore, because of the nose, or rather its piercing, it also strikes difficulties, and they, and blood wounds multiply; and these are difficult treatments.
And already clever men have been put in there with many engines; and from them are those who say, that you should place food for the sick ones which generate inflammation and heaviness so that the belly is inflamed, and it extends and is pulled towards the outside by the fracture.
We are averse to this lest it not become cause for an extremely cold contraction if it does not strike. If then it strikes, you must then put something into it.
And some of them said: Place on the place a gentle thing and afterwards gently with force; and thus is similar to reasoning. However it should be feared that too many gentle things could overflow the place due to the weakness of those who have been affected.
"Some of them said that the place should be opened to the wool soaked in warm oil and then placed between the ribs; until it swells up so as to provide an equal knot.
Afterwards, the sick person was cured through food and medicine
If the patient is exhausted and cannot tolerate it, he spits out or suffers a wound from the biting of the doctor; then we fear for the patient; so let us open up a vein above this place to draw off some blood Afterwards we place the tool that extracts the vein over it; its name has preceded this; and we make an incision with a knife to get at it.
Afterwards we gather two nostrils if there is one large as well; and we cure him with splints until he gets better.
If the patient's temperature rises at this point and then falls; we immediately apply a warm oil, and place it above that location to cure him with what accords best with his condition.
In the meantime, another incision is made over the side where he has been lying until he gets better.
The restoration of the fractured ribs and collar bones
The ribs and collar bones are also affected by fractures less frequently but equally as well; just like the occiput of X. Because it happened to this one, and you know that he is cured or not; then take note of If you know that his hands are already soft and stiffened and dead; so he cannot move them or stretch them out, nor constrict them with your fingers, when you try to strike him with a blow from your hand, it doesn't make sense for this one and there is no pain felt in these parts either.  Then know that he will not be cured and death lies ahead in many cases.
If he is able to move them and feels the constriction when you strike with your fingers or a blow; then know that there was a previous stroke in these parts and that this one will get better through food and medicine.
When the thumbbones of the left hand are broken similarly and you know how to treat them or not, then consider its position in relation to your feet; if when they become loose you know that it has happened as well, but when this occurs in the hands - then at that point you understand that it is mortal. Do not exert yourself unnecessarily while caring for him.
If the above did not cause any damage to him, then it is better (or: less harmful).
And the care he received for what happened to him is that you administer a soothing ointment with sweet oil and warm sun; or if you want to, give food (nourishment).
Place this on the spot every now and then during the day until it is soaked with soothing ointment from the cold; if you want to stretch it a bit between the fingers, warm it up gently, hold onto it with a cord and make sure that there's no loosening of the skin or any injury. Do not let him rest on his part where he received the pain until he is healed.
If something has happened to the left thumbbone and it is separated from him - then you must take off his clothing and get that thing out of there. Then close both lips together with a stitch if they are large enough (large enough to cover the thumb). Then care for him with some warm oil until he is healed.
If the last bone of his left hand is broken and there's no other way out - then you should put your thumb into his mouth with your right hand as well; if that doesn't work for some reason or another, try to break his second tooth from the inside (the one on the opposite side).
Then put it back onto him and get that thing off; and care for his wound along with what came before while he is being healed.
Of Restoring Ankh
Of Removing The Skull
Rare bones are broken. If the bones are broken, then the fracture is not complete unless there is a comminution to the extremities of them; and they divide into lengthways, and fall towards their interiors; and there happens a weakness in pain at its place, and perforation: and it makes the hand tremble when it is broken.
The restoration of them indeed is as if you place your hand upon him and stop the breaking just like its figure.
If the bone is broken only at its extremities, then you make it equal to that fracture as much as what was prepared for you from an equation and until the figure of his own naturalness is similar.
If the bone is broken at its length or falls towards its interiors; then you place a weakness upon his middle part and until you prepare for him the restoration of that fracture. When you make it equal to that, you place upon her the bandage and then the star from wood or skin; and you draw the band tight over what you do not take long enough the permutation of the fracture, nor the removal of the stars.
And making it equal to that as he extends her bandage so she holds it with the band according to equality; and you place the weakness as he lies down on his back or healthy side.
If it happens to him a cold finger; then he stops from its extension and his restoration and until the cold finger rests; and you place upon himself what is seated on itself according to that which preceded, and after that goes back for his restoration, and you draw him as he must be drawn.
If it happens to the thighbone or is broken off; then take them away from there.
Of The Aid For Restoration
The aid is what lies between the elbow and the head of the spatula.
If it is broken, its restoration follows one of two ways
The first way is to obtain a middle plank with the appropriate size, following this pattern
Two ligaments are tied at both ends of it.
Then, having been suspended from the place where it was broken, he lies down on a bed. Then, holding his fractured arm above the plank, until it touches and passes over the middle of it, where it is attached with a bandage
Afterwards, he suspends him from above in order to stretch him out gently towards his lower part. Then the physician stretches both of his arms simultaneously, until he is healed and has regained strength, in accordance with what is necessary.
Another way is to have the patient lie on his chest so that he hangs over his own leg, and ties one of his hands around his neck with a bandage. The two physicians take turns supporting him, one holding on to the side of his head that is above his fracture with both hands and the other holding onto his lower leg and stretching each towards its own side.
And if he wants a stronger stretch, then tie him down at the fracture with one bandage and over it with another; and they each stretch towards two sides of his body.
If the fracture is close to one of the arms, then it must be that a bandage is tied down at the fracture and another over his shoulder.
If the fracture is close to one of the arms, then it must be that a bandage is tied down at the fracture and another over his shoulder.
Afterwards, when the fracture is equal in ease and without labor, until it becomes equal to what is necessary; then tie her down with a bandage if she does not fall off on her own warmth.
If the fall off of the arm in cold weather occurs earlier than after seven days, then loosen it until after seven days. "Strike above the eye with a solution of vinegar and oil mixed; until it falls asleep, then pull it out.
After striking the mixture on the eye, wipe off the excess using a new cloth. After wiping away the excess solution, put your arm above it and place your hand open over your own shoulder.
And put on the cloth and pull it above your arm so that your arm is in place as a support; if you are not obstructed by something from the other side or behind, nothing should fall upon you from any broken bone.
If that should happen and something falls upon you from a broken bone on the other side or behind, then use this support as an anchor; it is so placed to be higher than all others and stronger in order to hold onto it securely with both hands when needed. And put the support on one side of all the other supports, length-wise with your fingers; the lengths of the supports should be according to their height and with an additional three fingers from every part.
After that, pull on the supports as I explained at first until you have reached your desired height
And it is so that your height should be set above the area of the more restricted fracture. The length and strength of the supports will increase as the fracture becomes longer and weaker.
If you wish the supports and tension to be as we described before when you are ready to restore the limb immediately thereafter do this; if something falls on it while it is still cold, then release the tension and all the remaining supports until the end of seven days like I said before.
After that, consider the ligament for three days to prevent itching or swelling from happening and to be pressed against it by anything with a body part due to the arrangement of the excess tension. Therefore rectify everything as I have said before.
If you are on the edge of falling off due to something from that side, then only release the ligament and after three days at most
The nurse lies on her back and puts one hand over her stomach while holding another hand to her breast with the goal of breastfeeding being filled up equally
And remember during sleep or wakefulness that no broken bone should be fixed and a soft ligature put upon it Therefore do this with your own skill.
And the nurse feeds her patient with a spoon according to our rule so that she will first eat something soft and gradually move on to food of other consistencies until it is time for her to begin eating solid foods: at this point she must consume more nourishing food.
Because of the custom and usage with the spoon it is to be fed for thirty days consecutively; then from this point on it is necessary that she should be fed until her thirst has been satisfied and medicines are applied with ointments which will aid in this.
If there is a broken bone then she should be fed until that ligature and poultices are applied up to fifty days or two months.
Of the restoration of arm fracture
Arm is composed of two bones called humerus and ulna.
Of the thumb bone. The other one is large and it is that which is put under a small from below part.
Therefore if the larger thumb bone breaks alone or both are broken simultaneously.
When therefore a large thumb bone is broken then the restoration and healing of that one is easy and is easier.
And when the lower thumb bone is broken there was a bad break for him and his healing will be difficult.
And it is worse if two bones are broken simultaneously.
If therefore the upper thumb bone breaks then there was a meeting with a doctor for restoration of that one so as to put on a ligature easily and gradually until it is equal in strength.
If the large thumb bone breaks then there should be applied a stronger ligature.
"You must place a figure on his restoration and also extend his arm above the pulse. "The hand must be extended above all the fingers; and to the inferior articular joint with all the fingers, or others: and if a person is lying flat on their back, have his elbow near them, or directly behind them at an appropriate height so that they do not tire from work.
"Then the assistant should extend their arm from below part, either with their hand, or using a cord. "The other assistant should also extend similarly from above.
"Then the physician adjusts his mouth to reduce him as much as possible according to better appearance.
"If there is a fracture of the bones then the assistant should gently move aside any broken parts with your strength in their place.
"If there is any swelling on his side then gently pull it off and the finger wound should not be a hope for restoration; then find its upper part and remove it according to what we have said about those that are missing.
"However if there is a fracture with injury I did make the one particular finger for this end; therefore take care of it from that point.
"If you begin the restoration with a cold hand then take a linen cloth soaked in oil and white, it should be medium between hardness and softness; and tightly wrap this on his head so that when he is done the bandage will not slip off; then remove the wet bandanna and put one prepared plaster on top using flour mixed with egg whites. "Then you put oil on it so that there is a light oil spot next to the fracture which is larger and stronger than the bandage itself.
"You know that the number of fingers on one arm is six depending on how many you are using; either there be a fracture in only one or two places simultaneously.
"Then you put your bandage tighter to the stronger and weaker place of the fracture; also some amount more with the upper or lower one depending on what is written at first.
"The veins that are squeezed from above a fracture should be covered with wet, soft pads; and they should not be dried up or hardened. "Let the thread used to tie the ligature from linen be its own, in between fine and coarse; just as we have tied it with linen.
"Consider the membrane and ligament after a day has passed. "If what you apply is necessary for its correction, just as itching applies to a limb: then let the membrane be rubbed with heated water until the itch ceases and the member is not constricted; after this, repeat tightening.
"If the tightness has already been softened and removed, like these things, then correct it entirely with your own strength; consider what is to come.
"If the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the membrane due to excess tightness of the skin, then you should let it be softened more and remove it every few days until the nourishment reaches it; after that tighten it.
"But if what we have spoken of does not come to the aid of those things, then it is not necessary for you to make them wet unless after one day or in alternate days.
"After that, let your hand be suspended lightly on its neck. "And let the neck of it remain equal and be guarded by your strength against being agitated with motion. "Let him sleep on its back.
"You know that this fracture is restored after thirty days or two thirty-day periods; and perhaps it may be restored within one hundred twenty days. "Everything was according to the dispositions of its color and strength.
"Of how fractures should be healed by hand.
"You know that the hands of a man and the fingers of his hand are rarely injured in fracture. "And it does not happen to him except when there is excessive weariness.
When therefore bones are broken or diseased (i.e., when a bone is fractured or decayed), then the afflicted limb should be placed in a square frame and the seat on top of it shall be level, as if seated. Then he places his arm above that same frame, extended.
Then he extends the fractured bones and aligns them as if joined by a good union.
At that time, it is necessary to place a plaster on his arm and bandage (it) should the hot water have been applied first. Then he places an arrow above it according to its quantity, and you just finished with that in your hand?
If the bone is fractured from below and around it there is no room for plants to grow, then he makes a sphere out of cloth and wraps up the affected limb with that so that the broken limb may heal along with its own plant (or if you prefer: so that the severed limb heals in contact with itself). Then wrap it well with long cloth.
The arrow is from a quiver, which has the softness that you need to apply it on the surface of the plants' body and wrap her with long cloth according to what needs to be done.
If the bone is fractured from outside (i.e., if a limb has been cut off), then it should be placed above and another arrow below the plant to its side; and leave your hand open straight. Then he places a bandage as before with his hand extended between them (the fingers) and binds it together with the ligature.
If he breaks any of the bones of his finger(s), then align them as necessary (or if you prefer: according to what is required). Then he wraps it with a plant and places an arrow at the right side (or if you prefer: at its head) to support the fracture so that it does not move around.
If any of the other fingers are broken as well, align them in sequence and bind them with the healthy finger(s) according to the connection; or bind them all together by extending them one after another (and it is better). Upon placing the probe above the object, remove it as we have shown for the finger
After your restoration has taken place and after you have placed the object in its correct position with the warm probe, remove it when something is removed from that location following the same procedure as we previously described for removing a finger.
Of the repair of broken leg
The knee is often fractured and the statement of this fact is obvious because it is turned inwards towards its interior and outwards towards its exterior.
And its repair is made in such a way that the ligament above the fracture is drawn tight, while another ligament below the fracture. He stretches out over his face.
Afterwards he extends all the ligaments towards her face equally and this when there is a fracture of the bones.
However if there is a fracture close to the root of the knee, then the ligament towards the face falls away and the other ligament below it.
And similarly if there is a fracture close to the knee joint, then he extends towards the lower part of his leg.
Afterwards the surgeon equalizes both his hands with their own saliva until he reduces him according to the similarity of the natural shape: and joins them together by a good union.
Then you have placed the probe and tightened it if no finger was removed. If something was taken from that location, then you release him for a certain number of days until he is cold enough and return to your care.
The tightening of his should be as follows. It is permitted to pass a probe over the fracture that may be broken through it, and fasten this twice or three times securely: excess should not remain attached by it. Afterwards he descends until his heel reaches near its root.
And he enters between the knee and leg towards the lower part of both of them. Then apply excess fat from the side of the thigh
Then place the bone fragments on the hip socket and one star over each knee
Then wrap the thigh and upper leg in linen strips, so that they may be tied together tightly.
Begin with the tying of three or four strips around the fracture site at mid-length, and continue to wrap them tight around the thigh and upper leg. And as you wrap more tightly with one strip towards the fracture site, make your knot looser and longer, so that it may be easier to apply pressure over time.
Then intend for two extremities of thread, as you crossed between the thigh and lower leg. Tie then with three strips that are above Then go downward towards the foot as you tie two of them to make a knot in your ankle. And with both strips and those above tied, such that the other part remains unremoved from its place.
Then release your knot when it remains there such that neither the member nor any other thing comes to harm as a result of its loosening and relaxing. If anything goes wrong with this, Therefore go back to your solution and rectify what went wrong immediately and as described above many times.
If the bone is broken by another bone, then let you set it so that they are equal if possible. And if not, find the other one and remove it from there; remember with whom you preceded until you are cured.
And when the thigh fracture is tied like this, as we have described it to help and arm;
However, while tying his fractures in that manner no impairment of movement occurred. And if restored alone without the other leg, then it is necessary to let him who has been impaired walk in turn always.
The hip is stretched for fifty days or added with a few days, but it can be shortened by the same number of days. It's like that because of different constitution and dispositions of limbs.
On the restoration of the broken leg (tibia).
It is known that a rare occurrence of the tibia breaking is a result of excessive effort or injury to it.
If broken by the same reason as before (either a fissure or a hole), then the bone will heal without an opening on its own parts. It is also like that with excessive heat and without excessive cold. And it grows above all of these things with awareness.
The restoration of the above is like that in order to restore what has been disrupted by its own parts with the fingers and continue to be united according to how possible it is from an equation and ease, and made
Then it is smeared with the skin of sesame oil or groundnut paste and placed over this above, making a round star if desired: and tighten above so that it comes down to match the above.
Then consider all the dispositions that we mentioned on other fractures as cold hands and similar things to them: so that you may oppose everything with him in how he was able to recover from anything, until it is healed.
On the restoration of a broken leg (crus).
It is known that the legs are two bones of which one is large and called the crus (the knee) and the other subtle and called the tibia (one bone).
And the tibia and crus are broken by two different types of fractures in both arms' bones because of that there is an equal restoration for them as for the arm's bone: so it is one operation.
If the tibia and the crus are broken at the same time, then they become connected to each other in every part.
And if a subtle bone breaks it becomes connected to the front side.
"If you break one of your ribs on the top, this will lead to injury below; and it is from those that are not hidden to you.
"Then apply an extension, balance (or equilibrium), and ligature of the stars in accordance with this balance.
"However, if there is a fracture of the ribs, it being a severe injury; so that its extension may be less than full and to the lesser extent.
"And indeed in the ribs is from an operation of some over the arm; and it is so when you have equal stars, and complete all your operations; then take two cords of pine wood, which is used in the manufacture of the sun's work, placed under boards: and they are done with palm twigs. And choose those who are superior, and not from minute ones; and their length should be according to the length of the ribs, down to below.
"Then apply over a single piece two solutions in accordance with its length. "And place one part of the ribs on another, and then place another on another; they are done from the knee down to below.
"Then ligate two cords at three places with two extremities and a middle one. "Since the restriction is prohibited, the ribs decline to the right and left, and standing in a good position.
"And indeed, the cuas (or wedges) of wood are to be applied according to the length of the ribs, and placed into them the ribs so that they can help it with motion.
"And above all else is needed, so that you make this when there is a fracture as well.
"Then consider the ribs every day and study them with him, at the very last of his work from the apostles or others; either by raising it, or by something else. "If therefore anything happens from them, then you should bind him with it, as long as he wills.
"Of fractures of the arms and hands.
The heelbone is not broken by a fracture of the foot.
A bone in the foot is broken by a fracture when there are several fractures and not just one; it does not happen to them unless there is attrition due to multiple impacts or blows.
If the footbone is broken, you will see that bone raised above itself to its own arm; then it supports the foot over the ground as a stretcher does.
Then you stand there and put the foot on top of that which was raised by them; afterwards praise it, or call it by its name, and equal it with these places: until then she remains in her own place.
Then you support the stretcher on top of that; and put a small platform under the foot with two flat feet beneath it, which have been given to him by God.
Then you tie her with a decent rope; after that you hold her tightly with the cloth, and others to whom she is subject
After three or four days then loose the cord. You will equalize those bones if they are fractured, dislocated, or just moved around. The operation is performed upon them as you see it.
If any fingers are broken then restore those and equalize them according to what I told you about restoring the hands. Then you put your own finger on the platform according to its length and make it longer than that; afterwards put under the foot the platform I told you about, and tie her with a decent rope.
If the bones from which that finger was broken are two or three or more then you put on top of every one of his fingers a platform of its quantity lined with cloth; and tie her to under the foot: and let her be standing over one footboard outside the foot so that it holds by good retention.
And I will tell you that the one who knows all things which I have said to you about the others broken and injured from accidents should not neglect any of them, but oppose every accident with him as it is necessary.
On broken bones of women and men
When a woman's jaw is broken, then seat her in a square posture Then incline her towards the back of her neck and hold her with both hands behind.
After this is done by an obsteratrix (a woman trained to break bones), then lay the woman on her stomach with both hands holding her body down and let a ball of cloth be placed under her neck as if supporting it like a sphere.
The woman is laid flat (on the ground), and the bones are gently pulled towards each other. This will then be supported by a ball of cloth as before so that her head is lowered and the bones are broken.
Then the man takes hold of her with both hands, holding her down on her back and breaks her bones again. Therefore he takes her down gently and moves with ease back to where you broke the bones before; then break them again as they were broken originally, then releases his first hold so that he can grasp it (his body) once more.
He will perform this seven days in a row or alternate days until the bones are restored to their original state.
And if it is not possible, take hold of her hair with both hands and pull the cloth from beneath her neck until she has been pulled all the way up into her vulva (her vagina). After this is done by pulling on the cloth with great force until the hair and cloth are all inside her vulva (her vagina), then she will be broken again.
After this is done by an obstetrical woman with a cloth and held for several days until it heals as we have described previously.
And when the bones of men or women are broken then he administers to restore them and arranges them as we described before for the Anchae bone.
And it is not hidden from view that the anus may be injured by those whose strength fails them, but primarily for those with some study or use of anatomy.
"I have learned much from this book because its fracture means to you the right way in many dispositions for restoration of your own and restriction of your own; therefore understand.
"When the bowstring of a man breaks, take the goose-quill [pen] and write it on that place. Then apply a solution with a cloth to it and let it be soaked; then let it be poured out three days or around them if God wills.
For the restoration of the bone when there is a fracture accompanying a wound
It happened to him who had a fracture accompanying the wound, especially if it is large like that of the nose or cheeks or assistant's fingers, so they are brought close and quickly applied by you as we did; but when conditions for phlebotomy [bleeding] are present, do so.
If a wound bleeds from the blood then you must bring them close to making an incision for him; so that you will squeeze over his cheek as we did.
After this initiate the restoration of the fracture on the same day and do not delay it if an assistant is not present.
If a warm assistant was injured then you leave the restoration of his fracture until the next day until the assistant is settled. And do not come close to him on the third or fourth day since you will bring bad luck upon him.
If the nose is broken and protruding above the wound then you must bring it down quickly using your hands in a similar fashion as we did; but if you are unable to reach it.
If extension is not available for him and his equalization of hands then bring it down with this instrument. The instrument is made of iron and its length is the number of seven or eight fingers; and its width is according to the amount of blood from the wound. Therefore a physician is necessary so that he may receive three, or four portions of the treatment according to the quantity needed for healing all wounds and fractures
And it should be round, and there should not be excess fat on top of him during the period when he is being pressed down for an operation to take place: and there should also be a sharp edge where the thumb meets the palm of his hand. And it must extend from his top (forearm) all the way down to its bottom part, including the middle part between them.
This is its shape.
It is suitable for this operation so that he may place the sharp edge of his hand on the prominent thumb and then grip it with one hand as tightly as possible until after returning its mouth to an equal state or position (i.e., when all the bones are in their proper alignment)
Therefore, bring both broken limbs into equal positions
If the limbs of his broken arm are soft and cannot be easily held by him with a good grip, then he should try to strike it off with both hands until he has enough strength in each hand.
Or if you cannot reduce them with him as we have said before, then strike it off with a blow from one side of the head using whatever technique is possible for you.
Then leave what remains after striking it off in that manner on your bones and fingertips
After you have reduced the arm, it is likely that the wounded man will experience great pain because his mouth cannot return to its original position or place
Therefore do this. But if the injured man experiences a very great pain with your restoration technique, then you will complete his recovery as much as is possible using those techniques of yours.
Then plunge it into vinegar and black. And if he is hot (warm). Do not place over the open wound any kind of fat or oil that may cause it to putrefy and become corrupted.
In the hour of your restoration, you will administer these remedies Remove any blisters that have formed; so that with a knife you may cut through the membranes of the wounds according to their severity.
Be extremely cautious not to tear the wounds while cutting them open. There are many mistakes made by those who have studied this art of medicine; they either killed their patients or themselves through a knife, death from injury, decay from disease - that is, insanity. Your restriction must be soft and mild, varying according to the nature of fractures; so you must not force a fracture when it has already occurred
If the wound is bad or great, and certain accidents have occurred over it, we suffer pain; then you must not place those remedies upon it, lest you cause more pain. And make cuts through hard skins at the places of the remedies and tie them up with it.
But if there has been one day or two days and the wounds have already begun to form; then you must wash away that skin over which you placed those remedies with vinegar. Then administer the ointments and unguents as per our custom; just like the tetrapharmacopoeia ointment, and others of that sort.
And it should be sufficient for you to have one bandage. Consider the wounds every day and often throughout the night until they heal.
And you must stretch out that member as if it is about to come away from its own weight with ease.
If several days have passed and it has not been healed; do not let the pus come away from it at all; then you know that those bones are small. Therefore, inquire about wounds with a probe. If those bones are separated; remove them and extract them separately. And if they are not separated; they penetrate the member and cause pain while cutting through them, and wash away those remedies in every way that is possible for you to do so.
"When a man is suffering from the heat of fever or exhaustion, whether through injury or illness - that is to say, with exhaustion or species related to corruption and putrefaction - at this point you must seek someone who has previously cured him following his narrative in one of his chapters.
"From that person who is needed to keep me speaking when my face is broken and I am bleeding from the mouth, like a horse's nose, and of advisors, and similar things coming out through large openings in his body, it is necessary that you do not deceive him by giving him your present mind once he has been injured or sick, for many times death comes to him from this condition. Therefore, let them remove him until he decays.
"Certainly no more than 21 days
"Therefore, when you see to your injury and otherwise let him go.
"Concerning the cure of a fractured nose
"These treatments for injuries have often led to death. "Specifically those which are related to the face and arms: "And in some cases they forbid operating on a natural member.
"Therefore consider at this point if the nosebleed is severe:
"And if you apply these bandages with wine or egg white or vinegar, and tie them on top of the nosebleed, and hold them tight at a good place.
"Do not keep the bandage for more than many days "Until the bleeding stops.
"Or tie them with a cloth soaked in water. "Water is the property of all that are afraid to leave their bodies.
"If a nosebleed is already hidden by a hand or is very tight and the need to remove it has become pressing due to its harshness:
After cleansing when restored, and remove the membrane after that in a subtle way, not according to its own nature
When the restoration of a fracture in the bones occurs, and remove the membrane after that in a subtle way, weak: then it does not occur except due to many causes. One of the many solutions is ligature and its ligation does not according to what should happen; either due to excess tightness of ligaments or prevent the flow of nourishment towards the membrane after excessive lubrication of the skin: or due to a lack of blood in the body weakness, and its weakness.
And the care of this is to feed the weak one, and make his body firm until more blood occurs there. And apply a poultice And pour over joy and gladness on him.
After that, put a piece of paper over the membrane to attract much food towards it. And with warm water he applies lubrication frequently until he gets nourishment and recovers his natural shape.
When the restoration of a fracture in the bones occurs broken
When the broken member is already restored after the cleansing of it, its tortuosity and prominence in a fractured bone occur at once, or perhaps it becomes numb: so that you are forced to use this form for both members, but do not allow the membrane itself by its own operation to be done away with; then it is not necessary that you receive speech from him who knows how to break it free.
And many doctors and restorers have done this here on our land.
This operation is truly unbearable in its pain or fear of death, so that it may be called deadly.
If the numbness and weakness are recent; then it is necessary that he be lubricated with warm water in which have been soaked various soothing herbs such as elder leaves, root, mallow, and others similar to them. Let him have a bandage softened with oil as if it had been made into a honeycomb
A mixture of radish juice and honey should be applied to the affected area, or else grease from birds' fat can be used instead; after it has been softened, then bandage him with that
A mixture of elderberries and wax should be applied to the affected area; or else grease from bees' fat can be used instead; after it has been softened, then bandage him with that
Sometimes when there is a continuous, strong, and relaxed friction between the hands of one or both patients, it can be relieved by applying a mixture of elderberries and wax to that area; alternatively, grease from bees' fat can also be used instead after it has been softened The motions of the members should go all around the whole body at once
If the tortuousness has already been done and is strong, causing a sharp pain when it strikes against stone; then let him be relieved by putting out the superior part of his wounds with iron; he should keep on pouring water over them until it subsides or is no longer necessary, after which the superfluous portion from friction or bone with fine incisions may be removed: thereafter, application of ease and diligence will follow.
Of a dislocation of a limb.
A dislocation is the separation at a joint's place. Because of his own motion it is prohibited to move him; and the form of the member becomes deformed. And he brings about sharp pain and useless wounds because of that.
Therefore when a dislocation happens, then it is necessary to hurry up for the restoration of him; do not delay at all.
If he is delayed, then the place may become broken off or reduced in the dislocation itself
Therefore it should not be moved, nor should an extension take place at that time of his delay; because of this. Because he causes a lot to hurt spasms and suffering wounds.
Indeed when that happens then it is necessary to hurry up for the taking away of his pain from an illness. Therefore it is removed, until he be silent
Then apply ointment on the member with warm water and oil And then reduced with ease.
And all the members, where its memory is not in place
I have already ordered the dislocations of the arms and legs as well as those that preceded them on fracture; from the upper part of his body to the lower one down.
For the treatment of dislocations of the lower arm.
Only two of the arms are dislocated, rarely.
And both dislocations occur according to one way. Either they are moved from their own places by means of some violence or become softened through gentleness. Either the dislocated arm is made to be complete and unbroken as it was before until it becomes softened up towards the chest, down to its course of descent from the shoulder, until it cannot hold her any longer, nor can it be bent back against the mouth with speech.
When the dislocation is small then he returns to many positions by himself with a few.
If the dislocation is complete and unbroken then it is necessary to bring about either the reduction of him immediately or delayed by pain; he must make effort to hold on with his hand towards its base which goes through the arm's dislocation; in case that it has been dislocated from one part Or he may introduce both hands simultaneously if the dislocation is from two places. And the rest of his fingers are outside which equalise
Then apply a gentle force until he straightens out both arms and frees them for use throughout the body. And the physician equalises one arm with gentle force and pushes it until he reaches his own place.
If the reduction is difficult especially if both arms are dislocated simultaneously then administer an enema with warm water and oil until a simple reduction of both occurs; do not delay the reduction of both at all unless otherwise instructed.
When this has happened and they become equalized, the jaw is loosened up but does not relax; then there comes a turn of the pliers above the gums, when he strikes it with the oil of roses.
Then it is tightened using soft ligaments.
Then the jaw falls asleep on its back; and his head is held between two pulleys so that it does not move to one side or the other; nor can it chew anything. So he puts food into his mouth gently with a spoon until the pains subside, then the mandible loosens up.
The jaw does not work properly during eating and drinking; until it is loosened, then it can function normally again.
When the reduction of the jaws is difficult due to their being dislocated at a certain time and they do not return to their normal positions; then many times fevers occur, and often one is seized by an excess of cold or heat; so it may be necessary for the nurse to soothe him with hot water.
When you know that this has happened, then you realize it is a loss; and many times he dies to whom this occurs within ten days.
Of the reduction of dislocations in the elbow joint
The furcula is not dislocated by the lower arm's natural movement, due to its own persistence around the breastbone. And it can be dislocated on occasion towards the outside; and this fact is declared through inspection of the body.
Its restoration occurs so that he may lie comfortably upon his back, and he extends his arms. Then the heart's place is filled with a strong hand squeezing it, as it will be restored.
Then he places his hand over the chest and pulls on it strongly.
The limbs follow him closely as they move with him, not being dislocated except rarely. "When one tooth is dislocated, then it should be reduced and restored to its original position as we have said, and what was prepared for you.
Then put a plaster over the dislocated tooth, along with cotton wool and a strip of bandage. And apply it gently, so that tranquility and peace may come to restore health.
And with the same care, the extremity of the arm is reduced when it has been separated from its place as well.
The reduction of a dislocated arm.
It is known that the humerus does not dislocate unless in three ways.
The first way being dislocated towards the lower part of the titus. The second is dislocated towards the chest part. And sometimes it may be dislocated towards the higher part of the arm, which is rare.
It does not dislocate towards the back because of the presence of a bursa (fluid-filled sac). And it does not dislocate towards the front because of nerves.
It is most frequent to dislocate and reduce towards the lower part of the titus, especially those whose muscles are thin or weak. Since reducing them quickly or slowly does not make any difference; they may be reduced just as easily when applied gently or firmly.
However, in those whose muscles are many it is to the contrary of theirs since reduction with difficulty may occur for them and also because of reduction with difficulty occurs.
And sometimes when the blow or fall strikes a man and he becomes disabled his arm is amputated close to its place because it had already dislocated.
Therefore you should proceed in caring for him until you are sure of his condition and then perform your care upon him.
It is known when the dislocation occurs towards the lower part of the titus and you must distinguish between the dislocated arm and the healthy one. In between these two extremes there exists a certain degree of difference; and you must apply this to the head of the human body, bringing its concavity into contact with your fingertips as if it were an object held in the hand: and he cannot be made weak so that his arm falls down upon his shoulder, nor can he move it about by all means.
Similarly, if the jaw is dislocated or turned upwards; then you must apply your finger to it as before so that nothing may be hidden from view.
This reduction can be made very easy when he is young, or is weak and feeble.
His reduction is to lift up his hand above himself. Then you put your fingers under his chin and press them together with all your might towards the top; and he lifts up his arm so that it reaches above itself; and he extends his hand upwards. Then you put her downwards beneath him, but he immediately pulls her back up again.
If he does not recover from this as we have said and there are many days of dislocation at the beginning; then it is necessary that he be bathed in warm water, and embrocation should be given which soothes and relieves, just like if you pluck up the roots of a plant, or the chaff from grain, and the millet from the water, and administer.
Then you support him on his back; and put under the chin of him a sphere and wool which is equal in relief from pain to pressure.
Then the physician supports his foot on the sphere; and he lifts up the arm of the sick person with force; and he pulls down the hand of him to beneath.
If he is weak and feeble, reduce him to this extent; and it will be as if you have made the present man who is longer stronger than before, and so remain on one side, and he puts his arm beneath with the fingertips of him to the sick person; and he lifts up the finger of him towards above until the patient is supported by the air. Another physician should examine his lower limbs If the patient is weak or ill, then he needs to be kept suspended in some way so that something else can be done for him; because dislocation occurs quickly.
And also according to another method, he is positioned on a long stick with a round head like that of the dead; so as not to be heavy or thin. Afterwards, he is placed under a long stick after being positioned on the head of it with a linen cloth; and the patient will be standing according to the length of the stick.
Afterwards his hand is extended towards the lower part on one side and his body is extended from the other side with force; because the union occurs at its place, either by chance or fate.
If the reduction of him is difficult through everything we have said, then use this remedy; and it is that you take a stick whose length is equal to two of his arms, width as much as four fingers, thickness as much as two digits on each hand, with a round head so that an entrance into deepness may be made, according to this form.
Afterwards the linen cloth is placed over the rounded head of it, so as not to be heavy.
Afterwards he is placed under the stick so that his hand can be extended or both his arms towards it to the lower part; and the stick is fastened over his elbow, and arm and the extremity of his hand are also fastened.
Afterwards one arm is placed over the rungs of a ladder according to its length; and his hand is extended towards the lower part, and the suspended body is released from the other side. The union occurs quickly.
Therefore the entrance into him is completed according to whatever method is possible; then it is necessary that you place under this spherical stick equal in quantity of wool. Afterwards a prepared plaster is placed over his forearm and back with olive oil and egg white as was done above.
"And then the ligature was tied tightly beneath a decent incision; and after some time the ligament ascended over the emplastron; and it became attached to his hand at its top; and it was released, that no part of his hand should move for seven days.
"And then the ligature should be tied to a thin thread, that it might endure for a long time; because its location is in relation with his cure.
"And then the ligature should be loosened after seven days or five, and it should be stretched along with a motion. "If at this point it is tight but not loose, he has now recovered.
"If the ligature should come loose excessively because of moisture that affected him or some other cause; then it is necessary to administer it with a cautery with three holes, according to what was mentioned in the chapter on cauteries.
"If this should happen in its entirety and the ligature is loosened after seven days and does not tighten up; the emplastron and the incision over it are contracted a little bit more than before and do not let go, so that his hand cannot be lifted upwards; you know now that the nerves of his arm at the top have already been cut or stretched out. And you also know that the ligature never appears in its place.
"And the dislocation that occurs with the breast and nipple or downward reduction; it happens along with a motion and stretching out with hands until it is over, after which the remaining ligature should be released and treated with the rest of the treatment, so as to recover.
"If after the cure there is a heaviness and slowness of his motion; then it should be administered with strong cold compresses frequently until its heaviness is relaxed and he returns to his natural state.
"The treatment of dislocations of the cubitus.
"You know that the ligature of cubitus comes loose with difficulty and is also released with difficulty; and in fact it even comes loose at all parts, and especially to the anterior or posterior.
The dislocation of it is hidden from you because it falls under your care and control, according to whatever figure or position it may be in. And when you bring the dislocated limb together with a healthy one, that is clearly declared to you. A union occurs between joints and cannot double or touch it while holding the other arm.
And you should prevent or correct the dislocation as soon as possible before frostbite sets in.
If frostbite occurs to him, it is difficult for him to reduce or cure all of it, especially if he falls on his back. A dislocation in general is worse than any other injury and often leads to death among these people.
The restoration of it when possible to reduce is like this: extend your hand with two hands and bring his arm up, the medical staff should be over the dislocated limb below him so that he can pull himself back towards where he was before.
Or the dislocation is to the front: then he reaches out like that so that his second hand strikes against his dislocated arm while reaching for its palm with both hands until it hits where it was before.
If not reduced by dislocation then administer an intense strengthening and extending of both hands until the arm is brought out strongly and held tightly, with two assistants holding it while another holds it tight at its other end to prevent it being pulled away.
Then the arm comes back to all parts after it has gone over his shoulder and is held by a long sleeve or wide bandage on one hand.
And when the medical staff holds his arm together with oil to make it easier for those who assist in lubricating the joint and making things go smoother. Then he pulls himself back by pulling forcefully until done.
After the reduction of his arm is to place it on top of that splint where there is stiffness and pain with a bandage as well, to tighten it properly. The arm is suspended from the shoulder, and it falls after several days
Then one solves it If therefore the connection is formed at its place, then one loosens the ligament from there, and releases her.
If you are unable to form a good connection then one repeats the plasters and loosens the ligament after several days until it is formed. Then releases her.
If any damage to the patient has occurred after reduction of the connection and there is pain during its arrangement in motion then administer humidification by bathing, and the use of a thin brush for friction, and compression. Until it straightens out or someone holds up their arm at that point (i.e., until it heals). Then he is bound and she is released after a day and night. Then you take them out of the bath. After bathing, friction is applied to the connection with heated friction. Then one repeats her over and over again until she straightens out in the bath.
And if there is someone else to hold up her arm, then you apply a warm compress with butter and tight it over him (i.e., put the warm compress on top of him).
Do this occasionally. Her is stretched out and she returns to her own position.
This concerns the treatment of dislocations by Albucasis.
Many hands that have been dislocated are caused by the connection between the arm and the hand.
Reduction of their dislocations is easy for them. When one has connected many things to many things. However it is necessary that the arrangement of dislocations be done at a time before they are separated from their place or before cold comes into play (i.e., before they become cold).
Then reduction of dislocations is done with the weak hand on top of a table, and he stretches out his sick hand at that place. And if someone holds up her arm then the medical practitioner applies their palm over the connection, and pushes it until she is released (i.e., until they are released).
However, when the hand has already withdrawn towards the center and lays its back on a table before extension and reduction: if dislocation occurs in this manner to the palm of the hand, then it is placed by itself at that point over the table, so that only its interior part lies above the table, that is, its interior part is placed there, with the surgeon's hand placed above it.
Therefore, if it is returned promptly, this is good: and if not, then bind her with a bandage immediately; release him to prevent repetition of this error.
If it does not tolerate the reduction well and you can't perform the reduction correctly after a day or more, however, the incision will remain as is according to its own tortuosities: but nothing else should be done that would harm the hand; and it cannot bind anything; therefore, know that there are slips.
Therefore, there is no cure for this injury except to tie her up with caution as close to the point of its injury as possible. And perhaps nothing else should be done.
Therefore if it does not return to Almahassim immediately, then put the bandage over him covering as much of his body as possible. Then bind her and release her after five days; afterwards it will be treated and released again, and the hand is exercised
If the motion of his part is held back and it becomes infected there or something else happens to cause him harm; then tie her down with a heated water bath, and apply friction gently until he gets better
Of the treatment for dislocated fingers
When a finger is dislocated from its place or the palm towards it; then extend it and pull against your fingers until it goes back into place.
After this, you support the head of the finger and tie it down to where it was dislocated; and release it after two days.
"Then hold him down and stretch him out until he becomes equal in length with his other side on that day.
"When this has been done at night or by day [while it is light], hold him according to the same order and do not let go of him until he exercises himself completely; stretch him gently.
"Do this on several days until he becomes accustomed to stretching.
"And do the same thing with him if his hand becomes dislocated; hold him to the opposite side and perform your first operation until he is cured.
"And do the same thing when one of his other parts becomes dislocated.
"About the treatment of dislocations in the back muscles.
"When any of the back muscles is dislocated either completely or partially, and they fall out at their places; there is no treatment for this because death comes quickly to one who is weak.
"His sign is that ejection by force cannot be prevented without strength; and some of his parts are separated from him one at a time.
"In many cases, the removal takes place such that they are removed to four parts.
"And what is dislocated towards the back is called gibbosity.
"The treatment for him is as follows, considering that gibbosity occurs during childhood; there is no cure at all.
"However what is dislocated due to a blow or from similar causes; the ancients have spoken many ways of treatment in their books. "Which one does not return with strength.
"I am returning to him from that place; and my excuse for having been at a great distance is because of the proximity of mine intention: I stretched it out in this way, and made an instrument of it one way by which they removed it.
Therefore I say that injury occurring at a point below the previous part is not an accident but skill
Similarly, for one below two sides
And it does not occur from these except when the injury occurs in the back itself, as I say and is that the injured part goes up to the face above the platform at a level equal to or towards the wall; and it expands below on a moist cord so that his chest is not harmed.
Then a fixed rod of wood is placed in the foot into the earth, at its extreme; and another rod around the feet at the other side below; and it holds the wood so that it does not move from the foot. And then it holds both rods separately.
Then it stretches the upper part of the ligaments tightly and firmly; and it extends the end of the ligament to the rod that is at the head of him; and it binds it on this.
Then it stretches another ligament above his ankles, and above both of his knees; and at the heels of him. Then all ligaments are tied together on one rod that is by his feet.
Then it stretches all ministers to the end of the wood that is by his feet; but two rods are not fixed tightly so as not to be moved from where they are tied.
Then the physician places his hands above the spine with strength; until he gives out or places a tablet on it. Then both of his feet are placed over the tablet so that they may give rest to him.
If however he does not recover through this treatment then he takes a tablet whose length is around three arms And the place where we said that it was necessary for him to be in order to get well quickly is at which end of the tablet he will be placed Then he places a middle piece of the tablet on the spine. The surgeon places his feet apart for another patient He ties the legs well and releases the spinal cord, then moves to its place
After that he takes the other hand as a tool and operates on it with his own hand like before; so now you are to place your feet at his head under two lines, whose length is equal to the forearm of one arm: then you must place both legs at his head underneath two lines.
The length of every line between the two fingers is equal; and it has been done at all places where the cord moves through a hole; then each line will be buried deeply into the earth so that nothing will move any longer.
A rounded cord is introduced; and now the opening of which two lines was previously closed by the ligaments, will be reopened by it through these same two holes.
At the extremity of it is a hole where the cord is bound; its length is equal to the distance between your fingers when you previously operated on them, and in these two lines there is also one similarly large.
Then, tie the ligaments which you previously tied around his throat as a tool where it is at his head; and the ligaments which you previously tied around his arms in this tool where they are at his feet.
And then the surgeon ties around every cord with his own hand, as he did before when using the tool; and he equally stretches the spinal cord according to what we said.
This is how it ends.
After the surgeon has stretched and arranged the cord, then you must place a pair of clean tweezers with new linen onto it. That is all. Afterwards place a star on top of the cord from a tablet whose length is three digits to one side, or going around them Its length should fit into the space reserved for [the] swelling and above the healthy part of the cord.
Then it is tied with the ligament we mentioned earlier. "The sick one is healed with subtle nourishment.
"If the ailment is removed from its place at the end of treatment (i.e., cured), then it's necessary to use medicines that alleviate and calm down, in conjunction with administering a table as we have taken long time. "And now, when administering the wet sheet.
"When an ailment occurs at the end of the spinal cord (i.e., a stroke), and it is placed through this dislocation, and it is that thing which has already come out. "Therefore, it's not necessary to use such a medicine with this remedy, lest he die prematurely.
"Of the treatment of dislocated ankles.
"Know that the fracture of an ankle and the fracture of the arm did not occur unless dislocation occurred; nor would it happen to them who experienced other dislocations from a remote distance.
"The fracture of the ankle is broken into four parts. "This because it is dislocated to anterior and posterior.
"It's very common for the dislocation of the inner part; and only a little bit is dislocated from anterior and posterior.
"The treatment of the dislocation to the inner part is necessary; because when you put a healthy leg on an unhealthy one it's longer and the limb which has been injured becomes more than the healthy limb but can not double foot itself under the knee, for the place where the hip is dislocated from below.
"The mark of that dislocation which occurred to external part was a contrary incident.
"The sign of that dislocation which occurred to the front part was expansion of the healthy leg in conjunction with the complement; however it does not double itself except for pain who is at the knee: and if he walks to move forward, can't go over from anterior; and urine of them will be retained, and the other leg will be bent down, and above the heel there is a sliding motion.
The finger which it struck dislocated backwards was, so that it did not extend the knee; nor could it double itself before doubling the other joint of the same finger; and its nail is short on one side, while its heel is longer on the other; and its joint at this place in particular.
The reduction of this dislocation is to be considered there when it has already taken place and become old with its possessor. Then if you administer the reduction of this dislocation according to his disposition, then at that time there is no overall care present for it. Therefore, one should not allow him to be puffed up with pride.
In that other person whose dislocation is recorded in the same place as four dislocations; then you should proceed to this at once and join them together, and extend one of them to its interior and exterior, and move both hands so they can each be separated or united: for perhaps it has already returned, and no need for another care.
If he does not return in this way then one should prepare a strong instrument and extend his leg from below, either with both hands or using a cord which is tied over his foot above the knee: and another person extends his hand on top of him so that they can get in touch with their fingertips. Then he holds it with a slack cord above the root of the thigh and keeps hold of the other person's hand.
And his extension can be towards the front of the leg or towards the back of the thigh.
Then their extension should all be from one direction until they are supported by his body on the ground and remain suspended.
This is the kind of extension that is common to four different cases.
If he returns the dislocation as we said then it is good; but if not, then it is necessary to attend to all that I have already spoken about in relation to one's own care.
In the reduction of him when his dislocation is towards the interior, it is necessary that he be supported by a sound limb on the outside. The ligature is placed above the acetabulum of the hip joint; it passes through the hole that exists between the head of the femur and the acetabulum and ends at the place below the groin Then extend the ligature to its upper side toward the more superior part of the body towards the shoulder blade.
Next a stronger ligature is applied to his forearms and makes a large hole in the weakened acetabulum by stretching it with an external forceps. I am returned to my place
This is the most suitable method for reducing this member compared to other methods of reduction.
If the reduction fails on you and does not reach your thigh when using this method with all its force, then it is necessary that both your feet are fastened together at once with a strong ligature while holding onto one of them with gentle care, above two calves and above two thighs: and let the length be as proportional to four digits of each hand extended. And let the foot of the patient extend further than the other two fingers by the amount of their length combined.
Then let it be suspended above his head on a stake that is in the house; and its length from earth should equal the amount of two arms.
Then tighten the strong arm of the patient so that it may lift his hip; and let another person hold him down while you are pulling with force as much as possible towards its place, since the ligature has been tightened together with its own weight.
In the reduction of him when there is a dislocation towards the outside, it is necessary that he be suspended above the platform as we specified while having the weight. And fasten the ligature over his foot and over his chest.
Then two stakes are placed: one under each of his feet and another under his head. Then a third stake is placed between his hips so that it does not drag downwards towards the inferior when extended.
"Then the surgeon extends his own hand and the physician cuts away the flesh with his.
If it is performed on healing, then it is good.
And if not, the surgeon puts his own bandage over her and presses down equally hard as we described for bruises But it is necessary that the patient may lie on top of a clean cloth with both hands extended.
And when the dislocation is towards the front, then it should be that the foot of the patient is extended either to one side or the other; and according to this same narration over the table the physician puts his right hand on the leg of the patient. Then he supports him with one other hand and also with that same support pushes him out towards the lower side to the knee joint.
And if the dislocation is towards the rear; then it should not be that he is extended to the lower side but he must be lifted up onto the ground so that he may be placed upon a hard surface as we described in our previous narration, and also let him remain on his face and extend the ligaments according to what we said previously.
It is necessary that a compression is given with the bandage also over to the place where it will be applied and closed together with the reduction according as it has been said.
And you should not cover up the sign of his reduction and let him extend both legs of the patient; when you see them equally extended he will stretch out his foot towards himself without any bending, then you know that now it has been reduced according to what is necessary: at this time you unite the two knees, put a bandage over him, bind with tightness, i.e., rotate as follows so that he does not come loose from one part of anything and must stay secure for three days or four.
Then remove the bandage and the splint, compare both legs with each other; if you see them equally extended then you know that the dislocation is now fixed; absolutely therefore he must be pushed to walking.
"If you wish to do something for treatment (cure), then remove that thing and put it aside; in three days if necessary.
After removing this, let it stay for a period of time to be carried about on both sides until it is well tolerated over several days
"Of the dislocation of the knee.
The knee is dislocated in three ways. It can be dislocated from the outside, inside and downward (inferior) towards the back (posterior).
And it cannot be dislocated to the front.
The mark of a dislocation is that his knee gives way and he applies both legs towards each other (crosses himself). If the knee does not give way, then you know that it has been dislocated.
The restoration of all the modes of dislocation is that you make him lie still until he extends his leg if he can, and holds your back to his face; and puts one foot between your feet.
Afterwards, press down on the knee with both of your hands and arrange them between your fingers above his knee. After that you apply one hand two times to each side of the dislocated knee while exerting force. Another person extends his foot until he gets back on top with both legs.
The mark of the restoration is that you hold down the leg while exerting force without excessive effort.
Afterwards, you press down on him and apply both legs. After that, stretch it while lying there for three days or four. Afterwards, let go of her (the dislocated knee).
Until it is well tolerated over several days.
If you cannot reduce the dislocation yourself, then apply a strong pull with ligaments; whose procedure precedes narration in the treatment of dislocations until it is restored.
"On the cure for dislocations of the heel.
The heel can be dislocated by a sudden blow or it can come out of its place when the foot is forced forward. Or it may be dislocated inward or outward.
The mark of a dislocation is that the swollen heel comes off when pushed towards one side to which it is dislocated.
The cure for dislocation of the heel consists in gently pulling it back with the hands until it is restored to its place and held firmly there; then release it when ready to return.
When the heel is dislocated as mentioned before, you should support it with your hand or hands, hold firmly and let a strong person pull forcefully to its back part until it returns to its place on that side of the foot; then release and let it fall gently to where it was before.
Then hold him with your right hand at the top of his foot and with your left hand at the bottom; then release both hands to allow him to return to its place near the heel.
And then pull the foot towards you with your right hand. And then release him using both hands on his left side near the heel.
Then extend with your left and push gently at the top of the foot with your right towards its back until it returns to its place near the heel without exertion or effort.
Do this again just as we did before.
Then push gently at the top of the foot towards its back with your right hand and pull him with both hands on his left side near the heel again.
If the heel is restored to its place once, do this again either by doing both sides one after another or with two hands in that manner and you see the foot is equal; if not then repeat the treatment until he returns.
If the treatment is not allowed by you when doing as we did before; then let him fall limp with his back to the ground and hold a firm pillow on the floor at its head until it falls between your legs near the heels of both feet; you have already pulled over him from above so that he does not fall further.
After this the surgeon should take hold of his patient's arm and stretch out the other limb either with both hands or by means of a rope which is tied around the foot. After this the surgeon should stretch all his limbs out as far as he can reach with both hands or by means of a rope which is tied around one foot to prevent him from being drawn towards the other side during stretching.
After this the surgeon should equalize his own limbs with both hands and hold the healthy foot down to prevent him from being pulled towards the other side during stretching. The dislocation was corrected with traction (stretching).
When the dislocation is corrected and declared to be restored to you, then stretch out with a band and hold it tight, tie him down with his own ligature around the foot.
And it should be that you stretch upwards from below the heels towards those above, making sure not to put too much tension on them so they don't tear apart and relax them as well.
After this let him rest for two days or three. If the ligature becomes loose tie it back down and let him rest for three days or four. Otherwise, prohibit them from walking on their injured limb for forty days. If after this there is no security or if the dislocation comes loose and becomes unstable again, it will be unsafe to put him back into use for that part until further notice as well.
If his hand is cold then you should administer to him a warming agent and let the story be continued elsewhere as well until that part of the treatment is done
The cure for the dislocated finger.
It is required that they are equalized with stretching and little effort; it's just not difficult, but it's easy.
If the dislocation is caused by a knot on the back of the foot then it should be let him rest with his own foot above the ground or table; he will stay like this while being stretched.
Then you hold it and fasten a leg over this thing which comes from those stitches Then bend that with your foot as it were bent to it until it gives way, and straighten out the idea when it is equalized so that there is no appearance of prominence
Then you place a table under both his legs to support him fully while holding on tight with your feet as if holding the two halves together. Then stretch him out slowly over three days in a comfortable manner. Then let it lie still and make him rest from walking around for many days until he is stretched out and secured through stretching.
Of dislocations of the joints or broken bones.
If something happened to him and you take care of his health, restore him, many will die; thus one should not allow them to surpass the care given to him for this reason that he is skilled in long use, merciful, patient, not greedy or boastful: so may it be in the healing art to heal coldly with medicines: so that a divine judgment might remove from their illness. Unless he is free of any sin or pride, or his heart is full of pity and patience. So make the care for him at the beginning of things before it falls into cold hands.
If he has recovered his limb as you wish, then administer a course of treatment to him that is applied by the cold hands; and care for them with what was given to him from drying ointment.
If the dislocation is with a break and the bones are separated then care for the elimination of these; and make it as we said in simple things from him where he was preceded by them.
And hold on to it with your strength and protect yourself from being shaken by fear; according to what I have said before you.
That is better for you near your Creator and more lasting to glory; that is more healing for the body of those who are with you in this time
