After having finished teaching you the book that follows and is complete with its explanation of medical sciences, I have come to an end in it. From reading this book's explanations and notes, I find it necessary for me to teach you this Treatise on surgery, which also includes manual skills required for performing surgeries.
Because the operation has been laid out in our region and time, because its knowledge is exhausted, it has fallen away; and they have not returned to what was necessary for its completion except these few notes from ancient books that were copied with their hands: and they came to destruction and confusion until all of them had been settled. I find it necessary for me to teach you this Treatise on surgery together with the manual skills required, which includes how to make use of Cautery tools and other surgical instruments according to its explanation, notes, abbreviation; that is, along with the forms of Cautery tools and the remaining ones used in the operation: as long as they have been added by these and taken from this necessary thing.
However, because the good surgeon does not come with his own hand in this time and place, there is: so that the teacher of medicine exercises before he becomes a master at knowing the parts of the body which Galen has described, until he knows about the joints of the bones, and their forms, and their connection, and separation, and has knowledge of the joints between the ribs, and nerves, and ligaments, and numbering them all, and their exit from there, and pulse points, and quiet places, and the locations that have ended up with them.
And because of this, Hippocrates said, "the name is much and the work is little, but especially with regard to skill.
Now we have already spoken about that at the beginning of this book.
Since he is not aware of what we have spoken about anatomy, they do not come out unscathed; just as I heard many from those who are formed in this science and practice themselves without any knowledge or experiment.
Because the man had a stiff tongue from which blood flowed into the woman's neck, until it died by his hand
And I saw another man who was superior to taking out the stone of wine, which he had prepared and the stone was great Therefore, it was brought to him, and he took it with a sieve of flesh. Because the man died on the third day.
And I had already called upon him to remove it; and he saw from the greatness of the stone, and with the infirmity of his strength that death would occur.
And I saw another man who had taken a staff near the place of our earth for medicine; and he struck him with blackness, which was by his hand, a fracture on his forehead near his heel; and the physician with his ignorance took away the fracture above the wounds with powder and strings, and walls of strength and did not release from death.
Therefore, he was released by his own desire. After that, he released him from days and said to him not to abandon the chain; and he stayed there until his feet were bound and of his weight and was taken to destruction.
Therefore, I went therefore; and he received in order to release the chain; and tranquility came upon him with his pain.
However, corruption had already occurred in the limb; and I could not delay it.
Therefore, corruption ceased to walk around in the limb until death came.
And I saw another man who had pierced through a cancer-forming post; and it was ulcerated after days until great malice with its lord came upon him.
Because when a pure cancer is from the melancholy of the mind, then it should not be treated with all iron unless there is something that can tolerate it to be removed entirely from him.
For this reason, sons of man must learn that surgery is divided into two operations; one being with health and the other with peril involving multiple situations.
And I have brought this book to every place where operation is mentioned, where there is fear and trembling.
Therefore, you must be cautious of it (the operation) and dismiss the idea that one should rush to speak about it or describe it.
Therefore, with care and protection, and with the help of the sick, you will make a better path towards salvation and a worthy succession; and dismiss the great terrors of healing, for it may make your minds tremble at what it does to you, so that there is hope from above in faith and comfort.
However, this will be more advantageous for your glory, and higher in the world itself, and ultimately towards the number of you all.
Galen has already spoken in some of his teachings. Do not practice fear during the night, for you are physicians by profession.
I am divided into three parts of this Treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapter
The first chapter is about caution with fire and caution with acute medicine; it covers the head to feet of the body, its instruments, and all that is necessary for surgery.
The second chapter
The second chapter is about section and perforation; it covers phlebotomy and suction; and wounds; extraction of arrows; and the like; all chapters ordered by the forms of instruments.
The third chapter
The third chapter is about restoration; it covers dislocations and twists; and the like; chapters ordered by body parts from head to feet with forms of instruments.
Before We Begin the Operation with Him, It Is Necessary That You Say The Qualities of His Skin and Those Of The Scalp: And In What Form He Appears
I therefore declare that the speech about the qualities of the skin for cautery and his wounds is a long one, subtle, wise, and hidden secrets are kept there.
I have already spoken of the many wise men and their dissenting opinions there; And to me it seems sufficient only from their speeches, fearing length.
I therefore declare that cautery is universally applied to all types of skin which are with or without material; excepting the two types which are hot and dry respectively.
In contrast, in the hot and dry skins the dissenting opinions occurred together. Some have declared that cautery is appropriate for it. Others have declared the opposite, that cautery is not applicable to those with burns, whether hot or dry; because nature's heat lies in warmth, and therefore it cannot be treated by burning warm and dry things together if they are both hot and dry.
He then declared the opposite, that cautery can be applied to all burns which are cold and dry, because when you compare a human body with its moisture, it appears as if there is frost on him.
And I say by way of an experiment that the opposite of what he said has already been proven to me several times.
Nevertheless do not think it right that anyone should attempt to apply this without having already tried and practiced the last chapter on cautery, and knowing the diversity of skin types among men, their disposition towards burns themselves, and the causes of them all, as well as accidents which have occurred by them and time lapses.
"The other skin types have no fear of you. "All doctors were present for them, and did not disagree with Cautious when he was among them.
"The sons of Cautious know that from secret curations through Cautious with fire and good fortune to him is over Cautious when a medical treatment is combined. Because the action of fire is simple, whose action did not succeed unless cauterized on the part: and it does not hurt another member connected to her by connecting with caution.
"The action of the medical instruments was applied to that which extends from parts; and perhaps it does make the cutting difficult on the member healing, or perhaps fails.
"Fire because of its subtlety and substance goodness does not do that unless there is too much.
"We were unaware of that through an experiment because of the length of servitude and study with art, and position over the rights of things.
"And if it were not, because of this book I do not allow you to secret hidden in fire and quality of its operation in the expulsion bodies themselves, by which he expelled the fear of speech through philosophical demonstration, agreed upon your mind.
"The sons of Cautious know that at the time when it was to be done Cautious and better times for you.
"I tell that Cautious was done at all times; therefore, the accident because of the time falls down into injury when it is pulled by Cautious. "Especially if Cautious is for the pain from necessary suffering forces, festivals that do not tolerate tardiness. Therefore, he fears with them, what did harm to malice is greater than the usual injury because of the time.
"And not in the minds of your sons that it did not think unless only a fool and a doctor's foolishness know that it is not returned for ever: And place it as a consequence of it, things are not like they thought; because Cautious was not, unless there is a place to change the complexion, and spread the humidities which are caused, where the pains do occur.
However the cautery is necessary for medicine when its heat (or warmth) is applied to a patient's body and the doctor has confidence in his own skill as an operator, and if it causes no harm or injury to the master of the house; but if there is any risk that it might cause harm, then this should be avoided.
The subtility of the cautery applied to the extremities (or limbs) with excessive moisture and humidity, like a dentist's probe for pain relief, may be used when it does not cause harm or distress to that person. However, this should only happen if there are few of them.
The second sentence is incomplete and seems to be missing a part of the phrase. Can you provide the complete sentence or help me fill in the gap?
The second sentence should be corrected to say "the intent when we administer methods of curing with a cautery and don't confer them on the medicine; then we apply the cautery in the end of the matter, and grant it. Then from that moment, the cautery applied by the doctor is no longer needed according to the intention as understood by the public or doctors.
In the past, it was said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron; and they did not say this except due to the equality of the value (or worth) of the substance itself, or its sublimity/excellence. And they also said that the place for cautery should never be made. However, this is not absolutely true because I have already tried it and found that cautery does not do the same thing to all bodies or none of them.
And when combined with gold, it is beneficial and better than iron as they said. However, if you use iron for cautery in fire compared to gold, it is not given to you when the heat of the fire is equal due to its brightness or warmth; and also when it is brought near frost, ice, or added onto the fire above it, it makes water, quenches the fire, and extinguishes itself on wood.
"The artist is lost from that occupation; and because of this there arises a cautery with iron nearby us, at the place where we are located, for treatment.
"I have already ordered this Cautery's book according to the rules; and I ordered that from head to feet it be used, so that one seeking for what is missing may find it in him.
The Cautery of the second part of the head (i.e., the ear).
"Here is the Cautery which extends over head and brain: these two causes are dryness and coldness; from the ear to eye sockets and auricle, and sleep, and tooth and throat pains; and universally all agitations caused by coldness, such as paralysis, and dryness, epilepsy, apoplexy.
"The Cautery's method is as follows: firstly to remove the pain by using a soothing remedy at once with the first application of water and vinegar three times in one night or four, according to the strength of the patient and his age and custom.
"Then order him to rub it [the Cautery] on his head with a towel. "After that, put your hands together in such a way as to place them both over the top of his head where they have been placed.
"Then put your thumb on the middle of his nose between his eyes. "So that when you have pressed it [the Cautery] with all your force to this point, show him the other signs now.
"Then ignite the Cautery oil, which is its form.
"Then place it on that spot with all your force; first, descending and pressing downward, until you are ready to release it. "Afterwards, loosen the hand of yours or quickly let go from there.
"If you now find out from the bone count of heads or hands separately, then take your own hand. "If not, take the iron from you yourself or if someone else strikes your bones, until they show you which ones I told you.
"Then put something from the sale or that in water and drink it yourself and leave it at your place, and throw away what I told you three times.
"Then put on the drink yourself with butter and leave it at your place until the charcoal is burned away. "And then cure that with unguent tetra-pharmacy, as long as you want.
They said, because the more wounds are opened up and exposed to the air, it emits pus; that is why it's better and more beneficial.
And some of them said that the skin should be cautorized up to the nose; and they would hold on until something was burned in their nostrils.
"Then it was burned after what had been removed from a bone, then it was cured.
"And others said that it should be cautorized up to the end until an impression was made in their nose like a letter of the alphabet so they could die, as if by formic acid; or with something infused with alpha-beta, and they would spit out their wounds from this place after long time.
"And then it was cured until consolidated.
"But to me, there are no two types of cautery except those given by some people according to the way I fear.
"And leave it at that is better for my health with his blessings.
"The head became weak due to the natural continuous solution of his body; just as we were tested on other parts and especially when the head was frail by nature; and indeed the Cautery was first among all cures is more helpful for me, so it is used: thus I use it in order that its application may be beneficial.
The third part of the body, i.e., the head
When a person's head is afflicted with pain that lasts for all the head and becomes constant, so that they are weakened (i.e., suffering from the illness), they use ointments, oils, and vinegar If someone has already been healed with cautery on one of their body parts, we should not apply anything from that part to them at this point If a person's head is strong by nature and not weak or infirm, do not cauterize it with another cautery at that time Then cauterize the entire head of the person with that cautery and apply a bandage (discooperiatur) made from skin to cover up any cuts that may have occurred And cauterize the head with that cautery on a place where they say it is located and this is considered to be the entranceway of the body (uas): and you should not cover your mouth in that place. The person becomes weak because of this pain for the head of all of them.
And I tell you this Cautery here (uas): it should be the cautery with which they cauterize their ears and eyebrows lightly, so that they may cauterize in the middle of the head.
The fourth part of the body, i.e., the ears and eyebrows
When the pain occurs on one of the parts of the head and continues down to the eye or when a headache extends that far, they apply a treatment with medicines along with it (mundificantibus caput), and administer another cure as I mentioned in the division about illness, so do not cover them both: then cauterization is done according to two methods.
Cautery with a hot metal is used to burn away the tooth of one patient and remove scales from him, as well as cut off his limbs at two points Then, after he has removed the scab on that spot with a lancet and sucked out blood from it, let him put a piece of lint there to soak up any remaining blood.
Next, take him to that spot and bind it up with a bandage, until the wound is healed; then treat him with ointment as much as for twelve hours. Afterwards, lay him on his back in butter, so that the wound may be covered: afterwards, heal him with unguent and oil until he is cured.
And if you happen to have some medicines that are hot or burning, as I mentioned in the twelfth book of mine, for treating wounds by the Arabs
The cautery is used with a metal tool. The cautery looks like this.
And it is called Claw's because its shape resembles the claw of a falcon; there are certain cuts on it and at its center lies an outstanding prominence.
Afterwards put it on the spot and bind your hand; and with a little bit of iron, as much as is needed to cut through the skin, let him perform his task. Afterwards take away your hand so that no artery remains below it and there is free flow of blood.
Afterwards pour the bandage on to water and put it there; afterwards lay him on his back with butter until he is healed; then treat him with unguent and oil until he is cured.
And if you have a second sharp tool called the second claw of Cautery for cutting off limbs. And cauterize from making an incision into this wound without touching any nearby parts.
In the old way of cauterization for wounds.
When you are treating a hemiplegia (stroke), as we discussed in the preceding care and division of blood vessels, do not restore the treatment; instead look for a cautery to apply fire until the signs of pain over the place with the length of your fingers or like this: hold your hand by one side and strike it gently up to the artery, stopping when you feel burning.
However, it is necessary for you to also cauterize the continuation of the jaw, which may be affected during chewing and prevent its opening or movement in order not to fall into spasm.
And this is also important for ensuring safety regarding the arteries' blood flow which were cut off For it is from the cutting of them that there is fear and especially to him who did not know what was done or was not diligent nor an expert; therefore, he should remove the operation with him first.
And I am using this reminder of procedures and their management of blood flow accidents from the second artery as it is described in its own place within this book.
If you see from the fire that it is not sufficient to this Cautery, and if you tolerate the body's inflamed Cautery between the head, as we described, cure the wound until it heals.
And if you administer Cautery which we mentioned in chapter of arteries with two Cauteries attached. It is a more efficient and useful practice.
Regarding the burning of the ear
When there is pain from the cold and it is treated with a solution and the remaining part of the care as we mentioned in division, do not remove the pain; instead apply fire Cautery. And that which is called "Punctum" whose shape is this one.
"In another part of the same ear, when he has inflamed it all around its entire circumference, as follows: either in the circumitus of one side if both sides are painful. "And you with Cautery to the root of the ear, when you have inflamed places with cautery: and there be ten points of pain in every auricle, and so forth.
"Then cure the places until they are healed.
"In this manner Cautery is done with Torture.
The seventh chapter of the head:
Torture which is cured with Cautery, unless it be by the species which happen through phlegm, according to what we have said in divisions of Agitation.
And if Cautery is given to the species, that happened from Exejection and spasm of the nerves.
When you cure this species of Torture with ears and head, and gargling, and if your treatment is not present, then it is necessary that Cautery be given to the afflicted three times: one at the root of the ear, two below its own time, third at the junction of two lobes.
And you put Cautery upon the opposite side weakly Because softening does not happen unless it appears healthy.
The form of Cautery is that Cautery be put directly beneath the top ear lobe, and another below its own length, which will depend upon how long it is compared to the fingers. And you put your hand with Cautery until the number of cuts are burned off.
And this is the form of Cautery, and it is a species from a cuttler, whose shape was given: however it is not finer than that one, as you have seen, therefore it must be that the cuttler may also be in excess of excessive fat.
Then cure the place where it happened until healed.
Cauterization for ancient apoplexy
When ancient apoplexy occurs and you follow the instructions given above, but don't administer your cure, and if he is not feverish, then cauterize him with four burns on all his head hairs and a burn in the middle of his forehead as we said, so that there be a burn in the corner of his eye, according to what preceded. And the manner of cautery should follow that which proceeded it
Also, cauterize with the cautery over the mouth of the stomach; and it is more ultimate than this one.
Then he was cured as we said before
Section 9
It is necessary that a big hole be made in the brain by using a powerful lye and foaming agents.
Then cut off his head completely, then lay a plaster over it as described in the treatise on plasters; and lay that many times upon it
That is how cautery should be done; do this according to order as I said there.
If so he is cured by that means it is good. If not, then cut off three burns on the back of his head as far down as he can go from the top of his head to the bottom of his eye; and lay a great burn between all the cauteries.
Then cure the cautery with what proceeded it.
If he is tolerant of that, then make a burn there as well. If you are intolerant, then cut off burns on two corners of his head.
Then cure him until he is cured; and the cautery should be hot according to that which was prescribed before
Cauterization for paralysis and relaxation
Section 10
"It is permissible for you to operate on the head with forceps and also as we have said.
Afterwards you must burn it with a cautery on the middle of the head, and also all the hair on the top of the head, as well as three on each side of the temples, and three at the back of the ears, and six above the collar bone.
If you have many bruises and the patient is tolerant of pain (i.e., he can endure it), then burn him with four cauteries on his shoulders, and one at last to finish burning all over him until he is completely burned off; hold your hand tight. Afterwards take care of him until he recovers, after which you should perform the treatment prescribed by Olius.
"In the manner for burning in epilepsy.
Do not burn an epileptic person unless it's for someone whose epilepsy is due to a brain abscess
It is therefore permissible for you to operate on the brain of him first with forceps and also as we have said in healing; when he becomes big or is tolerant towards accepting medications.
If the child cannot tolerate medicines, then administer a gargarism and feedings to the brain before that day with many applications of food.
Afterwards you must burn him with a cautery on the middle of his head as we have said before; and also one at each corner of his head. If he is big and tolerant of pain, then burn him with cauteries as we have said before in having a paralysis, and also to the neck and shoulders; make the cautery of Olius according to what has been said before.
If he is a child, then burn him with an appropriate cautery according to this way.
"In the manner for burning in melancholy.
When the melancholy humors are corrupted by dampness and phlegm becomes thick, at this point it is cautered with Cauteries which we mentioned previously having paralysis.
And if the melancholy humors are excessive and bring on melancholy, and the body becomes moist, at this point it is given to him in a vessel which cleanses his brain as before mentioned in the process of division: then radiate the head of the sick person, and afterward make a tortellini more gently made from linen just like a circle.
Then place it in the middle of the heads: and the sick person lying flat holds onto it from all sides with both hands.
Then apply the ointment. And it is appropriate to use old goat butter. Then warm him with heated embers of moderate heat that the finger can tolerate when introduced into him. Then pour a poultice on his head in a circle and apply it until he is no longer inflamed.
He should be treated with this ointment every week as long as the regimen of his benefit continues, until he is cured.
Or if a finger prick with multiple punctures is not possible due to the hand being held tight by the cautery, then it should be burnt while smelling of sulfur.
This indeed is the species of Cauteries which moistens the brain with its quality.
Then place on top of him a poultice made from goat butter or fat from geese.
The manner of Cauteries to be applied by descending into the eye is as follows:
The thirteenth head.
When the beginning of water is introduced to you through signs as mentioned before, then begin and pour it on the sick person while cleansing his head with that which cleanses its head.
And keep him free from all dampness, and make him to be at rest on a bed during nights and days for some time.
Then give it to him so that he may radiate his own head, and cauterize the middle of his head as mentioned before. "At that point, burn it over two coals simultaneously if an incision is made to the descent of water into both eyes at once: or with one torch alone, if there's an incision only to one eye; and cut away all veins and arteries under the skin along its length while cautery remains in place. The blood flow ceases.
"If you wish to remove something from it, immediately cut away with whatever medicine is available and I will be there with my knowledge, which includes extracting arteries, cutting them off, and cautioning the flow of blood.
"Sometimes when burning a vein inside, there are two outcomes: if one of the torches is extinguished during the process and both fail to ignite, or if one ignites but cannot keep up with the other.
"Regarding cautery for the eyes.
"If tears are ancient and dry: the veins of the head are then preserved with superfluity of cold and phlegmatic fluids; at that point burn it over two coals simultaneously, one to preserve the eyes' vein inside (using the same cautery described earlier), and another above both ears, along with a second pair below under the skull. "If it is added to the heat at that point, burn all of its length with a smaller torch above the eyebrows.
"Regarding cautery for the fetus's nose.
"When you treat this one as described earlier and do not apply a different medicine: then first bind its head with three times to make it stop crying; next burn the middle of its head using that cautery we mentioned previously, along with an additional torch for its nose. "Next burn it over two coals simultaneously above the eyebrows and under them (just a bit).
"And keep an eye on its artery to avoid cutting into it.
This is the shape (or form) of a claw
The method for cauterizing with the help of the Palpebra.
When the Palpebra is mollified by light or moisture, then cauterize it with one small pair of forceps as shown here.
And if you wish so, then cauterize him above the two upper teeth with at most two pairs of forceps in every part; and they will be long by two touches: and its length is equal to all cauteries multiplied by the lengths of the upper teeth, subtracted from three times the thumb's length when touched with a pair of forceps.
The method of cauterizing with Palpebra when there are many bristles pointing upwards from the eye.
Cautery is done with two methods, either by fire or by a burning medicine (ointment).
Cautery with fire is done by preparing an ointment beforehand and applying it to the eye before cauterizing in order to remove his own hairs if they are growing upwards; until they become longer and equalized (in length). If the bristles are at his own eye, then close them tightly with a wick so that they will not move until they become born (i.e., grow out).
And when they become equalized (in length), then place his head gently into your hands so that you can see their signs with the wax seal; and this is a symbol of the hair.
And then pour over him an ointment of milk or egg whites onto his eye.
Then do fire cautery with this shape (form).
And then do the fire cautery with this shape (form) until he has burned all of his flesh that is like a symbol of the dying leaves, completely showing itself.
The seal of your surgical procedure is that if you squeeze the eyelid with a probe until it contracts and the hair follicles at the eye puncture are pulled out.
If once you take away the hand, release it in three days.
Then smear it with a mixture of butter and vinegar until it is removed. Then cure it with oil, so that it heals.
If what you remove from the hair after a certain time has healed and your eyelid has become soft then use a cautery over that spot as you did at first.
If the hair is below (the eyelid), then burn that same place until it moves down to its natural position; and make it so as not to itch when hairs touch the eye.
It is so that you get rid of the superfluous hairs and they become equal in time. Turn into paper what was formerly cloth.
Then take the soap with knowledge and do not drink it when it is unwashed from one ounce or almost that; then bathe her thusly with a good confession and make it as if she was washed thoroughly so that she should not be defiled. Then take away from the hand and place it on the eyelid of one or two; And put under the eye the drunk drink mixed with albumin, then your head becomes light.
And place the sign of your finger over medicine, and raise it up higher. You moved him to remove as many times as you needed from the medical incision because his wound was like fire.
Until then he continued to remove it when he had inflicted himself with the injury; and moved him then away from the medicine as you do your finger. When the incision is quieted (the wound has stopped bleeding), remove the medicine, and close the eye with water.
If you see the eyelid raised (elevated), just as when it is pulled up by fire or with an incision; this is good: and if not then proceed to make that part of your eye healthy by applying medicine in the place where there was no healing, but without any harm - until surgery returns success.
Afterwards, put a piece of butter on top of it (the eye) to remove the inflammation. Afterwards apply ointment with another remedy if needed in order for the healing to occur.
It is necessary for you during the operation that the last guardian of your eye remains there so nothing can fall out from medicine into it (the eye).
If the eyelid becomes softened after a day and there is something hanging from its eyelashes that goes into your eye; then proceed to apply medicine on that place where it became soft due to the eyelid itself just as you did at first. Afterwards apply ointment until healing occurs.
This is the shape of a leaf mold (?).
You know that human eyes differ in size and proportion. Therefore take this into account when doing your work; do not hide the way of rectifying that which is his study in this art.
How to cauterize a fistula (tear duct)?
When you cure a fistula (tear duct), according to what we said earlier about the divisions of grief; and do not forget your care; then it is necessary for you to cauterize that part in this way.
Press gently on his head and place it in your hand; keep his head held between yours so that it does not move around or be carried away with the head
Afterwards put a piece of fat into his eye socket or over the eyelid; afterwards ignite the cautery (hot iron), whose shape is this.
Put it as gently as if you were touching the end of a quill from one of those pen makers; with this you should cauterize - and if you can get to the other side but cannot reach all the way through then try holding on above where you are.
Nevertheless this is better for your work
If the fistula is open, remove it along with its contents and apply a dressing; if not open, then make an incision in that spot to retrieve or obtain it, and after applying a dressing on the wound.
Then, place over the wound something which causes burning, such as a cautery.
Hold the other hand closer to the cautery near your nose so that it doesn't touch you or become uneasy; place the cautery on the palm of your hand and push down upon it.
Then if by using the cautery from its beginning up to your mouth will be beneficial If not, then repeat the process one or twice more days later.
Then apply a mixture of pitch and ointment to it so that you are cured.
If after forty days it does not heal then place over it a sharp corrosive medicine until the opening is cured; and if there are more than one hole apply each to its proper place in that book of yours.
There's another way for treating fistulas which some people have mentioned Place it into that fistula and find the hole; then place over that small slit a subtle thing called a cannula which has this shape. And after you find it in that hole a certain amount of drachma from the liquefied lead and hold tight with a good cannula; and let no one move the patient otherwise or throw the liquefied lead into his eye.
And it is necessary to place over the eye that liquid mixture of fish glue or water
Because lead would fill up and close the fistula hole and heal it miraculously.
If the fistula is healed with this cautery and treatment then that was good. And if not, then it must be administered into the nosehole and reduced to its proper course; according to what is written there itself in that place.
Cauterizing wounds of the hand
Many accidents occur in the mouth of the hand, which are called the fingers, and especially on the lips of children.
Therefore if you have wounds, as I mentioned earlier in the division of the bones, and do not apply the cure for wounds with fire, then apply a small flame to the wound in this manner
And gently apply it according to its subtlety
Then place the burning item on top of these wounds, until the cure reaches deep into them.
And then apply it with care, until it is healed.
Cauterizing wounds of the mouth
When the mouth is injured at the root of the tongue, or on the palate, or on the roots of the teeth: afterwards it becomes pus, and then dries up: after that it becomes a fistula: therefore cure it yourself, and do not apply any treatment to it, because you must use fire as a cure for wounds in proportion. Then insert the burning item into the fistulas opening, and hold your hand there until you have reached deep into it with the burning iron, then do this thing once or twice.
And then apply it after that, as I mentioned earlier in the division of the cures.
If so, then it is healed, and it will be good. And if not, you must remove the place where pus has built up from within your own body.
Cauterizing wounds of the tongue and teeth softening them
When the tongue is softened by moisture and teeth are moved around it, and you cure her with medicines, do not apply any treatment to it, then place your head gently into its own mouth.
In the meantime, apply a cautery whose shape does not extend beyond this point so that it can be placed over the tooth; and then introduce into it a heated cautery in order to remove from the tooth the putrid matter that has already formed there: and hold your hand steady until you feel the pain subside from the heat of the fire as soon as it reaches the roots of the teeth.
After applying your hand, apply a second cautery in turn; that is to say
Afterwards the patient spits out his saliva with salt water and holds it for one hour while spitting it back out again; he does this several times in succession.
The motion of the tongue becomes firm, the gums are relaxed and become dry, and so is eliminated the moisture that has become corrupted.
In order to cauterize a tooth causing pain.
When pain arises from the tooth due to coldness or frostbite itself, or injury to it, and no treatment is provided with medicines; then a cautery must be applied in that place according to two methods: either a cautery with butter, or else one made of iron.
The cautery should be applied using butter, so that you apply butter to the point where it is introduced into the ear canal or nose; and this causes a contraction of the vessels. After applying it, hold your hand steady over the extremity being treated. After applying the cautery with butter, place the heated cautery over the pained tooth and hold it until you feel that the pain subsides; then apply another one after a while, so as to remove all the putrid matter from the teeth in succession.
And if you feel that it is too cold to use the butter cautery alone or a combination of both hot and cold, apply iron heated as well over the tooth in pain; and hold until the heat reaches the deepest part of the corruption in the teeth.
The cautery is applied with iron so that you aim it towards the canal or use steel; and this causes a constriction of the vessels. This is a Latin translation of the Arabic phrase "his body has some excess fat such that fire does not burn his nose.
Secondly, the cautery tool should have a shape that fits it; place it on his tooth and hold your hand tightly until the cautery is applied.
Then do this occasionally, for the pain will be removed either that day or another.
And it is necessary to strike him with the cautery tool until he opens his mouth, and hold him tightly for a while; afterwards remove him gently.
This is the shape of the cautery tool
Use the cautery tool in whatever way you can; this is its form.
Cauterizing with a Stropus
When the Stropuli are at phlegm and from cold and are not obedient to digestion by mechanics or the digestion of these is more direct; then strike the cautery tool with its shape as follows.
Having two open extremities such that smoke may be drawn up to the cautery from one of them; and place it on fire above him for a while; afterwards, if he is unwilling, until he becomes burned at both ends.
If the flame is weak, then place the cautery tool according to the quantity of the flame.
Afterwards release him three days and put on top of it a new fire until the pain is removed by fire.
Afterwards cure him with the ointment of the tooth, until the shape of the cannula heals.
Cauterizing with a poultice and constriction of the throat.
When the humectures are above the airway and especially when it is accompanied by cold complexion, then it must be that he is relieved first with a solution of medicines.
"Then cauterize it at the root of the throat, causing depression; and thus prevent bleeding from the cautery, unless he is instructed.
"Then cauterize it with another cautery at the junction of the collar bone and the last joint; so that Cautery may be applied as previously.
"When doing this procedure, keep him until he is cured.
"The cautery shall be applied to the nostrils and nose as well.
"When a cold and cough are present in the lungs, and the patient is not feverish or phlegmatic; then cauterize him with two cauteries at the depression of the throat, ears, and eyes. "And another cautery between the two breasts; so that Cautery may be applied as previously.
"And if your cautery is with a point; which is called the Point, whose form precedes that of the earache; then there are thirty points from it to another.
"When doing this procedure, keep him until he is cured.
"And there shall be Cautery with three branches; in the manner as follows: "And when you do this procedure once with two Cauteries.
The twenty-seventh part.
"When the attendant's arm is dislocated due to moisture; and not during the return of his own dislocation does it cease until he has become accustomed to its reduction after that, then dislocate with a gentle motion as we have already said. "The patient is placed on his back or side. "Then remove the thread which is inside of the titillus and connect it to the left side with your left hand; and if dislocation occurs at that point.
"Then a cautery holder is applied with two tweezers. What shape or form does this have?
This refers to a surgical procedure where the cautery is applied using four pairs of tweezers or forceps for precise control and retraction.
Sometimes when a cautery is applied using three pairs of tweezers, the result forms six pairs or eight forceps as there are two in each pair. The tweezers are used to manipulate and control the surgical instrument with great subtlety.
This refers to a surgical procedure where three pairs of tweezers are held by an assistant, resulting in six pairs or eight forceps being available for precise control and retraction.
Occasionally when one additional pair is added to this setup, there will be a total of eight pairs or sixteen forceps.
Then a piece of porous material such as gauze or cloth is placed over the cautery so that blood can escape and control of bleeding is maintained during the procedure. Then apply a soothing ointment to soothe discomfort and prevent sudden movements, ensuring that the affected area does not move too much until it is fully recovered.
If a dislocation occurs upwards and rarely happens, then apply the cautery over the dislocated joint with multiple points using forceps or clamps to stabilize it.
The wound is sealed up tightly so that moisture does not penetrate and the patient is treated for healing.
The procedure of cauterizing the stomach.
When cold and excessive moisture accumulate in the stomach so that it cannot be removed from its own surface without additional help to open up the wound, multiple catheters are added near the wound site for irrigation purposes, ensuring that the patient is properly supported while allowing them to drain fluids out of their body naturally and extend the extremities. Then the cautery is applied with three pairs of forceps or clamps to control bleeding and prevent it from escaping while also using another pair on each side for support, resulting in an overall triangular figure formed by six pairs of forceps or clamps. And stretch the upper extremity so that they do not become entangled when used to apply dressings, bandages, etc.
The depth of cutting is equal to three times the thickness of the skin
The second figure of the cauteries is as follows without addition, and if you use a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this shape; it amounts to one cautery per the figure of the circle according to this shape
If you withdraw from this cautery while holding it in the stomach, it amounts to a mark on top of the stomach according to the quantity that you have with encaustry; then make him bleed with cautery; and finally cure him with a care until he is cured.
How to cauterize Epar
If Epar becomes painful due to cold, dampness, or large weight, until the excess of its natural exit, and it is cured with what we said, and does not fail in him; then let the sick one be supplied over his own head by signs using encaustry three times according to this figure and quantity, and below Epar inferior from hypocondriums where man's cubit has been reached: it amounts to a space between all cauteries per length of fingers, and the second cautery per the right side of the body. And do not squeeze your hand with much cautery.
If it is supplied by a thinness of the skin and not increased in quantity, let the sick one stand over his own feet.
If he is not standing, then lie down because he has already extended his limbs and opened his mouth.
This is the shape of a cautery.
And it will be possible for you to cauterize this cautery with an encaustry when your technique and insight into art is good.
And be careful so that you do not proceed in cauterization until the entire body has been supplied with a thinness of skin and everything is supplied to it all over, so that he reaches his intestines; for there is a thinness on the skin where it is, therefore let this be done.
Of Cauterizing Poxes
If an abscess occurs and you know it is on the skin of Epatis or his garment, then immediately apply cautery to the affected area of Epatis; if it's in the tunic of Epatis, but with pain present: do not let go until the surgeon has attended to him.
Therefore, he should raise up his head over the fire or hot object. Then apply the abscess with a caustic substance, and when it is burned with heated metal, it will be removed from the body by fire. And this is his shape. And when one cautery is applied with him until the entire skin is burned and it falls off, or until all the sores are removed by fire, then he should seek the care of doctors to be healed.
And it is not necessary to apply this kind of cautery unless the study of medicine has been prolonged, and through whose hands these afflictions have come with many experiments: then he may dare to perform this manner of operation.
But it is better for him to dismiss her at my place.
Of Cauterizing Poxes
The ancients cautoried the pox of Plagues with the roots of sweet Cicuta in a cold manner as follows: And it is that you receive from the roots of sweet Cicuta long ones, one longer root which comes out through her and feel as if your finger were swollen. Then immerse her in oil and ignite her on fire. Then apply one cautery between the neck and the head of the body, with two others close to each side under the guide below the chin, which is below the beard.
And with two others and also on the one between the fifth and sixth ribs towards the back, and another on the middle of the chest, and another above the stomach. To the fingertips and thumbs: one towards the spatulas on either side of it, and two towards each of the ribs on the chest, below which is between the two spatulas
And you should not apply your hand over the cautery while it is in contact with the skin and causing odor.
Some ancients have said that there are people who use the cautery with a similar iron tool and they ignite it, then insert it into where it is between the ribs, until it reaches its opposite end and returns to itself as we mentioned for the thumbhole of Epatis.
But with this perforation and cautery there is a fear that either the patient may die immediately or it can cause an injury at the place of the fistulous lesion which has no cure.
Method for splaining caput
When you cure spleen ulcers with the method that we mentioned from a cure of spleen ulcers and do not apply your treatment, then the cautery is to be used according to three methods which are all correct.
One of the three ways is to make a three-pronged cautery or four lines along its length following the shape of the cauteries of Epatis, whose foremost figure precedes.
And each cautery should have thickness proportional to the digits
The method for cautery is as mentioned before for Epatis.
And do not apply your hand over the cautery, and let the patient breathe normally through his back.
Another method for cautery is to have a person holding two tweezers who mentioned in the chapter on dislocated arm; and apply it directly into the spleen where it touched the left cubit of an infirmity: And let you be release according to its length through the body, so that they fall out according to the length of the body.
Then insert two ignited tweezers until they touch both parts of the skin; then remove it; there will therefore be four cauteries.
If you burn with a different tool than three fingers
After the cautery, if there is any remaining pus in the wound that has not been removed by previous treatments, it will be more difficult to heal than what came before from care and treatment.
In order for cautery to work properly
Cautery does not fail in hydropathy (a type of medicine) unless it is used improperly.
When you apply Hydropicum with the methods of care that we described earlier and if you do not perform a proper treatment, then it is necessary to cauterize him with four pairs of tweezers around the navel, and one on top of the stomach, another above the liver, and others at the back, over the spine between the ribs. And also place one directly under each arm, and the other directly under the stomach: for the depth of the cautery should be very close to where it is applied, so as not to damage the skin
After removing a burned area, pus may take some time to come out.
And in addition, after the cautery with him (the burned area): it is necessary to give him two intentions: and he will be healed by God's help.
Cautery with that which you will use for the abdomen is to be sharp; and according to its previous form (of another cautery) on his back it should also be sharp.
For the feet and hands.
When you apply Hydropicum and the blood vessels become full of a fluid called citrina, then it is necessary to cauterize the top of the back of the feet between the ear and the anus; and use your hand with the cautery, do not twist his arm like that: after using one hand for him, do not use another one again.
The fluid called citrina has been removed and the cautery should be according to this form (of a different cautery).
In order to perform cuts on all areas of the body, a cautery must be prepared with two fingers and heated until it is burning; then apply both to each cut simultaneously and allow them to burn for as long as necessary, after which one should use another cautery that is proportionate in length. One cautery should be placed under the arm, while the other below, moving laterally across the surface of the body at an equal distance from all sides: After this, make a cautery over any vein separately and without waiting too long; so you will have done what we said earlier.
In order to perform cauterization using the solution of Viscus.
The 35th chapter.
When the solution of Viscus has been chilled and humidified until it weakens the veins' power to hold and digest, which are in the stomach and intestines; and then cure it with the appropriate methods, but not heal; and when the patient is more tolerant of the painful cautery due to weakness, at that point cauterize him above his belly by a large cautery as before, following what precedes in cauterization on the stomach with a circle cautery, and four cauteries around the navel's sensitive area with a subtle claw cautery; and over the ribs near them, by a great cautery.
If you find excessively humid conditions and a patient who is more tolerant of the painful cautery, then at that point cauterize him above his throat with a cautery; and over everything else as well. And if you wish to add two small cauteries above the belly near it in addition to the large one there.
The cure is effective, whose application does not err.
In order to perform a cautery for hemorrhoids.
The 36th chapter.
When hemorrhoids are old and numerous, or only one, and they come from large amounts of coldness, humidity, or frigidity, then cure them with that as we said in the previous division; but do not apply a curative procedure there. Then cauterize three small cauteries above the lower part of the back beneath by the most triangularly inclined, and also place one cautery below the navel nearly with two fingers.
If the stomach of him is tightened and food cannot be digested by it, then make an incision in his face to save his life. Burn a large artery over his stomach and clamp off another one above his spleen after making an incision through it with a smaller needle's eye. Release the first incision after a while: then you will have to cure him as soon as possible.
Chapter 77
When you make an incision through the artery that supplies blood to him (arteria capitis), then ignite a cautery over it as soon as possible. After that, introduce the heated cautery into his body through the newly made incision and hold it there until blood flows out of him again: do this once (only once), or twice if necessary.
If many incisions are needed, then perform a cautery on each one in the same way as before. After that, cure them while feeding them with oil until they heal.
And if you burn him with a large cautery over his stomach, it is worse than the end.
In order to perform the cauterization within the fistulas (fistulae) of the anus.
Chapter 88
When a sick person has undergone surgery and is still bleeding because of the incision made there, then burn a cautery over it to stop the blood flow: he will recover with this treatment.
After that has happened to someone who had a fistula and it became closed (closed fistulas), pus comes out of it, and the corrupted moisture contaminates everything. Therefore, do what is necessary so that you probe him with a delicate tool to remove the pus inside. After that find out how deep it is when you probe him with a delicate tool.
Then ignite the cautery which has been prepared in the same way as before. After that introduce the heated cautery into him through his fistula and find out how deep it is by probing him with a delicate tool.
Iter over her cautery until every corrupt body is cured once or twice or thrice according to your needs
And guard you from the venom of the ulcers if there is one; either apply a large plaster over her or apply a patch to her fistula at once, whether it's on her nipple or in her intestines, then tend and care for all of them.
And do not make this unless there is a fistula present at the place where flesh is; consider it because penetration does not occur.
Afterwards, tend to that place until it heals completely
If the place becomes sealed off and materials come away from it, then leave it to its time for a long while; know that he has now completely healed.
And if no materials come away from it, then know that he is penetrating or there's a corruption at the mouth of his bowels; or as though something has entered through those, whose remembrance will not be found in its place.
The treatment of wounds by Albucasis
If a pain occurs in the veins from cold or from great suffering and the wound is small because of it, then you must apply cautery to him above all of them on top of the veins, using cauterizing iron over each vein with caution until its healing is completed.
And we may cauterize it a second time at his own request. Where three lines are given. Therefore the last one was added to the healing.
The treatment of wounds by Albucasis
When weakness occurs in the bladder and the cold goes to it with dryness of urine and humidity, until he does not hold back his urine; then you must apply cautery at the base of the male genitals above the vagina where the hairs of the penis begin, using cauterizing iron on the right side of the testes and another on the left one. And the length of that cautery should be in proportion to the number of fingers: and apply cautery below the abdomen either once or twice if you fail; according to what comes before it with a patch.
Of the method for cauterizing the matrix
When a fracture or excessive moisture occurs within the matrix and it is forbidden to be contaminated with any impurities, and menstrual discharges occur along with these things, and the procreative act of theirs occurs, and then pain strikes when they arrive at their destination, so that he must cauterize them in three places around the belly button using a pair of tweezers as we described for cauterizing the vagina, or with two pairs of tweezers.
Of the method for cauterizing an anchor in dislocation
When mucosal moisture occurs to the anchor and causes death at its location, that is when they approach each other; and his sign is when it extends above one of them when they are facing.
Therefore it is recommended that the weak one be cauterized above the anchor's pixel using a similar circle of tweezers after you have signed with the charcoal inside its circumference as we mentioned earlier; and so that he falls into the middle of the circle.
If this cautery is not present to you at that time, then cauterize him with three pairs of tweezers along with a deep cautery as mentioned earlier; and let the depth of the cautery be proportional to the thickness of all skin.
Then cure him until he is healed.
Of the method for cauterizing sciatica.
When pain strikes the anchor's pixel and there are causes of his cold and moisture; then the weak one is cured with him as we described earlier in two ways, and not by treatment alone, it fades away; so that he must be cauterized for this by either strong pills or artificial ones. In such case, the appropriate translation would be "Then cauterize him.
The method of cautery is divided into two ways: first, with the use of medical instruments such as needles and hooks; second, by using fire or heat.
"The method of cautery involving fire includes many variations.
One way to perform cautery is by using a triangular hook on the three points of an arrow or dart aimed at the part requiring treatment. And it may be done with good effect, or bad effect. The space between all cautery is measured by the digits of quantity; and one-way cautery may exist.
When cautery occurs at the top or middle of an arrow, it can be difficult to treat. There are four types of cautery: first, cutting with a knife; second, burning with fire; third, pricking with needles; and fourth, drawing blood by a tube or lancet.
If you use a circle as your cautery tool, the shape of it will be like the dislocation of an arrowhead; one way to do this is by making a circle that holds all three points together tightly.
And burn away completely the skin's thickness.
This is how to perform cautery for sciatica when pain extends from the affected point but does not reach down to the buttocks and legs.
However, if the pain extends down to the buttocks and legs, then you should use a hook made of four fingers as well, aiming at the point where the patient complained of pain; this way your cautery will be applied with four fingers in place, making it an effective treatment for that area.
The depth of cautery is measured by the thickness of the skin being treated.
If the patient had complained of pain reaching nearly to their toes, then you should use a hook aimed at the location where he initially used it, using one or three or four or more hooks as needed for treatment.
If the pain is felt below both the knee and the thighs, then you should use one hook to treat that area.
In every cautery you undergo, to the extent that no more than necessary and immediately required for the bleeding or artery opening is used, it should not be applied to a large artery, nor attached to an injury that may cause harm, nor by way of constriction
I have heard that one or more people applied a cautery above the artery and then suffered a hemorrhage due to its application, and their foot was cut through completely, and they died as a result of this occurrence.
If there is pain in both parts simultaneously, apply the cautery to each one according to that manner.
Some wise people said that a cautery anchor should be used for cautery, because it is its mode (way or method). You should use a hook shaped like iron, whose diameter is proportional to the palm of your hand; and at its opening you should apply it according to the thickness of the fingers, either by covering more or less in proportion; and into that hook insert another one as well
The space between all hooks should be measured by the number of fingers; and the openings on both sides are to have a height like a finger or two fingers; so that you may attach them more firmly with an iron hook into those hooks.
After that it becomes heated by fire until it is reduced to ashes; then it should be placed on a sick foot with an anchor firmly in place above the healthy limb. Then apply three round hooks into his wound, one at a time.
After that you should remove him from the hooks for three days. Afterwards place a layer of butter; and remove open wounds with many applications. After that you should care for him with oil until he is healed
So here ends the chapter on cautery by Albucasis; for his sons use is limited because of their fear from its sight and also due to very few who have succeeded above it.
Certainly. Here's a possible translation of this Latin phrase into English: "Indeed, one who has been trained with good surgical tools will find his way to the desired location.
"With medical instruments one can make two holes to penetrate an arrowhead, so that the door of his house may be opened by air or iron; and they are able to reach it through both holes at a height of two steps above.
"The space between the two quantities of the fingers should be equal in width; and both lower and upper openings should exist; and it may surround itself according to this shape.
"Then place that on a small anchor, gently holding its top towards the right side of your hand. "Hold tightly with your left hand upon the small anchor. "Then take the warm water that is heated with fire and has a similar warmth to it; hold onto it for an appropriate amount of time; then let the sick person bite into it, so that he may be burned just as if by fire, until he becomes quiet.
"Then take your hand with the instrument and pour cold water onto it completely from a vessel filled with sweet water; then let that go for two days.
"Then put above it butter and continue to remove the soot until it is completely removed; let that go for a few days; and then apply the oil. "It is indeed the end of our discussion.
"Then care for it with oils until it is cured.
"If the pain extends to your elbow or shoulder; make him stay in it as long as you kept water at equal distance from both sides.
"This is how warm water should be described; and I have written this down in the book on medicine. "You should pour it onto the left and right hands equally; put that into a new vessel with an opening at its lower end only slightly larger than one finger's radius of the hand on which you will be stirring; put another vessel underneath, but also make sure to pour from both vessels onto your hand in equal amounts. After you have squeezed it tightly by compressing your left and right hands together, remove that container until water from an acute downward portion of a third vessel touches your elbow.
In such a case you should collect all of it (the water) and place it over another stone or hard object until it is returned to its original state
This stone (or hard object) will be strong and effective when it is used for the collection of water during medical operations or in the process of closing up wounds after surgery. Because its use brings about a healing effect due to fire.
And from these medicines are used as well when they're being burned with a strong fire (i.e., cauterization), and just like this one here too, and also with the ashes of wood ash mixed in with soap, so that both may be combined equally.
And Galenos told the story of a certain man who was treated by this cure in ancient times and it relieved the pain of his ankle and foot; so that he was greatly pleased with its effectiveness. And he said this because it was not suitable for any other treatment and that he had been cured with just one application of its remedy, until it had been used inside the ear canal again; from which point onwards he became healthy once more.
And it is so that if one takes from the seath-ring remedy; and if not used with a man's urine, then it should be dried in the sun until it becomes dry as a powder: and apply it to the sore place where there is pain, either on the ankle or the knee. It should be tied tightly together and can be applied three times per day according to how much the patient feels soothed by the heat of the fire. And then apply it inside his ear canal.
After this, tie him down and place him on a bed or chair until he is asleep. The pain has been relieved, and so it was healed.
And know that he should not be burned with these medicines unless after the body is completely emptied of its own fluids first.
And Dioscorides said that the goat's skin when it is burned with just one application to a sciatic pain, cured him; and its use was according to this method only. A tendon is placed over a deep groove that runs between the heel bone and toes; it is located above the tendons of the fingers and toes.
Then take a dry twig (of a goat) and burn it over a fire until it becomes charcoal; after that make the charcoal into powder.
After that place it on the tendon and remove it, then let it be extinguished (i.e., burn off). Then do this again. Do not stop doing that until the pain stops (i.e., continue to apply it as long as you feel any pain).
And this mode of treatment is called a cautery (lit: burning tool or instrument) by the Arabs, referring to their use of fire for cauterizing wounds
The method of applying it until you are free from pain
When pain is caused by multiple causes or accidents, or by cuts, bruises, or the removal of excessive fluids, and similarly from infusions with cold and wet materials; but this cautery only remains if it was made through an infusion of frigid matter alone.
Therefore, after the removal of foetal pills and similarly for them to be above the back when pain is there (i.e., three lines in a semicircle), until signs with wax are placed on every five lines of the cautery or more according to their number; then let it be called a cauterization if done punctually with a cautery.
If three or four cauteries are used and the middle one has been heated, then do it in this manner.
The mode of cauterizing for Gibbus (the term seems to be a name for an Arabic region or country).
Many injuries happen through this with infants.
The sign of its injury is on the infants; that was caused by a stricture in his throat while he was being fed and a blow: then it entered into the last part of his back (i.e., the heel bone) between the toes, which has begun to rise above the remaining parts of his legs.
As soon as you understand this thing and know how to do it, then burn him with a cautery made in the shape of a circle according to that form
Spread the cautery evenly over all parts of him and burn through it equally; if you're using a cautery with points on both ends, make two lines or three: also have the dots close together
Afterwards, wait until he is cured as we said.
Do not administer the cautery to an excessive extent that might lead to a spasm of the nerves.
Cautery for treating podagra and joining up pain.
When the pains of joints are caused by cold and dampness that penetrate any part of the body, then when they occur in the feet, according to medical custom it is called Podagra specifically.
As soon as cured of podagra by cold causes and a cure with the methods of curing, the pains will not remain, but the cautery will remove them.
And it is that the cautery be applied after the application of a binding mixture around the feet with many cauteries; also known as Ollie's Cautery.
If you want to make points on the face of the foot then burn with a cautery along with the points If the pains ascend up to the knee or from any joint and there are many casualties, then apply a cautery over all the joints of each limb with three or four cauteries across it according to this same method as Clauilius does.
If you need more of that cautery then burn him (the patient). Do not hold your hand with the cautery for too long as it may damage only the skin sores
If the pains ascend up to the knee and back then administer what we said using a cautery on his cheek or brow.
When pain is confined to a single limb, then you must strike with a sharp blow as if you were striking two strings of an instrument.
If the pain extends to the fingers, then strike them all at once with a sharp blow as if you were striking one point over every knot and another point over the chin.
If the pain extends to the elbows or shoulders after a day, then cauterize both simultaneously from every part.
And do not neglect any sick person nor a patient's needs for treatment. If the regimen is good and helps clear the phlegm and heals with God's help by applying cautery.
On how to perform cautery in Ruptures (ruptured vessels).
When a rupture occurs in the groin or abdomen and descends into the bowels, either to the testicles or the anus, it is approaching; at this point you must immediately give food to the patient the next day with appropriate treatment. And if he becomes weaker from severe illness as he descends into his belly, then you should make use of gentle remedies that will bring him back up from his belly to your hands.
Then let him lie between your hands on his back and gently hold it until he returns to consciousness or the bowel appears; whichever comes first.
Then take it gently between your fingers and signs with the wax over the rupture above the nostrils as if you were drawing a circle around the upper part of the body from side to side; but also on one hand, draw an identical sign alongside the other hand so that they meet at the top of the head.
Then strike with fire to seal it; when this is done let him come out and take his food. And then you reduce the bowels or the bowel into your possession as appropriate treatment. Then lay your hand on the place to prevent him from defecating; and you have already applied a poultice between his hands that he holds onto it while another one is above his chest and another one over his chin as he holds onto it with both hands,
Then apply a cautery over the signature using your thumb with the cautery still straight Hold tight to it until you have finished applying it or another place if need be, and do not use it again unless you previously used it with the same thumb on its first application.
Be cautious while applying the cautery to the intestines during a surgery or procedure, so as not to burn it; instead, let it be placed over the patient's body near death or great evil.
You know that if you do not succeed in applying the cautery to the signature, then cancel your operation.
The cautery for infants should be subtle and according to their measurement or size.
Then apply a cream with the cautery until it heals.
The patient will be laid down on their back for forty days after the signature has been taken.
It is necessary that you place nourishment for him according to the length of his cure and the duration of his treatment so that he does not lose weight or suffer from exhaustion due to indigestion or constipation.
Then after forty days the patient will be given a stronger ligature for ten more days.
There will also be a reduction in work and increase in food, drink, and the voice of those who eat it.
When this regimen is used, then healing will occur with whole heart.
And I say that the cure for Ruptures should be with an incision on his head.
If Ruptures occur in the other parts of his body and are starting to come out but you do not want them to be added, then cauterize him with a round cautery according to its quantity; let it happen as if it were on the third time for him. Then apply this cure and do not add anything else to it.
Some people said that Ruptures should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this shape.
After the incision is made with a cautery, and another line is applied at right angles to it from the superior tear above and inferior below Place your hand in the middle while using the cauterizing tool (clavius).
The first is more easily and effectively used.
Cautery should be applied when there is pain from a cut or when striking with a mallet (percussio).
Chapter 80.
When pain occurs due to a case or a blow (percussio), and the suffering continues for a long time without relief through medicines: then it is necessary to cauterize using a cautery.
The cautery should be of all sizes proportionate to its strength and usefulness, its weakness, its disability, its usefulness, its torsion and pain from it.
If therefore healing comes through the use of a cautery first, then it is good (optimum). Otherwise, proceed to another cautery.
Because of the custom among people that they are changed from one member to what suits them better. Therefore, it is necessary for those in pain to be treated with a cautery until they recover.
Cautery should only be applied in Leprosy (Leprae).
Leprosy is sometimes treated with the most extensive use of a cautery. The particular type of Leprosy that occurs due to the decay of blood and melancholy must be considered when treating with a cautery.
If Leprosy is not cured due to the cautery alone and does not subside or heal, do not give up: continue with additional cauterizations above his head in five places as described here (in Chapter 90), one on the forehead, two over the ears, another at the back of the neck near the chin, the fifth behind.
"Lastly take your hand with a cautery tool, until the impression is made on the nostril and it will be dislocated from there, freeing up expiration of the breath in that manner, also cauterize using the cautery over him so as to stop bleeding.
"The Leprosy has already spread over the sick one and is visible; it must be cautorized using these cauteries that we mentioned in regard to the head, and a cautery on each nostril, two over both nostrils, six over the vertebrae, and one above the heel-bone, one above him. Over the elbows there are two, one over every elbow, two over the upper arms, two over the shoulders, and two over the chest, and a cautery over every joint, using the hand of your fingers, and foot of yours; also a cautery over every ankle of yours, six over the vertebrae of the back. One above him.
"And cauterize your nostrils that are above the heel bone so as not to burn them.
"Sometimes when cautering over the nose and mouth of the stomach is done, another above the esophagus, and another above the epiglottis.
"You know that when there are more cauteries, it is also more painful and exhausting.
"You know that the sick person did not feel pain from cautery as they do normally because their body is already weakened.
"It should be a cautery in magnitude and according to the parts of the body, and also with regards to joints.
"After that, cure the cautery using flour and honey, until it is cured.
"That's how to cauterize.
"If a member is stunned and is not cured using medicine, oil, plaster, and the cautery does nothing, then cauterize it in that member.
"Make a small hole for the firebrand [cautery] within and place it between the fingers. Then apply oil to the cautery until healed.
If the firebrand causes numbness or paralysis of the fingers and toes when applied to some part of the body, then it will be removed from that place by movements of the limb; and the numbness will be relieved.
Indeed this should not be applied over anything unless one is wise about the anatomy of the limbs, and by movements of the nerves can body move out.
The head, L.
If Albucasis says that something is not to be found in the cautery of Albaras by way of medical arts; then cauterize deeply into that cautery parumper and wait until the color has been removed, after which its appearance will change as well.
Then apply flour mixed with herbs and oil, lentils mixed with rose water, leaves of the hyacinth [Hyacinthus] mixed with columbine blood (columbine is a type of flower), and hyacinth blood mixed as well; from all this will be one part. Mix these things together and let them run over the wound until healed.
By using cautery in Cancer.
When Cancer is beginning to happen and one must hold him; then cauterize him with a circle of cautery in the circle around his body as it was done before.
The wise ones said that cautery should be applied last to the middle of the firebrand.
I do not understand this; because of my fear that it will become a sore, and I have already heard about that from someone else before.
Indeed, when the firebrand is placed around its own circle like we said before; or by many cauteries.
By using cautery for Adubelati.
When someone has an abscess and it is ripe for incision or excision, perhaps due to a lack of resources or advanced age, if the patient is already impoverished and lacks sufficient blood, or perhaps because time is running short, then in such a situation one should cauterize that abscess with heated iron rods puncturing the abscess several times. Then let it go away And will continue to swell
If instead one makes a hole in it with an iron tool as depicted below...
...then remove the abscess from its center and let it drain through a hole made with an iron tool; so that any pus in it may be purified as much as possible.
And once the hole is made, then cure him/her immediately.
In order to cauterize with a corroding iron tool.
The head of LIIII.
A corroding iron tool can only cause rot or destruction if it is applied to a swollen member; but he who was corrupted by fire became like wood that had been consumed by fire.
If therefore you want to apply the corroding iron tool where it may be accepted by fire and thus cause many burns with a large number of irons puncturing that place where corrosion occurs,
Then one should burn him/her from all parts until the rot is completely removed and nothing remains of it except the wound itself.
Then let him/her go without food for three days and apply sulfurous treacle with oil to the places of the cautery until all sores are removed completely and no corruption remains anywhere.
And then cure him/her with various ointments made from animal fat.
Therefore if after three days the body is born again healthy and free of corruption, that's a good thing.
Then apply more cautery to the place where some corruption remains after all sores have been removed.
The corroding iron tool is sometimes used in conjunction with an acute medication. An abscess appears where the cautery has been applied
However, the cautery with fire has caused a wound; and I myself have said that cauterization should be done together with acute medicine in division: take it therefore there when it is ready
Cauterize the nail or wart
The skull
Many wounds have occurred on the soles of the feet; there is a large one, leaking, which affects the foot.
The cautery can also be done with warm water.
When done with fire, the cautery must be applied in a similar manner to that of removing a piece of flesh from the hand: it should be done as if using iron, proportional to how much charred cloth is removed all at once: and there will be a fine border.
After this, place the burned clot on top of the cloth. After this, take your hand with the cautery towards the circumference of the cloth, until it reaches the depth of the cloth; and then release the cautery in three days, until the discharge starts emitting pus. After this, place a bandage over him with salt-soaked strips; and then remove it from over him at night. This one will be removed by its roots.
After this, apply ointment to the affected area of flesh until it is cured.
If it does not happen as desired; many wounds occur on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet; then you administer the cautery with warm water; there will be a cannula from the air or iron or from a piece of flesh: and place it on top of the cloth. After this, squeeze the cannula with a small amount of water; hold your hand tight and you pull it back towards yourself with a compression of your hands stronger, until there is a border to the root of the cloth: and the hot water will go deep, to the roots of the cloth: and expect weakness more than over the hour when a hot water border is applied.
Therefore remove it (the abscess), since its roots are removed
It is spread to one person after another, until everyone who comes into contact with them has become infected with the body.
Once it has been removed (the abscess), then cure those that have come into contact with it; and when they generate flesh from the unguents
Cautery by fire
If a seizure occurs when someone is struck by the tremor from cold or feverish illness or any other such thing; then he must be cautorized with four cauteries at once, either four above the neck (four in the region of the brain) or five upon the back of the spine and between all of them on the backbone itself, as well as within his heart by another cauterization. And over him, too, there should be a cauterization; so that he may not die from the disease.
The seizure ceases with cautery and health returns to the sick one (from cold).
Cautery by Albathir.
The 70th head.
When the food of Albathyr (i.e., boils) is expelled from within the body; that is, when pus forms on materials which are corrupted and rotten.
Therefore first they should be cautorized (treated) on every head separately with a subtle cautery using wood which is charged with fire; the end of this wood being applied with fire as well. Or with the root of a long aristolochia. Or with a subtle cautery made from lenticels (lenticles) or small twigs.
And when they are treated (i.e., cured) by cautery and the excess is removed as I have said; so that they become healthy again.
However, it must be done after expulsion with phlebotomy.
Cautery by the flow of blood out from an artery into a vein.
Many times the flow of blood from an artery that had been cut and was outside or near to a vein; it could happen by cutting oneself with sharp instruments, or by cautery on the member itself; such things cause difficulty in removing him (i.e., the blood).
"Then, if the needle passes through to that place where your hand is placed over the opening of an artery and you put forth your finger there: then grasp it firmly with both hands until blood comes out of it; otherwise, do not let go.
Then take a large oil lamp and set the wick on fire with it; then blow out the flame by holding it above what you are aiming at until the flame goes out.
Then take one of them - a small one or a large one depending on the location where the artery has been cut and place the cautery over that spot immediately after you have removed your finger; then hold it until blood stops flowing from there.
If you expel the needle along with your finger from the opening of an artery and extinguish the cautery, then take another one immediately after extinguishing it; from the cauteries that have been prepared by fire.
Do not do this with just one other one until blood stops flowing.
And if you touch the inflamed wound nearby and apply another cautery to it instead.
And you know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to remove it; especially if the artery is large unless you use four methods at once. Or with a cautery as we mentioned before. Or with extraction when it is not possible to remove the object. If an object is extracted out of them (the fingers), their extremities are cramped and blood stops flowing from there. Or tied with a strong thread. Or placed upon it medicines to stop the bleeding and tie it down using an appropriate constriction of veins so that it does not become loose or fall off.
Whoever administers the excision with a ligature, and a tie down using cloth or something else, or by placing things on top of it, he should not apply excessive pressure to prevent pain unless very rarely necessary.
If the person to whom that is done does not have a physician at hand and no medicine: then let it be placed over the opening of the vein in question as we described before, and by constriction of his own veins until blood stops flowing above the artery. The finger is not removed immediately upon contact with cold water; it remains frozen for a long time and becomes swollen, hard, and falls off.
In the meantime you should examine whether there was an injury or some medicine that caused this condition.
Chapter 2: Of incisions, perforations, and phlebotomies of veins, and the like
I am the tenth book of Albucasis and my purpose is to explain everything about cautery in medical practice.
And placed here chapters up to the foot.
I proceed through this chapter with the same path, so that he may be relieved of whatever was asked for him.
And before beginning this chapter, it is necessary that you know the offspring of what was mentioned in Chapter 1 on cautery, as it should be a warning to them.
And for this reason it is necessary that the caution be more severe, because in operation which takes place here there are many deaths of people from bleeding and all other causes mentioned earlier.
I warn you that if something like this happens to any of you, then when they fall into the same art with the weakness of people, there can be death too. From these is he who becomes angry with his own pain and death occurs from him through the severity of this and the length of it, as a result of its bitterness. And when there are pain and fear that mean death.
From these is he who gives himself over to his own pain and says it with him, hoping for healing but the severity of his pain is harmful.
"You should treat him with kindness who has come among you from those people whose method is such. Your caution must be greater than your desire and your greediness Do not boast over anything from him unless after certain knowledge that would have benefited you in the successful outcome which occurred because of his method.
You should apply your skills to the care and management of all the sick people's health, using predictions and indications as needed for what is more beneficial for their welfare.
That man among you shall be your teacher in acquiring fame and glory, memory and praise.
The God inspired you sons, his mind and gave no guidance or suggestions to you because it was only in his own hand that this happened
I have also given you this chapter distinguishing it by the chapters of Cautery as far down to your feet so that you may know what is to be done from him and what benefits you.
Of the care of waters which are gathered up among children
Chapter 1
Remember that this illness has often struck children at birth or when the mother's womb is tight without release.
And also when it occurs from an obscure cause which cannot be known.
I did not find this disease to be as severe in others than in children, and death came upon everyone who was affected by it; for that is why I wish to withdraw the use of my treatment from them.
I also knew of a child whose head was bound with water and it was adorned with beauty every day until he could not stay upon himself because of the greatness of his head; and dampness increased until he died.
And this disease also appears when moisture gathers between skin and mouth or beneath bones above the nose.
The operation on that should be performed when there is moisture between the skin and mouth or beneath the bones above the nose; it must occur so that a cut made at the top of the head in breadth occurs, and its length should be like two fingers until the dampness runs.
This is the form of a sponge
If therefore humidity increases more, and the sponge becomes larger, then make two cuts along this shape
And if humidity is below bone and its sign shows that the corners of your head are open on all sides; water will descend when you compress it with your hand to the inside, but not be hidden from you: then you should find three cuts in the middle of the top of the head, as shown.
After cutting out the humidity Then tie up the cuts with gauze and cotton. Then wrap it over with wine, oil, and olive oil until the fifth day.
After that, remove the bandage and care for wounds along with linen and ointment.
And do not tie up your head in an uneven manner. And make sure to keep the body as dry as possible and use any available moisture until the member is comfortable and healed.
Another way of cutting it is that you consider where the size of the sponge becomes visible and collection of water.
Sometimes when there are cuts on one side or another, or in both hands/arms.
Therefore ascend with the incision where you see the sponge and pull out water; then it will be done in a way that is possible for you.
And be careful not to cut the artery and cause blood flow stoppage; or else the member may die from that loss of fluid with the removal of moisture.
Of the cuts in arteries which are behind ears.
The head (second part).
If cuts occur on the eye or nose and become infected; then more than ever is the final care for it as a last resort, cutting of both arteries.
Therefore when you see that he has cut them to remove his own head. Then cover the place with a bandage so that the arteries are visible. "Then he ties his own arm with a bandage. "And then he considers where to apply the bandage. And his two hands are tied behind his ears and are rare unless some men have them.
"Then he puts a bandage made of wax on both his hands and smashes them with nails or picks up the corners to remove it from his face, inserting it through the slit in the back of the head.
"And if he is lying down, he puts a bandage made of wax under his arm and cuts it off above with an incision.
The length of the incision should be as close to two fingers joined together as possible.
"When one is cut open, blood flows out through a narrow slit that runs up the center of his body.
If an artery is not visible to him (the surgeon), then he should measure from the ear how far three fingers would be apart and insert the bandage at that distance into his body. "Then he puts a bandage made of wax all the way up to his nose.
The object that should be emitted with blood is six finger-breadths and at most it can be emitted from him more than or less than this. "That bandage should always be placed in accordance with the amount that is visible to you through your examination and pressing on his arteries, as much or more than this.
"Then he considers where to remove it from the nose. "Then if anything remains at his nose after having removed the bandage made of wax, then he cuts it off and ties up that part of the face with linen.
"And then he applies a treatment by anointing him with oil until he is healed.
"In the extraction of arteries, which are located behind his ears.
Chapter three
"When a man has an old or acute catarrh of the ears due to acrimonious moisture and coldness of the lacrimal canals, or due to soda or other things that irritate him (the surgeon), he must be treated with medical methods, without causing any harm: then we are skilled in his treatment of extracting arteries from behind his ears, as we have been taught.
The method of removing ears is as follows: first, the surgeon severs the hairs which are within a certain time limit and aims for an artery which lies close to it The pulse test is performed on you by means of your own pulse and is rare unless only a few men are involved or there is coldness causing it.
If the pulse test shows that you should be examined by an attendant with a cloth to remove fear and apply it gently. Or if there is warmth in place after removing the cloth then immediately show your face for immediate inspection. Then take it gently as I made before a short time ago Afterwards wash with that cloth in a hurry until you reach the artery. Afterwards remove it quickly and take it out to the top part until you pull it off from your skin, then tie it up securely below that with whatever is under it on all sides.
If the artery is shallow then immediately take it out quickly with your nail. Afterwards cut off a piece as large as the parts of his extremities and tie them together securely so that no blood flows through it. If not cut off or removed then there will be no bleeding from the artery.
Afterwards wash with water until you reach 6-3-
If the artery is large then you must tie it with two or three ropes, firm and strong, from either a cord or a strip so that no blood flows through after tying, to prevent decay of the flesh before healing wounds and to ensure no blood flow.
Afterwards cut off any excess between two ropes. Do this during that time or at another time.
And if you wish then sear it with a cautery until reaching the mouth using a cautery and tie it up securely once his extremities are cut off to ensure its location for that purpose.
And if the surgeon is ill or the face becomes red then a better method must be used. Because of the cautery is from those who go to end the dampness Therefore it's better
After extraction of arteries, let there be placed on an old vein and put the pulp down gently on top of it
And after curing with dry medicines which cause to be born meat, and with vinegar until they are cured.
If during the operation there was a sudden bleeding from an artery, then immediately apply it with a cautery or else take out what you have grasped and stop the blood with vinegar. If nothing is present among these things to you at this time, then put your finger over the place and until the blood freezes. And cover it with cold water and let it cool down and be bound as needed.
And that which is better and easier to remove from the artery is with a cautery holding two hooks together so that both their sharpness are equal in strength. However, smaller knives have less force than two hooks. Because if they are sharp like the two hooks, it is equally to each side so that they do not cut through meat with pressure. Therefore there is some excess of fat and heat in them and they are burned with fire or else the meat is cut off quickly, but because of this therefore it's better for all operations and more so.
This is how the cautery works.
And place what is between two hooks the size of your fingers after you put both places with encaustic wax and leave them to burn until they come out at their own mouth, or else cut off one in two different places so that it can be stretched as long as it extends from his extremities. Because the pain is not relieved with this cautery.
Caput IV
On curing of tears from eyes.
When there are excessive tears and the course of them is from within the ears, which are over the outer sides of the head's skull; and nothing was done for their cure with medicines, but they see a reddening in front of themselves: and it feels a movement on its forehead like that of scraping off scabs: and their eyes become moist, as if corroded by corrosion. And the eyelashes of them are heated from excessive tears, then those who were treating them did so through this operation, and called it treatment, using "Ensay".
It is also that the very hairs on their forehead may be removed by a certain ailment/disease Then there are three cuts equally spaced horizontally across the forehead; and their length is nearly equal to two fingers' breadth each, one cut being midway along the nasal bone: another cut following just behind the motion of tears: the third cut at a part which is opposite from the second: then come blood vessels on both sides: and stretch your hand out by the length of both lower jaws. The total amount of all incisions is three fingers joined together, so that you may take sponges or many cloths soaked with blood.
Then introduce sharp pointed sticks in pairs to which their form follows. From the cut at the part of the ear to the second one: and shave with that all the way through to the cut between two incisions, up towards the nose. Then do this as well from the middle cut to the second one. Then remove that with a pair of sharp sticks and introduce the same cutting tool again for the first cut from another part which is not pointed: but use an actual cutting tool for removing from another part which is pointed. And this is its form.
Then he puts the cutting tool into their ear with flesh on one side and then removes it leaving only the nose for them to pull out; and then pushes him towards the middle cut, until they reach that which appears from the flesh: except when there is a cut all the way up to where we see something coming.
In the middle of a wound until another cut is made
After the flow of blood becomes equal to that expressed through the coagulated wounds, express it from the severed vessels with forceps
Then apply a bandage over all the cuts made and bind it firmly to the severed vessels with sutures; and press upon it a mixture of powdered alum, vinegar or acetic acid. And be sure that the cold compresses are not too cold.
On the third day use a ligature and administer an infusion of warm water several times. Then apply that with the ointment of the basilisk [a healing ointment made from various herbs] to all those in need; and let them gradually heal.
Head V
For eye drops, nose drops, and throat drops applied from the inside of the head [the sinuses].
When someone has a sudden attack of the eyes and nose drops, and in his aspect there is a weakening; and the eyelids are ulcerated, the hairs fall off from them, and at that place [the head] there is an acute pain, severe, and the result thereof: then remove these things which have been mentioned, as they will not come through any other means but by many vessels.
And the cure for them is this. So that you may strongly pull at your face. Then make one incision in the middle of your face, or slightly higher and to the right; and begin with a cut at the left side of the nose until you reach the mouth. And stretch out your hand towards the lips, which move during mastication: until you have reached the mouth. When you have reached it, you will extract all the blood through a sponge.
Then make an incision between the lips with old linen or with linen cloth. Then bind a bandage over it and press upon it a mixture of powdered alum, vinegar, or acetic acid to prevent cold from causing shock.
When it has warmed up and you see that the tip of the hook is ready to be inserted into flesh (carp), then it should be removed from water so that it may begin to grow inside the flesh
Then take care of it while you are regulating the heat so that it makes flesh grow (carp): just as if you were to pull apart two parts from a mixture of wheat flour and four parts from colophonium, and prepare an implement using those parts, and administer them in order to bring the meat into being on these hooks.
The sixth part is the head, which contains two cavities: one for air and one for water.
Take care of it when it has fallen down inside the hook (carp).
Everything that falls down inside the hook (carp) is divided into four species: a mineral stone or a pebble like iron; earth and water are also included in this category: anything that comes from plants, such as wine from grapes, bread made of wheat; water itself, as well as vinegar.
Therefore when a mineral stone falls inside the hook (carp), or if there is no addition to its species so that it does not grow within the hook, just remove the hook from water and observe whether you see a pebble: in such a case distill something from olive oil, or sesame seed. Then administer the extraction of it and make it grow with care, and pull up the nostrils towards the entrance of the nose after placing a hook (carp) on the ears, or wool, and raise the hook to its highest point.
Many things will be attributed with this kind of care.
If not, then administer the extraction of it using a gesture (carp), that is, you pull back his head by subtle motions with such a shape as this.
If so attributed to him after the gesture, it is good.
And if not with a gesture (carp), then administer the extraction of it using a blind touch by subtle strokes in two directions.
If not with a blind touch by the gesture (carp), then make a hook from feathers and let its tip enter deeply into the ear opening and pull it out forcefully through your strong grip after loosening it gently with oil, so that no injury occurs to the ear: unless you use a hook.
"For one reason I am delighted that you have come. If not, then you must take it from the skullcap or from my hand, that is to say, prepare gluten, with which we cut the vein; and afterwards put this into your forearm just below where you had placed it badly when you were holding on too firmly. Afterwards introduce it into the earhole with ease, after you have shaken off the moisture of the ear.
Therefore if I am not delighted with everything that we have taken [i.e., the vein], then quickly prepare a hot chisel or any other suitable instrument to cut it off before removing the hook.
And the method of the incision is so that first you make an incision into the head; and remove him from the blood according to his measure of strength he has. Afterwards let the weak one rest between your hands; and gently pull his ear up to its highest point; find the incision in the root of the ear near his cheekbone; and make a slit into the ear's figure, until you have reached the stone: then take him with those instruments.
Afterwards seal up the incision at your time when it is ready; and look after her carefully until she has healed completely.
If something falls into the ear from one of many growing growths that are there and inflate; then administer an extraction for him/her.
If it does not go out to you with the thin, gentle, subtle manner, then take a very small, fine one according to this form.
And administer the removal of this kind from growths that fall into the ear and do not make it if you think that this one is already moistened through the moisture of the ear because of the swelling; wait until you place it on his/her forehead; then take her out with hooks, or with gentle, subtle, precise movements.
If something falls into the ear from water, let the weak one breathe with a nosebleed first; and already closed his/her ear because of some old clot; he/she is lying above her, where there was moisture. Therefore I have learned that this is good
If not then take many stones according to the length of your fingers, thin, light ones and set them ablaze with fire, and introduce one into his ear using a stone from that part [left side] for healing; after this strike him on the foot with another stone placed above it in the ear. Therefore, I will not stop doing that until he is entirely healed with a stone and another.
I have already learned water so that you take one from a bowl or jug and introduce it into his ear; you set ablaze the extremity of another with fire until all parts are consumed. Then you take another with a tube as prescribed and draw out the one that has been burned into the stone; you will do this many times until he is entirely healed by water.
In extracting an animal which is too small for the body, you pour it out as you would from a vessel; and to him who has received such care, treat him similarly by drawing out.
But if it is a large body which appears to the senses; then administer the extraction of him with a hand gesture and tweezers; and as for them who have received such care, it will be easier for them than those held in the ear.
In extracting the uremic excrements from the ear when you have cured him as prescribed by distillation and not conferred care; then it is necessary that you scratch his ear with a finger. If therefore something appears there from the excrements, then draw out this one with a gesture or with tweezers.
If however nothing appears there, then take a tube as prescribed; the shape of which is narrow below and wide above; and introduce the delicate extremity into the ear according to how much that can be tolerated by the patient. Afterwards suck with it strongly. Do this many times until all excrements have been extracted.
If they refuse to obey you at your departure, then they should be tied up with cords as I described it on stone
If they do not comply with what we have said, then administer the distilled substances which are now expert at infecting wounds and use them according to the treatment of distillations.
And let there be a shower for you with olive oil and medicines on top with this instrument which shape is depicted here. As I showed you before from the bronze or air below the narrow one where the hole of the ear is, above the broad one.
So that it pushes what is within the corded cannula away from the air and down lower. If you are on fire and receive the water; then pour into that which is at its end with a gentle movement of the hand, so as to send the oil or syrup towards it through the cannula; thereafter let there be heated up by fire above, and then come out cooled down from the flame. And what is poured in the ear should now become hot, as if ignited by fire, so that no thing which is distilled may remain cold, for medicines do not tolerate this.
The seventh head
Of the care of hair loss accidents ears.
When some infants come from the parents who have not been perforated.
And it has also happened to some people that loss of hair happens because there was injury at the ear or from birth.
And this loss of hair occurs sometimes in the deep hole at the ear which is not due to us; and sometimes it happens from the outside holes barely, and it follows that one.
Therefore, those who it has happened at the deep hole of the ear and does not understand the aspect, are very difficult to heal many ways.
And for those who it follows us because of an injury at the ear hole, it is necessary to put the ear in the hand with its face down and wash gently; if you see the loss of hair appear, open her with a small brush which shape is this which follows, place your thumb on his extremity where there is some slight latitude, sharp part also exists. And what remains after that should be washed by two hands lightly so as not to burn it.
The opening of an artery from skin to ear is done with an incision made delicately and cutting it easily after applying a certain substance that facilitates the process until complete severance of the flesh occurs.
If the opening is in the deep ear: Then take a small needle and thread it through delicately, until you have heated it over fire to harden it; then move it into the ear canal.
If you are performing surgery using this tool and it becomes worn out because of frequent use with hearing impairment, then repair the opening for him carefully to avoid ear pain
After placing the ligature in the ear according to its size opening and piercing it with an awl from Egypt: let this be done for several days until the swelling is settled.
Or take the ligature and immerse it in hot water, then squeeze over it vinegar juice, until you mix them together; after that use this mixture to suture him up.
If you are removing the ligature already: then remove it immediately and allow it to be mixed with another ligature that has been soaked in olive oil, until the heated ligature is cooled down; after that, take good care of it so that it can heal completely.
If you have a burst artery: Then immerse the sponge or cloth in cold water and place it over his head; after that use the remaining cure to stop the blood flow which was cut off by this distillation treatment.
On how to heal eyes.
The eighth chapter of the book on head surgery.
Those who fall into the eyes and sometimes become wet or dry.
Therefore you should hold them with tweezers; or with a needle and thread the eye and cut it at its root. After that apply vinegar juice to the location.
If blood flows from them: then burn them with a small, fine cautery.
And after cutting them it is better to burn them. "Many become infected when a part of their roots is severed. If they are burned with fire, the roots are burned and do not return.
For healing of eyes
Head 9
Many is damaged to the eyes something which is like Ceado with its strength and firmness, because of that it is called Grando; and there is an accumulation of large moisture on the upper eyelid and lower eyelid.
Therefore operation on them is necessary, so that you consider when Grando proceeds to it what appears from the eyelid and move to all parts of it; for his is easy.
Then find a fissure across the width. Then smooth it all around with ease until it is gone. Then suspend it with a hook and remove it.
If the separation of his part is not prepared for you except after you penetrate the eyelid with a more powerful incision then that will be harmful to him somewhere.
If there is a large fissure, then bind it firmly with stitching and heal it until it becomes well.
And if the fracture is small, you will not suffer evil from it. It was restored and reborn.
If Grando is removed from the inner surface of the ear to its outer surface then the eyelid should be turned inward and suspended with a hook except where you cut it and remove it completely around.
If the eyelid is stretched by an incision, it will not be harmful somewhere.
Then close the eye after Grando's removal with salty water and heal the place where it was reborn until the injured one has healed.
For healing of eyes
Head 10
Axirnath is a swelling that occurs in the upper eyelids of children; and it happens to many boys, causing tears from them morning by morning, so they are not able to look at the sun because their eyes become swollen, hence there were always tears flowing from them, and also the swelling was under the eyebrows which was caused by the inflation. And its great prominence is noticeable on the eye when you touch it with your fingers, and then you feel Axirnath between those two eyelids.
To perform an operation you should place his head in your hand
After receiving the sheet with incisions and tying it around his neck, proceed to cut off the head according to the quantity contained in the Axirnath from every part of him. Then place him upon it and fasten his head with your hands around the middle of the circle so that Axirnath will be centered within it.
After this, find the center of his moisture with a spit-like instrument and make an incision according to depth so that no incision is made for phlebotomy into the deep parts.
Or perhaps you should find a complete cut and pass it on to Axirnath with many incisions so that Axirnath proceeds from the incision according to the shape of the white part's edges.
Then take the sheet away with your hands and spread it out between yours so that they can be separated; proceed to not include an incision lest you may cut off his eye, tie him back up
If however the shape of Axirnath is not apparent to you at first incision, proceed with the incision only slightly Then remove it as we described.
After removing the sheet with vinegar and water, place them upon a spot, and tie him up tightly.
And there are those who have taken the salt and placed it into the incision so that it may dissolve what remains of the moisture from before.
After this, take care of her until she is healed.
If however he falls into a hot place bind him tightly with satiated plasters so that he may be healed.
In the mode of Axirnath to the eye, which means with a relaxation of the eyelid so that it moves like it should not
The 11th Head
When there are hairs added to the eyelashes of the eye that grow beyond their course under natural hairs and are equal in number: at this point they harm the eye by striking it with blows like tears and causing irritation of the eyelids and dryness, until this occurs as a cause for destruction of the eye.
"And for curing eye ailments, there are four modes. With fire cautery. Or with a lancet and acute medicine, as described in the chapter on cauteries. And for curing eye ailments using incisions and stitches (sutures). Or with tubes, as I say.
It is to be placed on the head of a physician into your hand. Then, with the left hand cover the eye socket.
If it is so done, then it's good. And if not: pull the thread from beneath the eyelid as it is and make it penetrate through with a needle and tie to the eyebrow ridge; that is, to the hair's head, i.e., to the eyebrow margin where hairs are born; and draw the thread up to the top of the eye as you cover her with your hand.
Then find it in the inner part of the eyelid, under hairs added due to spit and tears running down to the tears below; then you will have reached the tear duct lower than the tear ducts themselves.
Then draw it out and place beneath the eyelid a small knot made of wax or cloth; then take signs over the eye with charcoal, as it is like the shape of a mourning wreath.
However, let its figure be according to the quantity and elevation of the eyelid; because it has already been diversified among men.
These are done by those who make incisions into large portions from the eyelid according to how much the eyelids have been softened.
Then find it above two lines that you have drawn and start at the tear duct lower than tears itself down to tears; and there should be a single hole near natural hairs as large as the radius of your hand is wide.
Then introduce it into one of two angles of skin. And then you are done. Finally bind the lips closed with a double fold of thread and needle thin linen; and remove blood, so that you do not exceed what is left on both sides by the threads above two eyebrows, if it can be done: and if not, then do not cure.
"If you remove sutures after three days at the latest, or four.
"And if there is a wound without sutures, then take care of it with oil and vinegar so that it may be dried up and tightened. "The eyelid swells upon the swelling around the wound, but recovery is better.
"This manner of treatment was used by ancient physicians.
"However, there is a lot of effort on the sick person and good work does not create fear.
"And another way of treatment is in Ataxmir as well; and it is so that there are signs above the eyelid shaped like a leaf cut out, just like we know.
"After the eyelid swells apart from three strands or together with four, according to its shape which follows then you cut off what is left over using small cuts in the same way as before.
"If you cannot hold onto one thread and it does not match well then take the other thread in your hand and put it into the middle of the shape; and put another thread on its way towards tears more, and one thread on its way to tears less: and gather the threads between your fingers with equality.
"After you have gathered both hands equally then take a thread above the one that is marked out as before in the same way.
"Then gather two lips together with sutures and care for it until it gets better.
"If you accidentally cut the eyelid when making your incision or tearing it then apply oil and vinegar to it.
"And sometimes eyelids also occur where hair grows out of them.
"Therefore, it is advised to use sutures as we mentioned before the incision; but stitching more than one is artificial. "About curing of Ataxmir with animals.
"And it is so that you apply oil and vinegar to the eyelid, and cut off any cuts that have come out in the same way as before. In the art of making two hooks or two thin rods, their length should be according to the length of the eyelid and their width shall be less than that of a very small sponge; you have already made an incision at both ends where you hold them together
After attaching both ends to the eyelid using a thin rod in excess of that which is available from the eyeball's eyelid, and after binding them with strong thread on both sides, you should release it at intervals over several days. The tightened skin will die (die) and become emaciated, and will decompose unless it is released itself.
If this occurs late then make an incision with hooks. After which you must take care of it so that it may heal.
Once they are secured together the eyelid will become firm; and hairs will not be pulled out.
And this is the shape of two hooks that you should make according to this figure, quantity being in length and width.
The end
With the pulling out of hairs from the eye with sharpness
Operation is performed on this as you take a thin thread and introduce it into the eye from its edge with great care. After attaching both ends to him, then tie each end of the thin cord firmly and let one thread be as long as a finger.
After joining them together with another thin thread below him for a short time, then tie off the ends of his fingers tightly
After you have placed your head inside your hand and it is close to the sun, for this operation is thin or small in size.
After you have introduced the thread at the root of the eyelid and made it penetrate further into the eyelid with force, until you remove it from above a natural hair.
After removing the thread up to where you have introduced it, then introduce another thread at this point or somewhere above that, either one or two or three threads, not more than these.
Then take your finger with him, until he gets away from under his hair.
If his hair is pulled back after taking your finger, and he does not get away from under it: take that same finger to the lower eyelid, using a thread you prepared earlier, until he gets away from under his hair; then pull him towards the upper eyelid with the other hand, so that both eyes are covered. When this has been done, remove the eye patch as described above, and in three days or more it will grow back over its place on his forehead, restoring him to normal health.
If the hair is very short, then attach it to his longer hairs with those of nature and tie him down as mentioned above; or remove him immediately if you want to shorten them quickly, until they reach their full length, after which remove him again.
The Thirteenth Head
When this happens to an eye, it is called Leporinia.
This eye patch can be either natural or accidental.
Accidental causes include injuries caused by blows to the face, cutting off his eyelids with scissors, or tearing them in wrestling matches or similar situations.
The mode of operation is as follows: to find a thread between the eyelids and sew it up so that his eyes are closed, until he recovers from this injury.
Do not neglect the need for treatment of any injury that causes pain or constriction when he is being operated on; since if you do this, his eye patch will be worse than before, use such remedies to soften them as a poultice made from fennel leaves soaked in water, rubbed with ointment of unguentum dyaquilon, which has been made by mixing it with olive oil. And bind him up tightly and carefully, so that the treatment is complete, or you will be unable to remove his eye patch even if he recovers from the injury.
Your treasure trove of treatments is as follows: you must apply your ingenuity and not let him get sewn up again in the way it was at first; but rather use a poultice made from fennel leaves soaked in water, rubbed with unguentum dyaquilon ointment that has been made by mixing olive oil.
"This operation is not mentioned in our previous discussion, but rather a correction by Albucasis to prevent the form from becoming distorted according to what was originally intended.
"The treatment of the lower eyelid by Albucasis is either a fold or contraction upwards towards the right and left sides.
The number 12, in Roman numerals.
"The treatment of the lower eyelid by Albucasis is called the 'treatment of Albucasis.' "It's natural and accidental.
"Accidental injuries can occur through a wound or tear, or by other means similar to these.
"The path of this operation is to grasp the doubled thread and pull it through to the skin, then cut it so that it penetrates into both sides of the nose up to both sides of the tear.
"Then stretch out the meat upwards with a knife on one side and cut it, then use your other hand as well. "If this operation causes the eyelid to conform to what is expected, it is beneficial.
"If the eyelid was not corrected properly then grasp a rod and put it in a tear, hold the eye lid so that you make two tears on the inner corner of the eyelid, and find both tears at the ends from which angles the incision occurs. Until they meet and become one figure: until when they are made into these figures is the Greek letter 'L'. It means 'good luck'.
"Then stretch out that meat from its inferior thickness downwards towards the eye. "Then bring together the separate parts: hold it with a thread of linen.
"And then perform the treatment as mentioned before in our discussion about mollifying medicines and applying ointments until they are healed.
"And if Albucasis caused a tear or cut it then you should apply a patch until the flat tear is found below the eyebrow hair, as well as according to what came before. Then separate between two lips with a hook, as we have stated before
And at the end of a patient's care, when it is superior or inferior to his operation, it should be performed according to what has been prepared from the form of Alxatrati.
The shape of each part is different: and a prudent artificer prepares the body with whatever way it can be done, until he has directed the figure to its natural form or direction towards it, or even to that which is impaired; and the same infirmity, according to what was agreed upon by his operation and instruments in many dispositions.
Chapter Fifteen.
The detachment of the eyelids from the conjunctiva or the cornea.
When this occurs in many men, the fixation of the upper eyelid with the whites of the eyes should be done so that it may not be hindered by its own natural operations.
Therefore you must insert the extremities of your fingers under the eyelid and hold it up: or extend it with a hook; then cut through to its detachment with a small sharp tool, so that it is not hindered by the sharpness of the incision, rather being obtuse than blunt: in order not to disturb the patient during operation, and remove it gently, and anoint the eye with your own fluid; and make an incision as you release it from its attachment gradually, until when returned to its natural form, and become whole again.
Then drop into the eye some salty water, or distill it from its own juice if you are able to do so with water alone.
Then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a hook liner; and place over the eye a moistened cloth lined with white linen; and after three days use it along with solids, until it is healed.
Chapter Sixteen.
Of the incision of the eyelids and prominence of the cheeks in weeping.
It is done according to two ways. "It is a gentle thing and it is similar in strength to a sinew. "It is not a gentle thing and it resembles frozen white frost; when touched by iron or grasped with an awl, it splits apart and does not stick to the awl.
"The two do not begin to grow together unless they are wetted with more tears, until it yields gradually and stops the flow of light, and moves the eye.
"The method of using this substance is as follows: you place a weakened head into your own hand, or put it between your fingers. "Then you open the eyes by touching them with your hand. "Next, press it gently between two fingers and stretch it out above. "Then take it in your hand and hold its two ends with a needle from horsehair or similar materials; make the thread strong enough to double the length of the eye, but not too thick that you cannot stretch out all the way to the pupil: then insert into the eye with an awl, bind the two ends together with string, extend it fully above and open up completely.
"Finally, cut off the remaining part at the root of tears with a delicate and slender instrument; or with tweezers made for this purpose. Release the natural tear course as it will not be impeded by the incision.
"And sometimes you stretch out the eye using only a needle or string, just like we said earlier. "Finally, scrape away with a gentle and slender instrument as described in this section.
"Do not touch the delicate eyelid skin or cause it to tear apart; otherwise it will be ruined and cover the pupil.
"After making an incision but before inserting anything into the eye, wash it gently with a saline solution or clean it thoroughly using another instrument and remove it to be used later. "And then apply whatever you need until it is healed completely.
If the ulcer is not healed and cannot be introduced into it with a probe, nor does it pierce through to the other side of the ulcer from its base; then cure this kind of ulcer by means of ointments containing unguents (drugs). It will heal just like an incision in the flesh.
If you wish to enter this ulcer and make an incision with a probe, then open the eye of the patient, take gentle and subtle spit, soft, weak due to old age, according to this form. And approach it from above with subtlety. If you see that it becomes rare and is crushed by reason, and it imprints upon it a reason, then distill from your eye at the time of its occurrence out to another eye in this way: either due to factitious reasons or due to weak rubes, or sale truffles; and cleanse the eye until the next day.
Then repeat this same treatment until you remove completely from him Unless it is contrary to the custom of your eye being warm; then let loose this same ulcer and cure the wound until it heals.
Then repeat this treatment with reason, until you heal him completely.
However, if the treatment with tears of the eyelids is contrary to custom and causes great pain when it touches the eye; then hold back this same ulcer by its base using a probe, and make an incision into that part of him; but do not finally cut out until you have cured the tear course.
Then hold back gently using a very weak spit or due to a factitious reason, until you heal him completely.
From the incision of the glans penis and the flesh of the eye.
The seventeenth chapter.
A person's flesh is formed and placed in the eye when it occurs once or twice at certain times; until it closes its pupil with a veil of flesh, or extends itself towards the pupil, or stretches to the eyelid, sometimes turning over the eyelid towards the outside: and it assimilates the baluster roses.
And the treatment for this is also done by placing a weak headpiece on your brow. "Then open his eyes and tie down his head with a strip around it so that the whole meat hangs down beneath him, then hold on to this with one tool or by hand.
"Then cut off the head first until only his neck is left with a cutting tool. "Then place it on his face so that the incision will not be seen during surgery; and if you are using a curved cutting tool or scissors then cut off just above the elbow to make sure everything is done neatly.
"When your incision is complete and all the arm has been removed then remove his eye with a soft cloth or towel; also apply some medicine to cool it down, if you wish.
"If anything remains from the arm then apply warm blood to you and control your heat; then remove his eye and take care of it as you would any other.
"Then repeat this for him after he has been operated on until he is healed.
"And similar things should be done with the added flesh that was cut from his eye by cutting it off like so.
"However it is necessary to treat any weak eye from the natural or accidental way with a cutting tool; and do not let your hand interfere in another operation until that one has been completed so that you may tolerate that member undergoing the operation.
"Of the Sebel removal from the eye.
"Chapter Eighteen: The Head.
"A Sebel is a cloth used to cover the eye and it prevents your own surgery from being seen; it also weakens or makes weaker the eye as time passes.
"Therefore it is necessary for you first to consider if the eye with which a Sebel is used is strong and not has any weakness there except for the Sebel; then tie down that Sebel.
"And it is also necessary to consider if his head is weak so that he puts his own head into your hand.
"After you have made the incision, either with one or two curved hooks according to your judgment; and let each hook be smooth on both sides so that they can grasp.
"Then close the incisions with fine hooks in such a way that they will not cause injury; and after you have done so, remove any blood at once before it can be removed through the eye, or they will tear.
"Your work should take place during daylight; and you must have strength for your work so that you do not cut unless necessary.
"When you have completed it, then put a small knife into the eye or into the ear; so that your sharpness may cut off what remains from the flesh.
"If you are unable to close that during the same hour; then put your eye-needle into his eye so that he may feel pain and release him from there.
"This is how you make an incision.
"From the excess of thirst to the nose.
"The ninth head.
"When the physician reaches Arissa's fist, he should either treat it with cautery or burn it with a strong medicine according to his story.
"If it is not healed then there must be a cause that the mucus which is there and pus can come out through his mouth.
"When this is done, you will see that he has got rid of the corruption or blackness; then put it with a tool whose shape is like this.
"The tenth head.
"Let the head be cut off with an iron; and make it round like Aziris so that it is made smooth by a needle of lime or by a small iron needle, and put it on a corrupted bone.
Therefore take hold of it between your fingers and you shall make its proper use; until you learn that this corruption has already occurred. And when you have learned, do
Then restore the place with the help of medicinal substances applied to it.
If the place is restored and flesh appears therein then the course of sin (sin) disappears along with it; after forty days have passed without any recovery or further progress being made, that point indicates healing has occurred.
And if not, then there is no natural outlet for it except to reduce the fist through the nostrils, following this path.
And it is so that you break away from the bone with a second stroke of iron or with an acute medicine; and when the mouth has been found then take hold of its back following this path, make it solid, triangular: and its wood should be reduced to a pyramid shape until reaching the extremity.
Then place this upon his mouth; let it hang down in front of his eyes, and extend your hand from the mouth only slightly. Therefore take hold of the hand with the stick; until it penetrates into his mouth and he feels this cold thing on his tongue; by doing so you will remove the poison from him as you hold your hand over his mouth.
Therefore restore the place with the help of medicinal substances applied to it, just as I have shown you.
And when flesh appears and the place is hardened; then the material that was poured upon the outside comes back to the nose: it therefore sticks to the sick one above all others.
Of the reduction of prominence (or prominence) of the eyes.
Head Twenty
When the eye comes out with its entire part and there is no falling of the eyelids or diminution; then it is necessary to take only one sick person; afterwards apply leeches to him; after this place tubes near his ear without any scarring but by suction.
Then place upon the eyes ointment which is made from acacia and aloe and oil of myrrh and sarcolla. "Then grasp an eyelid above the eye with a multitude of eyelashes.
The method of eyelashes is as follows: grasp the upper eyelid with many lashes and double it on top; then place one over another in multiples according to quantity - above all four, then above three etc., until you reach the eye itself. Then grasp them with a hard cloth firmly
And repeat this motion with suction without making incisions.
Then release the eyelid and remove the tight band of skin during the day and at night.
If the tightening band is loosened in future repetitions, then it should be tightened once again; after that release it during the day and at night as we have said.
If you want to correct the eyelid's position once more while using the band and if not then repeat the tightening band, eyelashes, and release pressure until the eye is corrected.
From making incisions of the eyelid's bandage
The 21st chapter.
When the eyelid's bandage breaks, it is then placed out and proceeds to wrap around like a grain of salt, and adheres to the shape of a man due to that; you should make an incision there, as follows: and it is, so as to insert a finger into the root of the eyelid from below to above.
Then insert another finger with its double strand on the opposite side of the tear duct and make it penetrate; then release the first one according to your own arrangement.
Then cut through the two strands of the eyelid and bind them tightly around the eye's circumference; then tighten it very much.
Then remove it and put a loop of thread on the eye with an oar; then release him until the thread is with the eyelid.
Then care for the eye by holding it as needed to correct its position until the injury has healed.
And when the eyelid is tightened with a circle of cloth from all sides, until the eye's prominence increases greatly.
"Then, with a fine spatula, remove any residue of the eye and pour in clear water. The eye will descend immediately; after that, gently pull it out and quickly apply it.
From the remedy of Alcomnate
In the treatment of an attack on the head with a severity of twenty two.
This remedy is called Alcomnateor, and unless it is cured, which gathers in the eye just like a clear water descending, it will not be itself.
And the method to do this is as follows: either gently set down or support someone with an infirmity over a raised bed that has been prepared for them; otherwise, you should direct them in some way.
Then take his head into your hands on the two sides; and gently move it down so that you can remove him from the lower part of your eyes. Then he becomes quiet and does not descend; and his light disappears; the patient is like him again; if it did not descend lower, you know that it was water
If however, when I said the descent of the eye with him what we have mentioned, then gently set down the patient between your hands. Then take with a fine spatula and find it above the surface of the corium layer at the junction between the conjunctiva and the cornea, until it descends immediately.
And when it descends then you should immediately pour into the eye a warm water which was prepared as I mentioned earlier; or else use the other water and its solution of honey. Then after that is cured until he is healed.
From the treatment with water that descends into the eye or a cataract.
In the treatment of an attack on the head with a severity of thirty three.
We have mentioned earlier that kind of water and it is used for piercing the membrane with a needle and an expander; then you take that one according to health
Then you should gently set him down or support the patient between your hands square and opposite to the light of the sun; and apply the eye of his good health and pull it out quickly; then touch with your right hand the eyelid of the eye in which water is, if there is a left one; or else use your left hand for the other one.
With your right hand take the instrument if it is on the right side; or with your left hand, if it is on the left side.
With the right hand take the instrument and apply it to the nose as far as possible by extending the arm; afterwards pull it gently with strength using both hands until it reaches the eye. And when you feel that the instrument has penetrated into the tear duct, you will notice that the object is now within the eyeball.
It is necessary to measure how far the instrument goes along the nose and up until it reaches the end of the nasal septum; and this is called the "corona" or "rim" of the eye. But you should also do this: insert it into the pupil of the eye because of the clarity of the cornea's membrane.
Afterwards, apply the instrument until it reaches where there is water. After that, remove it from one side to start on the other.
If water descends immediately, then at that moment you will see it above what was the opening of his eye; and place it into his eye as quickly as possible.
Then close your eyelids gently. If water descends after that, then put it aside from the other side as well.
When this happens and does not go up; then remove the instrument gently with speed using both hands.
Afterwards dissolve it into something from a clear droplet of oil, after removing it from eye. After that put aside the whole eyelid or insert a piece of oiled wool onto it; and after doing this place an eye bandage on it; and then tie with it the healthy eye as tightly as possible.
But for us of our times we put upon him a mixture of charcoal and alum.
If the instrument does not take you into the tear duct due to its hardness since people have found it that way and it is hard in use; then you should remove it gently as quickly as possible, called "Alberid" because of this shape.
With this you will join her together only once and not again after that, excepting your own hand to the purpose of needling; unless it is done skillfully at the place where she is set down
Then introduce the needle in accordance with what we have said.
And from the completion of your work you should retire to a sick-bed, where he lies in the dark; and be prohibited from all motion by his hands, except that which serves for food, even as nature dictates it: and let not his head move on its right side, nor on his left hand.
And you should keep the bandage according to your disposition until the third day.
Then take him into that dark house and see what his condition is; and do for him whatever is to be done. And you should remove the bandage according to your disposition until the seventh day.
It is not permitted to do this at the time of healing or immediately after the operation; it should be done by another, because water ascends quickly through a wound which has been opened.
If a cold finger has been lost, then let it be introduced before the seventh day; and rectify that which was set with it until it is satiated: and after this take away its use, putting on above his mouth where he feeds his own flesh beneath him for several days in that dark house.
Then return to your home gradually, and arrange yourself in the beds you have made.
And know that a pupil is not excused from his duty at intervals of time; then he may do for the operation.
And indeed we have heard from certain people who are of Albucasis that what was done in the passage from Albucasis was made by puncturing through the hand to let water flow out.
Indeed I did not find anyone among our own who had done this; nor could I find it in any of the ancient books that we have; and there is a possibility for it to be new.
These are shapes of organs from the abdomen, so as not to cause harm when they are ignored.
They should be placed in their proper position; and the extremities of them should have the same degree of sharpness as that which is required for the triangle (i.e., scalpel).
Head (twenty-four).
From birth, care should be taken to avoid injury by nose into body.
When newborn animals are introduced into the nose of a person who has scorpion stings on their feet; from this there arises something that is akin to poison in many feet and also arises in it cancerous matter, matter of flesh (scarlet), fur (of skin) of colors: and from this arises what is lenis body matter not of color.
In such things that from those bodies there arises what is lenis not deceitful and also not cancerous should be said to stop being used (as remedies) against the sick person in your hands opposing only one hand alone: you must hold his nose, and push back a finger into their bodies; then pull them out towards the outside, and strike that which you comprehended from those with the fine pointed tool on both sides until now you know that the body is already completely wiped out.
If anything remained of what whose removal was impossible; then you will take that with one tool from the fine tools in an easy way until it no longer remains out of him something. If the blood to you becomes dominated or if it is injured by a hot probe; then bind him with that which should be used: or if he is possessed of venomous apostems, then cauterize his (binding) and until the bleeding stops, and all the flesh will be removed.
After the incision there should be poured into the nose of the patient vinegar or water or wine. If he opens his nose and proceeds from him until that which is wet reaches up to the palate: then you will know because he is already healthy.
If however the wetness does not penetrate as it should: then you will know that there is cancerous matter which has arisen from within his nose up to the upper openings of the nostrils but did not come out with the incision of a tool.
Therefore it is necessary to insert a string of some length into the vein that has many knots in it and then tie all these knots with one another: either by using your fingers or fewer; if you are unskilled, use an instrument like scissors so as to cut off one end of the thread towards its nose (if possible) or along whatever direction is convenient for him after he has finished sewing such a thing. And then put back on his throat that which he has removed from it.
Many children of Attus do this same trick at school; and for them it is very easy to learn how to do it
Then tie one end of the thread towards its nose and leave another still inside his nose. And then tighten the knot around the finger as there are knots in the thread. When you have finished sewing, until you know that the fingers of meat and the knots of the thread are already tied together
Then remove the thread from its nose and put back on it what you drank off of the finger with the Egyptian ointment after the blood has been washed away: do this for three days or more until the ointment completely dissolves whatever remains from the meat.
And finally tie a knot around it with lead after some time has passed: do this for as many days as needed until healing occurs.
If the ointment you used for sewing is exhausted, use that one instead.
To clean the head with oil and other medicines from it, do this by using an egg or air instead; so that what is similar to the flame of fire will be burned off in a way similar to blowing out a candle: and let whatever remains of him burn off in the same manner.
And if you tie a closed knot like that
To clean the head with oil and other medicines from it, you use a tool for that purpose: keep its handle while heating it up until you have removed all of it through steam or by any other method.
Head, 25th.
It is born and adorned with great care as soon as the nose reaches its utmost extent; it grows larger each day until a suitable size is reached for use of clothing or other adornments on it.
And this should be so that the appearance and shape of it at its beginning might resemble what is now seen; and all its parts should be reduced to him Then they must apply a remedy in the place where this happens; either a bandage or an ointment applied to it.
If this should be delayed by a delay in its opening; then it must be considered if it is made of stone or horn or fleshly color and furrowed with bristles, so that the time for cutting off [the cancerous] growth will come, when the matter is dealt with: because the tumor has spread.
Indeed many heard who had cut off this tumor and met a great evil from it which he had on him
And if the tumor is gently touched and does not have bristles on it, you will know that cutting into its whole extent was possible; then apply a remedy to it quickly, without fear or hesitation: until health comes back
Head, 26th.
Of the nose's care and ears and mouth's care.
Because when the solution of continuity has been lost on one side of those cartilages; only a few can perform it unless some people do.
And it should be so when anything happens from that; you will see if he is wounded by his own blood and then tie up the wound with sutures; after that, take care of him until he is healed.
And if the solution of continuity has already been separated and one healthy part is made; then it must be done that you remove all parts from his sight in front of him until he bleeds. After tying up the two lips with sutures and stringing them out; pour oil of dragons over him so as to stop his bleeding, and also sprinkle crushed oylabum on it; put a bandage upon him with a hole made in front like this one [indicates]; bind the other part closed by means of an implement placed above. And release after three days or more, unless he is bound with two bandages. "Remove (remove) and exchange medicine; after removing it they will fall apart by themselves. "And remove the bandage
"The surgical technique is to combine the continuous flow of solution or by means of an abacus and stitching as we do with the stitches inside us; either combining a bandage with thread so that I taught you how.
"Chapter 27".
"To remove the knots
"To many people the hard knots (remarks) are inside their intestines, and some of them smaller and larger.
"Therefore, it is necessary to make a loop in the threads, so that you remove (cut) all the knots of him with a knife and cut off (remove) him from every part.
"After removing the knot tie it tightly so that the blood stops.
"It is tied with vinegar and cured when it was with him where there is a stiffness until they stop the ulcers.
"Chapter 28
"Of the incision of the beginning of the tongue above the gum.
"The additional part of the tongue that is added above the gum.
"Therefore it is necessary to remove it with a knife, either you hold her tightly or tie with your fingers and cut off from the root of his own.
"After removing the knot ties tight so that the ulcers stop.
"If she got it after treatment of the ulcer, as many times he did, then you cut him again and burn her; but she herself does not come out from the burning.
"Chapter 29
"Of the wisdom with a knife (tooth) to
"When the teeth above the gums from the interior and exterior parts come together with the tongue's surface, and when they are cut up to the side of the tongue, stumps, and when they give out and disappear, and virides [survivors], until it is gone corruption from him to the gum, and the teeth become empty.
Let it happen that you may hold a sick person between your hands and put his head in yours and gently touch both the eye-lids and tongue; where if you find any resemblance to those of an arena fighter, do not neglect but remove them with great care: until nothing remains from these except some part only. If you wish, however, you may also strike a blow at him with a sharp instrument in order to put him out of his misery.
If indeed there is reason at the beginning of these things and goodness prevails over them, then all will be well; but if not, let another day come to examine and try again tomorrow, the second time; and on a third day until you have finished your studies in him.
And you know that the different shapes of instruments used in your surgery are important; namely, one shape for cutting through the skin from below is different to one for cutting between the teeth, according to other forms.
The shapes of instruments used by you will be prepared beforehand as far as I know.
Head (omitted).
On extracting pain from the teeth
Let it happen that you may cure the pain of his tooth with all your ingenuity and try to eradicate this from him For it is not the case that a man may be cured when he has been eradicated; for its substance is very high and until there is no excuse to eradicate him from then you must try again as soon as he becomes sick in order to cure him, so that it can be certified by you of the suffering one.
Many indeed suffer from pain and believe that cutting through it will eradicate them; but afterwards the pain does not go away until they are eradicated by a sore person.
We now understand this from the work of phlebotomists.
When it is certified by you of the suffering one that they may be cured from all the pain; afterwards, let them strike at their tooth with a spit-cleaner and gently touch him to remove it completely, until all of his teeth are gone: afterwards move him out using your fingers or with fine forceps.
"Then take hold of a good forceps in the hand and place them on your lap for cutting; when you have already performed this operation well and with care, do not let it move or drop from your hand until you carefully draw out the tooth using it according to its position.
"If you do not succeed, then take one of their instruments and gently introduce it beneath him from every part with ease; after that, compare its movement as you did before.
"If the tooth is perforated or has been burned off; then take care to introduce a piece of cloth into it and tightly wrap it around with the end of your delicate fingers so that it does not break due to the pressure you apply while using forceps.
"And take care to remove all traces of blood from around the tooth with great care and cleanliness.
"And guard your strength so that you do not break it and the part remains whole; after that, let it fall off from that evil trickery which is more painful for him than before.
"And remember not to do what ignorant phlebotomists do at the time of their own excitement and audacity over its destruction; except for what you have already mentioned.
"Many people make big mistakes when trying to extract teeth from men because they are more fragile and can break; the roots remain all of them, or some of those, or that they extract it with the jaws of the mouth in such a way as we have tested before.
"Then bind him up after its destruction using wine, vinegar, or salt.
"If the flow of blood from there is abundant and often happens; then take something out of it immediately and carefully with that place; but if not, burn him using a cautery or do not let him go until you take something else.
"Forceps of small size are used first; the ends long and delicate, the middle ones short and strong so that they do not break when force is applied over the tooth like heavy tools; these are like thick sticks until you draw them tightly with care without damaging yourself or breaking them; the thin ones have teeth at their end which sometimes bite into something and clamp tight by force.
When extremities are compressed like a beak of a cuckoo and are strong against constriction
Section 31
The removal of teeth and the extraction of the mandibular bones that have fractured
When a tooth is broken and needs to be removed during the removal of teeth, it should be placed on top with butter for one or two days until the place becomes comfortable; then insert into its mouth, or use pliers: whose extremities become beak-like. This is a form for pliers.
Their extremities are made as thin as the blades of grass, or like a sickle blade.
If you cannot remove it with those pliers, then take another pair of pliers and place the whole piece on top and insert a tool called Palanca's bow, whose form is this one.
The thin extremities are stronger than those that have been soaked in oil; so they will not break when used properly.
If the root is cut through that one, it is good; and if not, you need to use another pair of pliers whose forms are like this one.
The first has a triangular extremity with some thickness.
The thin triangular extremity.
And with the other instruments and tools that came before them in extracting teeth.
The tool is the large one with a triangular extremity twisted and having some thickness as not to break; it should be used when soaked (i.e., not fresh).
You know that there are many tools for extracting teeth; and similarly the other tools are not counted, so a skilled craftsman has found an appropriate tool by himself with his own art, according to what operation he is performing and the skills of these tools.
"For those instruments which were not mentioned before by earlier writers because of their diversity.
"If the mouth is broken by a bone from the jaw or another bone of the face, it becomes necessary to search for that which was suitable with his instruments and fingers as I described in the removal of the root, and to hold him with a grip, such as this.
"It should be gently stretched or held with it the mouth so that no dripping or loss of saliva occurs and a place is restored when appropriate, together with suitable medicines.
"However if decay has set in the bone, then cure it by its own means and take care of it until it is healed.
"Chapter thirty-two.
"Of the extraction of the teeth superior to others.
"When the teeth superior are not extracted as prescribed by their own nature a wound occurs due to that form and especially when it happens among women or children.
"Therefore take care, considering this. "For if the tooth is born after another one and cannot be located or if it is possible to extract him without breaking any other teeth then remove it immediately and when it has been attached with a tooth: at that point strike it off with this instrument whose form is like this.
"It is very similar to the face but happens by an iron wound and severe extremity of the mouth.
"And you must make an incision to extract him during many days, due to the hardness of teeth and so that no other person or tooth is damaged.
"However if it has been exposed in its own cutting out groove then cut him off with the cutter whose form is like this one.
"The whole of him is extracted by the fingers and the small points of his hand are exposed so that a point or a cutter can be used to cut out the tooth during many days as desired but not to damage it, until finally he is relaxed in order to extract him with some cutters.
When the part is cut off from what it was dense with, and its language fails; then let this be done, that he may become smooth again (the wound), until it becomes fresh and equal in smoothness to before: and it shall be pliant once more, but not allow itself to be taken by any of his own parts.
The 33rd part.
About the treatment of teeth with a child's arrow
When the teeth are struck before by concussion and motion from percussion; or if it is struck at all: they cannot be made to fall down with that which has caused them not to yield to what has caused them not to fall; [but] as a result of this treatment, in those there is an entrance so that strings can be applied with the child's arrow.
And let the arrow be a means for subtlety and coarseness according to its quantity which may pierce between the teeth
The shape of the treatment is such that you take in the arrow, and insert two of his between the two healthy teeth; then apply with both extremities of the cord among the teeth separately if one or more are inserted until you bind up with cloth as far as another part of the tooth. Then again apply the treatment up to the part that you struck in; and with subtlety and wisdom bind it until it is not removed from before; and let your binding be so as when you bind the cord among the roots of the teeth such that it does not yield.
Then drive back the extremities of the cord with hooks; and join them one by one [in pairs]; and intertwine those among the healthy tooth and the moving tooth such that no language is yielded; then let it be loosened so tightly until it remains.
If he has been successful or was struck through with another cord, bind him as tightly as you can for the same length of time.
And this is the form of teeth and the figure of two healthy teeth and two moving teeth as you see it.
"And sometimes it happens that a single wire may hold one thing or two things after its break; it retains them as firmly as we grasp our tools and they remain.
"And sometimes it happens that something is supported from the broken ends of a cord; as securely as if our teeth were holding onto it and it's placed in its proper place, where it supports the weight and is tightened, just like we described.
"Chapter 40.
"And sometimes the ligament that breaks under the tongue is either natural as part of human growth or accidental when it has already been consolidated.
"The operation is done to the broken ligament so that you grasp it with your fingers as if it were in your hand and pull out its tongue; then cut this slippery ligament by cutting through it at right angles until the tongue can be held by its tension.
"If the broken ligament was caused by a severe injury and swelling, then it is from the consolidation of wounds; after that you should first make an incision into this knot and cut through it until you find it.
"And so be it if there is a deep wound; then make an incision into that artery and stop the flow of blood.
"Then you should tie off the incision with heated or cold water or vinegar [to clean it].
"After that you put under the tongue a slippery substance from linen which holds fast day and night; so that it does not become consolidated again.
"If there is a flow of blood after that, then put above the wound a poultice made from wool. "If there is blood coming from the wound then you should apply a poultice made of a heated iron that fits to it; then after that you should care for him with the remaining treatment until he heals.
Fifty-fifth head
When the blow struck beneath a seal (of speech), transforming it into the voice of a frog; preventing its normal language by his own operation; and may this be splendidly enhanced until both are filled up.
And the operation is done to make you hear its voice when it stands before the sun; and consider (the frog).
If therefore you see him suddenly dark or bright or of any color other than that which was affected by the illness; then do not touch it because he is a malignant tumor.
And if the seal suddenly becomes white and moist; then with a sharp instrument strike through it from all sides; and release (it) from every part. If you see blood on the time of your operation; then place a bandage over it until the bleeding stops; and thereafter return to your own treatment to remove it with its appropriate complement.
And afterwards you shall apply vinegar and salt; and complete the remaining care in that fashion until he is cured.
Of the two Amigdala of the sealers
Sixty-fifth head
When blows strike between the Adam's apple and the epiglottis which resemble each other; and both are called the Amigdalae; when you cure them as we have said to do with division but they don not heal (this); then consider.
If therefore you see him suddenly dark or bright or of few senses; then do not touch it with a sharp instrument.
And if you see him suddenly dark or bright and the root of his is thick; then do not touch it even with a sharp instrument fearing the outflow of blood; and release (it) until maturity comes. Then you may either perforate him yourself or leave him to be ripped apart by nature.
And if he is suddenly white and round and the root of his is soft; then it will need to be cut into two.
The operation is done so that you consider before your own treatment if its seal has been quietly completed; or may some diminution occur to it; then let the head of him be in your hand; and hear his voice, and he shall receive from yours (servants) with open hands, and will cause the lower part of its language by a tool which is this shape.
"Let it be as subtle as a bee.
"Since the premise is with it [the subject], and the apostrophe is given to you; there falls upon him your follower, he climbs on top of him [your subject]; then take one end, and bind it in a knot, and remove it from outside as much as you can, except for what you draw out through the tunic.
"Then cut her [the subject] with an instrument whose form follows after this one. "She is drawn through the mouth; however her extremities should be bound tight so that the opening of [the instrument] from which she comes out may be sharp on one side.
"If this instrument is not present then cut it with a blunt object whose form follows after this one. "Let the cutting be sharp on only one side, not sharp on the other.
"After you have cut through [the subject] with a single stroke, then cut the second in accordance with this same pattern of incision.
"Then after cutting, apply ice to your throat if you are feeling cold; or vinegar and water can be applied as well.
"If you have suffered a flow of blood into the throat, gargle with water in which the granulator's teeth are burnt; or ivy and similar [substances] from strychnine and similar poisons until the bleeding ceases.
"And when other pustules are born into the throat apart from the two [amigdalas], beyond these as well. "Therefore cut them according to what I said about cutting through the two amigdalas equally.
"And I myself had treated a woman from an abscess that was born between her throat and she pulled it out to be cut; very few senses remained in her and she already closed the throat; then she breathed with me as tightly held, and no longer allowed food or drink water; and death would come upon her if it lasted for one day, or two days.
"The arrow ascended, having hit two marks; then it passed over the upper part of the nose.
Therefore I bound them fast, and fastened one by one Then I drew it out, and from that a great part was taken away
Therefore I let her fall at the place where I understood that an opening of the nose had been made.
Then I did to him who went out from the other nostril what had passed through the first one.
Therefore I opened his mouth and pressed the tongue of him; thereafter fixed one by one on it the arrow; then I drew off a part from him, and not did run out except a little blood: thus was done to her what had been done to the man; immediately she began to drink water, after having taken in food.
Therefore I did not cease to strike the arrow for a long time; and the arrow was at that place which I struck
Therefore I made an incision between his throat.
It was therefore added; thereafter I walked on the side, and did not know what God had done with her after me.
From making an incision of the arrow.
The 37th chapter.
When the catarrh descends to the throat and becomes long; then she is called perpendicular; if there is a large part below, round, then she is called upside down.
When you are done with what we said about the incision and do not make a cutting; then see that the arrow is becoming cold because of her, and is thin; then it is necessary for you to strike off her.
And what is added round to her, and there is no length for it, and blood, or color black, or black; but there was no sense for him; then it is necessary that you make a cutting of hers. There indeed is fear above the illness.
"You should proceed with the second method I described earlier regarding eye lenses, and their length as before so that you could set them aside from the sun to treat a sick person's eye. You have to use his language along with its tool whose description has come before this. Then make a notch in one of two tools I mentioned for cutting open the eyelids separately.
"You must not strike it unless something is added to its end that is beyond nature's limits.
"If you strike it with more than what was mentioned before, the eye will be damaged and speaking will cease.
"After cutting open both eyelids you should apply a treatment for that specific purpose until the eye is healed.
"If the patient becomes weak from being cut open, then you should proceed to apply heat with care and without fear or worry.
"The method of cauterization is not the same as water. It involves placing a heated object onto your head. "Then use his language with its tool that I mentioned before. "Then take the heated object I mentioned to you in the previous chapter on cauterization and apply it gently but not so hard that it damages this tool's shape.
"Apply medicine to his eye with care as you would a delicate part of the ear.
"Place the tool with the medicine on top of him and let him lie there until he is healed.
"Hold your hand with the medicine until the patient is healed. "You should place it on top of him with a quantity appropriate to the healing hour until you see that it is already becoming pale and then gently apply the medicine.
"If you take it gently and place the patient's head on top of his hand while wrapping both hands with a bandage around the tool along its length.
"Once you have cleaned it [the wound], then apply a cautery. Then remove the cautery if she begins to fester and die after three days or four.
If you need to apply further medicine after the cautery, reapply it immediately; and remove the cautery around its edges with a cotton soaked in butter and cleanse it with that which is around its edge from medicine; and tie it down with cold water.
And after removing the external one with a washcloth soaked in vinegar, and when he begins to choke from that, until he is cured (i.e., gets better).
Thus cauterization for healing cuts is safer than many fears
And sometimes cauterization works just as well and more subtly than a cut; for it is cured with smothering (i.e., suffocating) and in that way. Mix saltpeter, and hyssop, and origanum, and rue, and seah, and chamomile, and abrotan, and others from herbs; and gather them all together, or some of those into a vessel, and put them in vinegar, and let them boil: then the boiled mixture is to be poured through a sieve into the middle of an earthenware bowl (i.e., a mortar), on which should be placed the instrument for grinding in that manner.
It is to be beaten out with the back of a spoon or by air; and put down one end into an earthenware bowl (i.e., mortar), which contains the powdered ingredient slowly dripping in water until it rises up to the surface over a strainer, until the mixture becomes very smooth.
Then reapply it many times until she improves (i.e., gets better).
And let no one begin to perform this practice with impure hands or fingers. Add a washcloth, so that you wipe your hands clean of impurities before touching the cautery; and do not let anyone perform this practice unless their fingers are warm from washing (i.e., warmed by water).
If you do not have this instrument at hand, then take a strainer and remove the mixture from its edge; so that the mouth may not be burned by water because it prevents the burning of the mouth; and this is for good practice with health.
Extracting (removing) the spine and bones from meat
Part 80
It may come from either a fish's spine or something else.
Therefore it is to be removed from the things which are on top of a fallen victim (body) after you have spoken with its instrument before the sun, and it is declared by you as what is found in the body.
And if it does not appear to you and be hidden from view (in the body), then it is required that you prepare a sick person before they eat food with their mouth in their stomach before it is eaten If it has been separated by the instrument, then it must be added to meals (food).
If a sick person cannot eat anything that is liquid (such as milk or bread), they can drink sea sponges soaked in brine and then swallow them. After it has been moved to a place where the spine is (the body) or its mouth, it must be eaten immediately.
If not eaten with what we have said above, then you are to use the instrument from a lump as follows.
It is more than double the size of a radius, and at its extremity there are pains which it passes through with ease when brought into contact with his throat; and he himself has lifted up (his) head from above (the body).
And let him strike with his own fist, so that he does not come into contact with the spit or vomit (spitback), and thrusts it with him mouth, or spine, or introduces it by means of his hand.
Indeed if the sick person introduces it into him (the instrument), that is better because of his knowledge of where to place what was taken away: and he pushes down with a downward motion or takes hold with his hand on top of the instrument until it has been eaten all in accordance with the amount prepared for him.
Extracting (removing) the blood sucker
Part 90
When bloodletting is performed with the same instrument that I advised earlier, and before it has been applied, consider this: place it near the sun so as to dry up any surplus moisture from its surface; then apply this [instrument] where the sun shines after it was spoken into your presence.
If therefore your bloodletting instrument falls on the lancet, remove both and gently cleanse them
If it is not possible with both: take the lancet and gently introduce it into the mouth of the patient, until it reaches their throat; then introduce the iron cannula heated by fire into this same place. Do this many times: And let the patient refrain from drinking water throughout the day.
Then take a full draught of cold water and open his mouth into it; let him drink from this until he has closed his mouth with it; do not allow anything to come out of the mouth while drinking, except for a short time after that, using your hand only; wait one hour after another before doing so. The bloodletting instrument falls on him when he drinks water
If otherwise is not possible with it as I said before: take the patient's nose and gently introduce the instrument into his nostrils; then use this same instrument for fumigation [bleep]
Do this many times, because she is leaving
The method of operation is as follows during fumigation; take a vessel where there are the handles with fire [bleep]
Then proceed with the fumigation and place the patient's mouth on the cannula; press his mouth so that no more of the fumigation can enter until you know for sure if it has completed its task in bloodletting. Bloodletting falls immediately after the fumigation
If not fallen yet: do this many times.
And let the patient stay silent and eat salt [bleep] and other food, but no water.
It is necessary that I depart with this treatment regime.
This is the form of the instrument by which a blood-sucking creature is removed when it falls upon the veins.
It is similar to a bite (enclosure), as you would say: unless there is inserted into it a force which reaches up the throat. It has an extremity similar to that of a swallow (a sort of bird), where there is sharpness and cleanness; when it comprehends anything, it does not let go of it at all.
Of the opening of a sheath for arrows, and their cutting off, and care in general.
Head (size).
Arrows have many species and many forms; according to what has been recalled of them, namely one kind (the compound) and another single kind in this book; and there are others by perforations of theirs, and their cutting off in two ways.
Of one kind is from a sheath (species), and what he comprehends through the moisture.
The second way is by reason of places where it happens from the body.
When an arrow falls on the head, it is another by accident from an arrow falling into the anus; and an arrow falls upon a place of flesh, it is another by accident from an arrow falling at the joining points; to each one there belongs its judgment according to the operation.
And from arrows there are those that should not be perforated unless after the maturity of the sinew in them, and its completion; and from these (are arrows), which ought to be perforated when they are raw, but do not mature according to their purpose.
As arrows that are near the joints.
Because arrows when they fall near the joints, and it is prolonged for them, until the corruption of what is near their side perhaps the ligaments are torn or the veins of that joint; therefore there is a cause stronger than the contraction of those members.
Or an arrow falls upon a principal part; if you delay the perforation of it until maturity occurs perhaps one thing will be done to him or that member, or he himself will die.
"An artery is cut near the bone; therefore it must be closed so that it does not die. And you should not perform a closure without cauterization of the wound to prevent putrefaction from deep within, and allow the interior to heal as quickly as possible, or make an opening in its course (to exit) if healing does not occur.
"It is recommended that you know the time for closing perforations with sutures; it occurs after the completion of the complement and at the moment of administering anesthesia to relieve pain, reducing fever, lowering redness (inflammation), increasing pulse, tightening the head sutures.
"And it is recommended that you perform the same perforation (anastomosis) at lower location with sutures and cause it to be higher in importance: and let the opening extend throughout the length of the body if the sutures are in the hands and feet, and places for the tendons, chords, veins, arteries, and go up to all places equally where there is no reflection.
"But in those which are reflected with the perforation according to that member.
"When you have performed the sutures on a place of flesh (ligament), then it is better to remove the perforation from him and confirm his digestion as we described in relation to the complement.
"Because if you perforate it before that, the course of blood from him is prolonged and there are many sores and ulcers, and perhaps his lips will be closed.
"And some sutures will be performed according to the width of the body at need, or according to that member which is most suitable.
"And it is recommended to administer perforations at both ends of the sutures thinly and widely at the larger ones.
"And there are from the sutures where it is necessary to apply a cut; and an incision occurs when it has already been done like leather, or at its end which was dead: just as that which happened many times so you may double-take, and bubbles.
"Having three angles "As if cutting through a leaf's shape.
"Like the tongue of a man.
"There are sections used for administering circular and lunar sections; similar sections also from those listed above.
"Whoever does not have a head should be perforated with shallow cuts, or it will suffice for him to endure the pain of flat surfaces.
"When a large tongue is cut and has taken away much of the saliva, you should pierce it so that no part remains on him; take off the whole with one blow from him. "Then the other person will drink his own saliva. "Then, having taken off some of the pus a second time, you must pierce it so that no part remains on him; take off the whole with one blow from him again.
"This should be done in stages; especially if he is weak or the woman who nurses him, or the child who is young and still a boy, or an old man who is decrepit; for it may happen that spirit of animals goes out through discharge to many times: perhaps the infirm one will die, and you might not notice.
"Take great care with this chapter.
"After you have pierced the tongue, pierce it as follows; remove and consider carefully. "If there are shallow cuts or flat surfaces in the tongue, administer medicine with linen thread or a thin rope. "If there are many perforations of the tongue's cuts, you must go into every single one and administer medicine.
"If you have cut off part of the tongue with your hand or grasped it tightly around its circumference; then take a rope of old linen and apply it until after three days.
"Then bandage him as before, taking care not to tear the cloth used for binding; until he is cured.
"If you lose a flow of blood during your surgery, then immediately apply cold water and vinegar to the affected area; once soaked with it, place this over the location where the flow of blood is most intense.
"If a bleeding flow of blood persists, you should immediately administer the remedy and preservation, as written about in our book's locations. And if you divide it into parts.
"If there is a burning pain (in the time of hernia or after a fall), you should apply cold water mixed with oil and warm oil; place them on the locations.
"If it is an ulcer (or sores are present), you should apply cold water mixed with oil and warm oil; or vinegar mixed with oil to the affected area. "Until death comes the third time (after three days), as we have said before: you should remove and administer to him what has helped him until now, so that he may be healed.
"Therefore, it is necessary for everyone universally to apply the remedy of the cure in the same way.
"According to half a day's division, I have said about every treatment how it proceeds individually towards the cure of his ailment.
"Chapter one hundred and eleven: About the scalp.
"About the cuts which occur on the head.
"There are cuts on the head from various causes; such as from scratching by birds.
"Their kind is many.
"From these are the pocks; and from them too, which are like limes in moisture (or sores on the scalp), but not so numerous as those previously mentioned. And also from these, where lice and combs touch it.
"About the extraction of all things: this is not done out of fear when among their extracts no contrary effect on the artery occurs.
"The operation of their sections is to try it with an instrument whose shape was after this one called 'Intromission', until you know what it contains.
"If there is moisture, then remove it with a sharp incision along its length according to the depth of the transverse incision; in this manner.
"Begin with an incision from point B to the line G. After removing the moisture, remove any moisture that remains and do not discard it.
"Certainly; if anything remains after having removed what was there.
"Then immerse the incision with Egyptian unguent if it is present at that moment; and if not, in water or salt-water, and release him until another day. "The incision will become rotten from what remains after having been released.
"Then apply the Egyptian unguent for the second and third time, until it stops releasing anything after having been released; at that moment you must heal him with unguent.
"If a knot remains in the pincer, remove it according to this form; with the cross incision and cut through both incisions; and shave off all hair except that which covers him; and compare your strength in removing his garment.
"If you encounter the opposite of what I've shown you here, then do as I show you after this.
"Do it similarly with the pincer if there is a stone; remove it by incision and cure according to what I've shown you.
"The incision of the pincer for removing stones is easier, because there are few blood vessels and moisture in it. "Sometimes certain pincer hooks are in the heads of some people who do not have a lot of moisture.
"This is because I have taken the female pincer by its handle and inserted it into a stone just as hard and rough; if someone were to strike against this with force while pulling him out, he would be injured.
"And in the cases of accidents on the heads and those that happen to boys' hands except for these pincer hooks which strike into the ears and roots of the hair; their incision is a superficial one.
Always make an incision below where necessary in order that the vessels may be freed from the lower part of them towards the lower end
Then attend to it as you deem appropriate with regard to the care given
Section of the strangulated parts in the neck
Head - 12th
These wounds occur on the neck and under the arms and the thighs, sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
And over that which is caused by these wounds on the neck there are one and many, and they come from a cut made inside: and every strangulated part is within its own tunic as it is with knots and the heads of hair, as we have shown.
There are many kinds of strangulation. And from them there also come stones; and from them comes what is a moistening of the breath; and from them come venomous ones that do not obey care.
For that which comes from them through a good disposition and whose color is close to the skin, and moves towards every part of it, and is not attached with the neck veins nor with the guide vein or with the artery, nor is deep: It should be separated by a section in its superficial part from above to below the part of the body along the line b. across the line c. d. e., and spread two lips on each side with a small finger or with many fingers if necessary as we have shown for the strangulated parts of the head, and withdraw it slowly
And over caution so that no one is cut, nor the vein.
And it should be done gently so that you do not add your hand when you cut or upset the sick one and you do not strike what is not necessary.
If you cut someone or the artery and it prevents you from doing the operation then let a bite be given three times, or pull out the veins that are cutting blood and tie them off; loose them and release him until he is quieted by the strangulation and mollified with the vein. Or if it begins to putrefy
"The nose is removed and made ready for your operation; thereafter nothing remains.
After removing the strophulus you should then use your finger to examine what is left of it and its surroundings; if something remains after this, then cut off those as well in order that nothing might remain.
If there is a great strophulus in the root of it; then you should not cut off that strophulum from its own root as follows: it must be that with twice the force of your finger and you remove her until she falls down by herself without causing any harm or pain to anyone.
After removing all that is below the strophulus when it has been taken out of its sheath (the knife), you should: Then take care of him.
If the strophulus is completely cut off then you should make two openings with your finger nails and immediately insert them; when you see that no more remains of it in excess.
If you see that it has remained because of the size of the strophulum then you should aim to make an incision in its root and remove it; and administer sutures as we have advised.
And if there are any secretions from the strophulus they should be perforated with a superficial incision so that you can see the location of its maturity and put an opening in it where the inferior part of the body follows as we have advised.
After the strophulus has been perforated with a knife and these are applied as well in order to corrode what remains from corruption until you see that the wound is now dry; then take care of him immediately with your finger nails so he may be cured.
The thirty-third head
The excision of the epiglottis, from its attachment to the inside of the throat by accident/mistake.
They performed this excision on the epiglottis and I did not find anyone among us who had done it; and here is their writing.
If the two sides are joined then it is necessary to make an incision in the epiglottis without using a tool; for otherwise all of us will be weak and sick.
In such a person who has cool lips on their tongue or blisters or two ulcers inside the mouth when there is no tenderness to touch with the tip of the tongue must be used as an escape hatch from damnation, provided that this happens by chance
It should therefore be done so that we cut through the three or four circles of Epiglotim with a notch, or at least one notch; by this means, which is between two circles in length, it must be made into an escape hatch from damnation, provided that this happens by chance.
If the surgeon is timid, then he should make a cut on the tongue with a knife. Then when it reaches to the canal, water will run from its veins if anything is seen coming out of them.
Then we cut off the notch that we made; and it is called an escape hatch from damnation because of this, when it happens by chance.
And he loosens up a closed ulcer at some point in time.
With the removal of any moment when he is fearful of an introduction, he cuts both lips and removes them without cartilage.
Then administer medicines that grow flesh until such time as they are cured.
It is finished with Albucasis. The summary of this lecture that we mentioned is as follows; the exposition was not given unless they saw that a particular one among them had already been taken by their tongue to be sick, and then he became better than death: therefore, they were commanded to cut off the Epiglotim so that he could breathe over the ulcer which he has in his mouth for some time, and it would have been well: and because of this reason, they were commanded to let open ulcers until their evil was consumed, and is a malice in three days, and nearly as much; therefore, then they immediately cut off the ulcer themselves so that they could heal him, until he was cured.
That which I heard through you is that an attendant struck the head with a mallet and cut off its top portion, after which he inserted it into the gullet of his throat.
I was summoned to attend him, and then I struck her with a mallet and wounded her similarly as death does to the living.
Therefore, having withdrawn from the vessel through which he had entered the blood, I drew out the severed head. Therefore I was enraged that she did not retreat and flee, but he who had entered through the vessel withdrew from it.
I therefore ordered my servant and healed him so that he became well; but the attendant did not cause any injury to her except for a slight scratch on her neck from which she recovered after some days, with better dispositions towards others.
Therefore I say that there is no fear of the saw.
Of the cut throat surgery.
The 44th chapter
This chapter is called the 'Great Hernia of the Throat' because it is very large and as red as the body; it occurs frequently in women.
It can be either natural or accidental.
In nature there is no reason for it.
Accidentally, in two ways; one of which resembles a knot on the beak of a bird. Another way is similar to what happens when an artery is cut from a knot. And there is fear and it should not be allowed to bleed into itself with a knife unless the blood which has entered through an opening is bound up; and you should test its strength by inserting a finger in it, or else it may strangle your finger as it does mine. Therefore if you have inserted into it a knot like that of a pigeon's beak and it is not held up by anything in the vein, then dry out quickly, just as knots are dried, so that one may remove it from what holds its entrance closed; but if it does not hold on to something inside itself or outside itself, you should examine everything completely about him. After cleansing with it what needs to be done through care will be done.
The head is 45.
Of the section over the seeds of the nodus.
There are many species of the nodus, and I have already recited all the species for them to be divided. It is necessary that we distinguish here between the seed (Nodus) and the excurrent (Exitus), so that if someone doubts this, let him divide again.
Therefore I say that when the excurrent is warm, and there are fevers, and also the death of life (uhementes), until a superabundance of heat escapes, and decomposition completes; then, after this, they remain feverish and heated.
But when the seed (Nodus) is not warm, nor feverish, nor death of life, and there are those who are their own sack, which is according to the color of the body; and it receives as much as a cicer does, and it happens like that, greater and less.
And there are two kinds in this way: either with a pang or with keeping of moisture. The colors of the moisture are many, according to what I have said about division.
Therefore it is necessary when you come to care for the seed (Nodus) that you inspect him and ask about him first of all with an instrument called Intromissum, according to what follows after this.
The mode of interrogation is determined by the seed (Nodus) as well, that you take this instrument and lead him into a more humid place which comes before it; and then you will slowly bring your fingers with him until you know that the instrument has already entered his skin. Then last, you take hold of his hand according to the measure of its magnitude after this.
And then remove the instrument and consider that which has gone out into the excurrent (Exitus) of his.
If then there is flowing moisture at any time, whatever the color may be; then dry him superficially according to what I have said about others.
"If you do not believe that moisture is present in the incision, then know that there is a chill [i.e., it has become cold]: dry out this with a cross-shaped section and apply it as prescribed: suspend it together with sinews; and remove all skin from every part of him gently.
"However, if the skin is detached from the incision during the procedure and it is impossible to remove her [i.e., the patient], then take hold of her firmly until she is restored; for otherwise, nothing else will be saved.
"If something remains after this except a little or much [i.e., the patient], then make use of the cord according to its greatest usefulness.
"If you are sick and something remains from it just a little bit [i.e., the patient], then apply leeches to your completion as recommended by some with corrosive and acute fluids: suspend them above his head in order that they may not touch anything cold; care for him together with the rest, so that he is restored.
"If there are many leeches [i.e., a larger number of them], then place two mouths in his ears and care for him with whatever is injected.
"If it is contrary to the pulse or not [i.e., you are unable to apply leeches], then make an appointment and arrange a place for the application, and release him from stricture by two days at most; or three, until there be no longer putrefaction of the vein: thereafter return to removing that which remains from Nodus.
"Chapter 46.
"Of instruments used in making incisions and perforations.
"Here are the shapes of the introducers [i.e., leeches] and their three types.
"From these come the great ones, the middle-sized ones, and the small ones.
"Let the introducers be of iron, so that their extremities may rest in a manner conducive to receiving the blood into the veins near at hand.
These are the forms of experience, that is to say, perforation: and one of them is called a needle, which means piercing through or cutting into three pieces; there are three varieties
And among these is great, medium, and small
They unite together as a means to penetrate through the openings or holes, extraction (removal) of things from it, fistulas that occur because of its presence between those openings, and bubbles arising out of it which is in contact with the openings/holes
And others are round and narrow like the great needle mentioned before (that is to say, a large needle), thin and narrow like a thin needle, or slender and thin like an arrowhead, which may be used with cord (of course) from the flint, or iron, or bronze
And among those are improvements that occur from the flint (or other material), which means that they can be used as knives and scalpels
And among those there are improvements in using the black lead, which means that they can be used to puncture holes and make fistulas (fist-like formations) with their hardness, as a result of reflections on its surface when reflecting off of them
And there are also three varieties of needles Because of these, there are long, medium and short needles depending on the size of the fistulas and their tightness respectively.
The forms for removing things through openings or holes, which have many varieties
Because of these there are simple forms like the ones used by physicians or surgeons (which have three varieties), such as small ones, large ones and medium ones respectively.
And among those there are blind needles which also have three varieties
And among those there are needles that hold two different sizes and three varieties, and there are needles that hold three different sizes with three varieties, and all of them are necessary in their place.
These are the forms of scalpel that cut and remove knots (scalpel means cutting instrument), holes or openings, which have three varieties; among those there is great, medium, and small ones respectively.
"The joints whose cuts are acute have sharp ones; the others do not. They are not applied thusly unless they get a cut through which there is fear of cutting, or a knife wound: so that he may be healed through them and find tranquility greater than when he was inexcoriated.
"They flow from the air, and are similar to radio; when they come upon [one's] tongue there is a burning feeling of alcohol: and in the lateness of night there is hidden Spatumilis obscure, and it flows towards the interior part and exterior part like you.
"The shape of the Spatumilis that hides itself between the fingers when there is a cut through [the skin] towards the post; they do not perceive themselves being touched by an infirmity: and are three species, great, middle, and small.
"The foam of the venoms when they are drawn off with the flow of blood; there are three species great, middle and small.
"They flow from the air or through the veins in circles greater than their length; like you [see] them.
"And it is necessary that the great and small species of venoms are given to you for you to draw off blood through them with a certain velocity at the necessity.
"But you do not apply them to make the blood flow in all parts of the body; but only at the places where there is flesh; like a hawk's claws and wings and a hawk's leg and breast and throat and belly and vent and anus and others with flesh wounds, moist.
"And when they are instruments of small and similar shapes for the fists; according to their shape, with which blood is drawn off when it flows from a place phlebotomy or at an incision or artery; and sometimes they are in circles according to this shape.
Head 47
On the care of men who become breastfed from women's breasts
When men are suckled from a woman's breast until they fall asleep [i.e., when the nipples harden during sleep and become engorged], until the breasts of women nourish them, but after this nourishing period is over, their milk will cease to flow.
Whoever wants to prevent this should take a circular saw section of the nipple along its curved path [from below up to above], so that it may be removed from the line [i.e., the edge of the breast]. After this, all the engorged part will be shaved off. Afterward apply a poultice with fresh application of medicine Then bind two lips with sutures and attend to it until it is healed.
If the nipple falls downwards and becomes engorged due to its own size, just like what happens with women: then you must cut it off in two halves along a circular path from below up to above, so that one of them is kept on each side at their ends until the larger one contains the smaller. Afterward remove the cuts and apply as previously mentioned sutures and poultice [for healing].
If you are not able to make a complete incision on it as recommended earlier due to concern for the nurse or because of blood flow: then apply a poultice with a corrosive unguent and remove it until it is corroded by that which remains after cutting through the engorged part. Then attend to it until it is healed.
On the perforations of the breast caused by Titillius.
Head 48
These perforations caused by Titillius are of the type seen in the hardened veins [Strophulas], which hold onto drops and are surrounded by moisture.
What are to be done with those which contain moisture? It should be cut off [the nipple] using a circular saw along its path from below up to above so that all of it is removed from the breast and then apply the older poultice until another day.
In that manner he cut off his hand and treated it with a salve applied to the site of injury until healing occurred
If the amputated member was of the type with knots (Strophular), then it should be placed on top of it as we described for equal sections over Strophulas.
If the wound extends downward to emit blood then apply a cautery over it as we described for the previously mentioned section of the same procedure.
Section 49.
Regarding the amputation due to artery and vein.
When the artery is cut and the skin above it is sutured then many wounds occur from that amputation including similar wounds to the vein as well as swelling up.
The signs that indicate an amputation due to artery or vein are as follows: when the amputation is for the artery it will be long and deeply seated into the body; if you cause a pinching of your fingertips there's a feeling like something is being strangled (stridor).
The one due to vein is round on the outer part of the body.
The section above this amputation is a mistake and is most pronounced on the underarms, groin, neck, and in many parts of the body; it is very large. Therefore there should be an effort to treat him with iron and also on the edges or even at his head it is advisable.
Therefore above that which from the artery's swelling there should be a cut in length. Then apply the amputation with a hook after the artery; and release her from the clothing until she is detached.
Then insert below the hook and make her penetrate until you reach another place; and suture the artery with two threads as described for extracting both arteries at their places of origin.
Then wash the place that is between the two ligatures with a wet cloth until all of the blood from it has been washed out and treated as described for the amputation.
"After applying a dressing that generates pus until the ligaments fall off; then treat with ointments until healed.
"If a vein is cut through an incision and you cannot hold the wound with your hand, then you must tie it with a ligature as close to you as possible. "After tying the ligature around where your hand was, and it's not tight enough, then make a second knot to tighten it further until you can pull out the other end. "After tying with a ligature as I advised you earlier using the ligature as a double loop around it.
"If the ligature is removed from the thread then tie another knot with a second loop of the ligature underneath at the incision point; pull hard and your four fingers should make it tight.
"After tying the ligature around its middle until you are ready to remove it; then cut off any excess skin and release the ligature.
"After placing a bandage soaked in oil on top of it, massage gently. "Then apply the dressing that works with ointments until healed.
"The head of Lucius.
"From ligature from nerve damage by torsion of nerves.
"Just like what happens with an artery and vein, just as it does with a nerve; if the impact is from a blow or excessive force then it will happen to the ligature also.
"The rest of his body becomes pale and is in many positions without pain; when it's pulled with a lot of force, he feels dizzy.
"The ligature cannot be pulled up deep into the body without pain and is pulled only towards all parts of it; not towards the front or back.
What is important about these ligatures [connections] for sutures is that they must not be cut with a knife Indeed, the cutting of a connection would lead to contraction.
In that which is from them on the head or forehead, you should find it with a blunt edge. If a string has become slack, then hold it with tweezers and clip it off at its base.
And if the string is long, then suspend it with a hook and peel away from its base; thereafter clip off the excess, hold on to it and care for it until it is healed.
The head.
The cutting of the string having occurred inside the body.
Some of those individuals were frequently encountered along their way and among other members of their group, who are called Fungali, due to a similarity with mushrooms.
Of whose root is soft, and of whose head is large, and the lips they have are broad. And it from them is slack; and its size is great.
I have now heard of a man who had two in his body which were greater than anything else that was similar to the mushrooms; there was no difference between them except for the size of their roots and they parted with their lips, they moistened themselves always from those things.
Then I cut them off with a knife and weighed one of them at X denarius and eight sesterces, the other at six denarius; and the operation was by cutting them through [or] piercing as you consider here if they are damp and the color is white, moist, soft roots.  Then clip it off with a blunt edge in your presence, let there be your careful treatment of fire.
Many are expelled at the time of cutting his blood is much; therefore if you see it flowing [or] bleeding, then cauterize him right away.
If you see a weak and fearful person cut from his blood with a knife, then take the thread that has been made loose from his body and tie it to him; this is how we have said so, and release him in two days.
Then add air tight Do not let go of the seal until it is completely sealed and then removed so that it can be discarded without effort.
If the seal on the heart is too large for the incision to be performed easily and safely; especially that which is within the middle of it.
However, there may exist a way in order to decrease its size if you are skilled enough. After that seal it so that it does not leak.
Then take care of it until the wound is healed.
And remember that if you wish to make an incision on it and remove a part of its color, few senses, face, it is a very dangerous operation; I will be with you after the remembrance of Cancer when I come.
The second head
Care for the great Womb.
The greatness of the womb is born from many causes. Or if it is separated through a tear on the top; and goes out of that way, or from inside through an intestine, according to which it happened among the other tears. Or if it is separated by a flow of blood out of the vein; or from an artery, according to what was left behind. Or if it is cut off because of a knot within it.
If it is separated through a tear in the womb and then goes out of that way; at this moment its appearance becomes similar to the body's color, gentle without pain, and stays hidden from view for a long time. And if it is separated because of the exit of an intestine; at that moment its position remains as long as we have remained there and is more diverse in appearance. As soon as you take hold of it with your fingers, it is concealed; and after that it returns forthwith, but may be painful if there is any resistance from the womb or its surroundings: and it becomes much more noticeable in relation to the entrance of the belly.
If because of moisture; is gentle at that moment when you take hold of it with your hand and there are no obstacles or additions.
When it is due to blood, then with these signs appears a letter towards the dark region
If it's due to meat death, then its appearance is an A (uppercase) letter towards the dark region
If because of excess fat or poison, then his touch is gentle.
And the operation on that place is to be considered then if the greatness of the umbilical cord towards the blood vessels or veins or excess fat and poison occurs: it is necessary for you then to stop restraining his care In that place there was fear and poverty like a doctor tells about writing the letters due to the artery and vein.
If greatness of the umbilical cord due to intestines or bile occurs: it is necessary then for you to take great care so that its desire may be fulfilled and remain in a standing position extended. Then signs with pitch around the umbilical cord's entire circumference. After that you should put it so that he may be supported by your hand upon his back. Then around with a pitch mark on the place where you wrote with pitch around the umbilical cord's circumference. After that spread the middle of the letters to the upper part with great force. Then tie it around the circumference strongly using a thread or cord firmly, and let there be knot of the ligament stretched outwards.
After that spread out the middle of the letters on top of the ligament extended. If you then catch him already tied to the ligament: then take out stretched outwards and put into his finger a pointing thumb and drive his bowels towards the interior of the stomach: if you then catch bile: then receive him with thread or cord, and strike off its excess fat from him.
If the opposite is to you artery or vein occurs: then surround it much After that return to your work Two skewers are taken up and inserted into them two strong stakes; then two skewers are inserted around the person who has been tied to a cross with such strong stakes as you have used so that he cannot get free.
Then tie the person to a stake for four places above the skewers; if you are tired of holding them and releasing their place until they become rotten from the outside, so that he falls by himself or is struck down when skillfully sharpened and becomes rotten.
Then take care of him with the ointments which are necessary until he recovers.
If the eminence is from fleshly pain within him or from moisture; then you should tie his stakes as we have said so that he may be freed from them and suffer no more. And take away the blood or the moisture which are within him.
Then take care of him until his place becomes firm again.
The end of book 31.
Until his cure is complete.
We have spoken of the various ways to apply remedies for cancer and how one should proceed with medicines when treating him; and we recommend that iron be used along with his treatment as long as he does not become ulcerated: and it was also mentioned in this book to produce the tumor from a matrix, and caution regarding his treatment.
It was also said by others that when cancer is present at the place where it can be removed; such as cancer which is in the breasts or the buttocks and in those places, from body parts tied together to remove all of him entirely, especially when he is just beginning
Unless it has become big, you should not approach him with close proximity
I was unable to cure someone from that person and could not find anyone before me who had cured them.
And the operation on him when placed as we have said is such that he may be freed from his black bile sometimes. Then remove the blood and moisture if present with great force.
In preparation for a patient undergoing an operation
Then insert the lancet into the vein Afterwards apply the lancet evenly all over him, making incisions according to the prescription; until nothing more remains from his veins: release the blood so that it flows out, and do not cut away what you did not take, lest you express a vein somewhere else; or withdraw the entire amount of blood with your hand alone, depending on how this can be done there.
If anything contrary to your benefit arises from cutting into an artery, or one of the veins: then cauterize that vein; until blood is withdrawn. Then attend to him with the remaining care, until he has recovered.
The end of treatment for hydropsy
Epilogue We have finished the treatment of hydropsy as described above; and so it is with all its signs, and the care for him along with his medicines.
Only the treatment of hydropsy with iron is finished; and it does not come close to the treatment of the earache, nor comes near to that of tinnitus (ringing in the ears); or it does not reach for the shortness of breath caused by hypo-sarcosis: this would be fatal.
When you have finished treating hydropsy tinnitus with medicines, and did not affect the treatment by your medicine; then consider it. If there is some weakness or other illness after hydropsy; as if it were with him another affliction beyond hydropsy, just like if he were tired and needed to drink water, or anything else of that sort; then make sure you do not treat him with iron: because this would be terrible.
However, if there is some excess of strength that weakens him; it does not come near to weakness because of hydropsy alone: nor the child, nor the old man either: then you must find a way for treatment in him as he sits between your hands, and the nurse afterwards expresses his drink towards lower part of stomach.
"Then take a small and thin skewer. "Slice the two larger arteries (or veins) as sharp as possible, then slice the thinner one at its tip like a toothpick. "However, be careful of some small break that may occur while passing it through the operation up to the intestine, and put a bandage on it.
"Then consider. "If generation is through the abdominal part of the intestine, then it should be stretched with a three-finger incision from below to above its belly.
"If generation is due to weakness in the liver, then your left section should be made from below with three fingers.
"And if the generation is due to weakness, then make a cut on the right side; and it should not be made so deep that he who is weak cannot pass them through.
"Then proceed with your tool to complete the cut. "Then introduce your hand into the cut and press it in like manner as you saw before.
"Then pierce the skewer through until there is a void place; then the water will flow out of that place. "Then take it out and introduce your tool with its shape into the hole. "It is like a straw; it can be withdrawn through air or water, or by a mixture of both, the lower part being open and the three sides closed except for one on each side, so that its upper extremity is cut off just as you saw before.
"When the tool went into water immediately it descended quickly on top of the tool; so that half quantity of water was discharged at once.
"If you draw out more water than necessary at once, the weak person will either die because of a failure to breathe or suffer from a stroke if something approaches his face while he is dying.
Certainly! Here's a possible English translation of the Latin text you provided: "For truly true surgical skill comes from practice and experience, just as its significance is evident to you through your own efforts in training.
After this, take an instrument, and hold water.
This means "When you have taken the instrument in your hand and hold water close to it (i.e., as if performing a tracheotomy), proceed by inserting it into the opening that leads out from the nostril.
After this, take another instrument on a different day if you find yourself unable to tolerate holding water with one; and then extract that from the water as well.
Perform this process for a certain number of days without fear, and ensure you avoid making any mistakes by closely observing; until the removal from water does not remain.
If you find yourself unable to tolerate it on a day of the illness (i.e., tracheotomy), then remove that from water and place him upon a warm bed with much moisture, and expectoration through his mouth; and then apply fire above the stomach as well, and extract smoke along with the sputum after removal from water according to what I have previously explained.
Do not perform surgery on infants who are born in places where urine is present.
Head L (lower case).
When a child is born from its mother's womb and the head of it has not been perforated (i.e., skull fracture), or there is a narrow opening, or it lies outside its usual place.
Therefore, you must promptly approach the child with a skull fracture after birth and apply gentle puffs of vapor, according to this method.
After that, place a thin tube from the bottom into it; and hold it firmly for three days or four.
When then urine is emitted, remove him immediately and wash his mouth. After that reduce it (i.e., make a tracheotomy).
And if you do not place the tube, there is still an option to prevent urine that flows over his body from making him cough.
"For a patient with a narrowed hole [or opening], treatment is made using a plug, as we have stated earlier, until it enlarges.
"In those where the hole is not in its proper place, they are treated (lit.: bandaged or otherwise managed). "This is because when it [the hole] is born into the neck of a man, it cannot be lowered to its original position until he raises his hand from above. "There is no generation [of offspring], therefore, since the semen cannot penetrate to its mother according to the right way; and there are bitter fruits.
"The method of treatment for him is that he lies on his back. "Then extend your left hand to the neck of him with his left arm; and strike off the head from its place with a sharp blow or an acute instrument, as you would cut something on a knife; so that it falls into the middle according to what is necessary.
"So that you may be in a position for your blood flow during treatment. "Indeed many accidents have occurred to him. "Therefore for him with that which severed the blood and wounded his body until he is healed.
"Of Albucasis concerning what happens to the neck and head of a person, and corruption, blackening (i.e., death by strangulation), and detachment.
"The 66th chapter.
"Indeed many accidents occur to Albucasis among those people and there is an excess of bitter fruit [death].
"And from that are two others: one malignant, one not malignant.
"The non-malignant should be held with a subtle sickle and severed her until she is entirely done away with. "Then he puts over her the head of an Egyptian [a large, heavy fish] submerged in oil. "And then with the oil and the fish-killer cure him until he is healed.
"If an abscess is malignant, you must administer a cautery after cutting into it and its root.
"If a person has been circumcised by an al-ber, do not cut into it [the foreskin], and its part is between the cutting and the outside; you must administer the al-ber itself inside first until it consolidates. Then cure him externally: because when you cure both at once, neither of them will be cured before.
"And there are also cases where an abscess occurs on the testicles and the cutting procedure goes black or corrupts. "Therefore, you must cure everything that is already infected and corrupted, or has already become corrupted.
"Then apply a mixture of the powder from the testicles and herbs that crush weeds or thistles.
"And then cure it with the remaining treatment until it is cured.
"If a bleeding occurs from blood flow, you must administer a crescent-shaped cautery along this shape.
"A cautery is suitable for simultaneous use in two cases: bleeding and wounds when they become corrupted.
"If the head of a man is cut off and destroyed at once, then you must immediately insert into its meat with the male privy channel from a lead pipe so that it may fall over him.
"In another case where the cutting procedure is performed from a head injury and this does not occur unless it's on someone whose circumcision was cured and there is no requirement for an external cut; or sometimes it occurs due to wounds elsewhere, so you must therefore cure her with a rope-like ointment until the ligament is solved and the head of the man is released from all parts.
"If it's difficult to determine whether this occurs due to a wound or the circumcision procedure itself, then you must administer something from the head of the man and from the circumcision procedure. When a small incision is made, it may be penetrated through its own subtlety or by another instrument
Afterwards, separate the incision from the scalp with a wet cloth that has been previously soaked in cold water so as to prevent adhesion
After which, it was treated with a heated needle until it set
Chapter Seventy Two
For the correction of children's mistakes and their care from errors that may occur
Circumcision is not a solution to continuality like other nails; however, if it comes from our operation, with our care and use for him becomes proper for children, it is necessary that we indicate in this operation the better one and the more suitable for salvation.
Therefore, I say that the ancients did not write about circumcision in any of their books because they are not used according to their laws and only what we have acquired through experimentation is written.
What is important is that I use a greater portion of the art and phlebotomist to make the world better; circumcision with new tools, and wounds; and they are used in pain, and ligature with thread, and incision with knife.
I have already tested all these methods, but I did not find a better one to make the world better with thread and ligature.
Because when making the world better with new tools, it often escapes the skin. The two parts of an incision have two tunics; so that one part of the incision must be on top and hold back the lower tunic; therefore it is necessary to cut through the upper tunic until you reach another incision or future pain. And when making the world better through needles like sutures, that is, fingers, which are used by sews, it cannot be cut off from a man's arm member; because perhaps it will enter into his hole.
But when making the world better with a knife, it may give iron and ruin your work; and indeed children are born with nature to be this way, and many are born like that, so they do not improve the world; I have already heard of this.
Mundification is done with forceps and ligature with thread; this [act] brought me good fortune as the cut on top was like one below in severity When you use both hands for this purpose and align their forces, two cuts of equal severity are made at once during the operation; after which a compression is applied in such a way that all the excess flesh is drawn together from every part without falling off any part.
The proper way to perform the operation is as follows: you will have to estimate and measure carefully, especially for children if they understand better; otherwise, do not tie it too tightly with a thread of your own hand, but leave it until another day.
Then let him enjoy and learn in whatever way is possible for you to do this thing with the help of his intelligence. Then let him stand on your prepared height with both hands free; do not let him lie down, and make an invisible incision on one hand or below the foot to prevent any child from seeing them without using the instruments.
Then insert your hand into his and blow out the blood with it; then draw up his head to prevent him from going down completely. After that, you will have to clean yourself after wiping off the excess flesh.
Then tie a knot with twice as much thread. After that, tie it with even more ligature below to prevent him from escaping further. Then hold on firmly with your index finger and thumb; keep the lower knot tight, then cut between the two knots. After that, blow out the blood from his head to prevent him from escaping quickly or going down completely. Then let the blood flow slowly for a while; lay aside some of it on top to make a poultice with roasted wheat or oil recently prepared in a way that when cooked in water with vinegar and crushed together with recent olive oil is beneficial: leave him like this until another day, and take care of him with the remaining treatment to cure his wounds.
This is a medical term that refers to the process of removing a tumor from the body using surgery
This Latin text describes the anatomy of the human limbs and their relative lengths to one another. The first part refers to the lower extremities (feet), while the second part refers to the upper extremities (hands). It states that both pairs of extremities have the same length ratio, meaning they are proportionate in size when compared with each other.
A mistake that occurs during surgery is the loss of all or part of the skin due to injury inside it at the time of cutting (incision).
Therefore, you should make an incision during your turn, using your finger in front of the place where it is to be made, and cut it at its same length as the other one.
If you cannot hold her with your finger, then remove her using a probe and cut her then.
If three days have passed and the remaining part that is swollen under the cloth has become hard as a rock, then release it (let go of the grip), until it becomes cool to touch, you cut off what remains with ease, and cut it at its prepared length, so that your sword will hit it. It won't cause any harm to him/her
Therefore, let us treat that which we have removed from the bowels with care and apply the remedy for removing things from the bowels to it: if an incision is made above its measure (length), allow it to go upwards towards its upper limit without causing any harm to him/her.
Therefore let us treat that which we have said until he becomes well.
Title of the next section.
On the subject of removing a hernia from within the body through an incision.
The retention of urine in the bladder is relieved by draining off the obstruction with a stone or frozen blood, pus, or a growth from within it, and similarly to those by our methods of treatment when necessary.
If this bladder obstruction does not yield to removal by stone or frozen blood, pus or growth from within it, then let him lie on his side until he is cured of the retained urine above his waist. After making a hole in his foot and extending it from the top of his back as far as possible, he ties up any remaining part with cord. He stretches out the bladder through an incision in the neck to expel the lapis from behind: why was this necessary?
If this were not possible with him as we said, and the urine-retaining muscle is above it, then you should administer the extraction of his bladder using an instrument called a syphon, its shape like a siphon pipe made from lead or any other heavy metal, but thin enough to be bent easily.
And the way of leaving urine through him is by tying a double knot on his penis and pulling it tightly enough to ensure that no more urine comes out as long as he holds his breath; if there is anything left in the thread from the urethra after he releases his breath, you should insert this into the syphon tube at its lower end.
After using the syphon tube for this purpose, you can let him lie down on his back and lubricate him gently as before; bind up his bladder with a double knot or with butter if need be, and lead his urethra out of its sheath with olive oil-based lubricant, olive oil alone, or hot water.
After inserting the syphon tube into him gently and ensuring it reaches to the base of his urethra.
And you tie off the top knot from around his navel.
After inserting the syphon tube into him gently and ensuring it reaches to the Vesica, you now proceed with the extraction from within this sheath: do not follow these steps as described here unless you are using a specific tool for this purpose that has been designed specifically for this job, because its design may involve winding and twisting.
And you extend the thread gently with urine. The bladder will follow the thread.
After this you extract the bladder and run urine through its urethra; repeat with him and do not stop until all of his urine has been drained out.
Of the quality of sponges used in clepsydras
Head XI
When a cut occurs on the sponge or blood coagulates in it, or pus accumulates and distills from it with medicines; then there is to be used an instrument called Clepsydra whose shape we have just described.
It is deaf, that is, sealed up And in it there are three openings: two on one side and one on the other side just like you do.
And the outlet is closed off so that it may expel something without any addition; but when anything is pulled out of its power by humidities it draws it back again to length: according to what clepsydra does, it projects pitch [tar] into flames just like Greek fire on battlements.
So that you may pour out the humidity into the sponge; and when pulled towards the upper part of clepsydra by its power it will be drawn into the opening of clepsydra by its moisture: but when something is expelled towards the superior direction, then the humidity will be drawn back in to the outlet of clepsydra.
Then bring that part within its chamber according to what we have described as a chamber. And then drive out the humidity with that which pulled it towards the sponge immediately and quickly so that he may become weary of her.
The shape of the soft sponge to be used in clepsydras.
Shall be made from brass or bronze; whose head shall be of a height like that of a small bowl and beneath it there shall be an opening into which the ligature may fall.
Then take the sponge by its edges and place within it humidity for clepsydra to use. And then tie a strong ligature with double cord into the two openings so that its heat may be greater than that of fire.
Then bring that part within the chamber of clepsydra according to what we have described as a chamber; after which tie your hand above it with a humidity seal securely: so that he may become weary of her for she has already exhausted herself upon the sponge.
If you don't have a knife with you right now, take this broken one and use it to make a circle, then cut through all its thickness. Then put the thread firmly into these holes as tightly as before. After making a circle, you will secure it just like we did before, when you put that which was wet with water and oil into the container.
After securing it to an instrument (the knife), continue making a circle with it just as you did before when using the knife and your hand; until water becomes wet from the blade.
The end of the passage
From extracting the lapis
I have spoken about the species of lapis and its treatment with medicines, and distinguished between different kinds of lapsides born in kidneys, liver, spleen, and skin; and also mentioned the whole sign of the stone: and distinguished where the operation takes place with hand and cut off; and that the lapis is generated by the stone itself, which appears as a figment on the knife edge. And I am telling this to you now when presented in front of me.
Therefore, I say that the lapis is most often produced by children.
And from the signs of it (the stone), urine flows out like water with its subtlety; and you will see a white hare appear there, who is injured by that same hand's sword and works hard while being pulled along by her and many times she falls to the ground. After this urine will flow out from it with him as a boy does; and you will see that one of them (the stone) stands erect among them all.
The healing for children comes from it, which brings about a cure in 14 years. And the treatment of an old person is difficult. However among young people it is common (the treatment), which is within the lapis and his who has a bigger lapis the cure is easier; if small, then the cure for him is lighter.
"Firstly it is necessary to loosen the stiff limbs with a cord so that they may be opened up.
After this the stiff limb is taken in hand and opened up by stretching it with both hands downwards towards the depths so that a vein may be opened leading to the heart; or if there is no vein at all nearby, then relief should be sought from some distant point upwards.
"Then place him between your hands prepared so that his hand is beneath the cord of yours; in this way the whole vein may be opened downwards towards the lower part.
After which it should be sought for outside if you wish to open a vein completely from below upwards.
If therefore you find the vein empty of blood, then immediately with a sharp cut above it.
If therefore the vein does not yield to your touch at all, then it is necessary that you withdraw with oil your left hand if the limb is a boy; or else withdraw the middle finger of yours if it is youthfully complete and insert him into your own arm: and you must seek for the vein while he is beneath your digit until he comes from below the vein.
Afterwards press above him with your finger and drive him out against the place from which his vein is; and you should be prepared to receive the hand that he may give it towards the exterior: and another of yours, that it may extend its fingers towards the higher part: and another one, so that it may remove a cut beneath its fingertips in the part where the sectioning was made.
After this is an incision of the vein. And find there what is between the arm and the fingertips on the left side; make a cut above him over the vein: place your finger in his anus: and then it should be made for an external cutting that may be wide, and an internal one that must be narrow according to how much of the vein's exit can occur without being larger.
But if you compress your finger which is in the anus of the vein near to the cutting and he will be removed with difficulty.
"You know that from a stone there are angles and margins, for which it is difficult to exit because of this.
And if you come from soft things like membranes or rounded ones, then exiting is easy for him/her.
Therefore, to one with angles and margins add a slit (fissure).
If not able to be inserted like that then you should insert it beneath him in a subtle manner with the help of a delicate tool or by having an extended hand for his extremity which is similar to the moon's shape and can grip the stone and not let go from its hold: or by inserting something under him.
If you are unable to insert it above then widen the hole (fissure) as much as possible. If it causes bleeding remove it with a finger or hand.
However if the stone is more than one then first move to your mouth using a large spoon. Then strike above it. After that pull down the other ones similarly in this manner.
If it is very large then ignorance arises as to how you should slice off a big piece of it. Because one of the pairs was weakened or ill, either it died from drinking a strong urine mixture or it was sliced off by someone else because its location is not secure all around itself (it cannot be protected everywhere).
Indeed the expulsion of him should happen until he escapes or it is broken with his own force until he pulls himself out forcefully (from inside).
When you have completed your operation then press the hollow bone with a hard substance such as lead or dragon's blood and hold him there firmly until he pulls himself out forcefully (from inside).
Afterwards the weak one lies over his own head without support or help from ligaments and it remains like that for three days. When you have freed him, fill in a hole with water mixed with oil (a mixture of olive oil is recommended) until he pulls himself out forcefully.
"After cleansing with a mild soap and water, then apply the healing ointment.
"If it happens that a cold object touches the wound and causes frostbite or burns; and similar injuries occur - as if blood froze in a vessel and urine is prevented from flowing out with it, and it is known by the discharge of blood mixed with urine. "Then place your finger into the wound and extract its blood. "If left untreated, it can lead to infection of the vessel (vein) or putrefaction.
"After cleansing with vinegar and water, then apply any remedy that agrees with the cure.
"It is necessary for the whole course of treatment to be observed so that two veins and a single vein can be cured.
"If the stone is flat and lies in the urine bladder; it appears there, and must be prevented from exiting - then cure him with what you put on before you cut into the bladder. "Many times I have practiced this course of treatment; but that's it for me.
"It is as follows: the trocar has a small opening with a narrow blade; its shape is triangular, and it is held fast by a wooden handle.
"Then take a thread and bind it tightly under the stone so that it does not slip out of its place.
"Then insert the trocar with the narrow blade into the stone; hold it gently against its place so that it does not slip out of position. Then take the hand holding the thread and carefully move the stone to one side, then withdraw the stone while keeping your hand pressed tightly against the stone's surface: you will see where the wound has been made.
"The urine is discharged immediately.
"Then take your hand and remove what remains of the stone from its outer surface on the urine side. "The stone will break up; it becomes fluid with urine, and is cured by that.
If you are not provided for this care, due to something that prohibits it from him, then tie the first thread under a stone and the second above the stone Then dry off over the stone between the two tied threads. Then remove it (the dried thread). After you tie a knot, and open up the frozen blood that is inside the vein.
And it is not necessary to tie the thread under the stone unless you want it to go back up: and a different thread above only if when released after going through the stones goes down with its skin at its own place, and cooperates in healing the wound: and because of that, when tying the superior thread so that it cuts off the lower part, so that it comes out at your upper part, to heal the wound as we have said.
Chapter 11
The extraction of women's thighs (a surgical procedure).
It is not generated by a stone in women
If you encounter one of those stones, then the cure becomes difficult and is prohibited due to many reasons.
The cause for this difficulty may be that women are stronger than men
Another reason is because you do not come across a woman who becomes a doctor when she is pure or with the help of her husband.
The third reason may be that you do not encounter a woman who knows this art and practice well, especially when it comes to surgery with her hands.
The fourth reason is the fear of falling into deep sections caused by the length and width of stones.
If this necessity arises from such a place, it is necessary to have with you a woman who knows medicine very well: and few come across her.
If earlier or later you encounter a cast iron physician, subtle and present, or another woman who is proficient in the art of women giving birth: so that she may do everything that is above for him from an examination under the stone.
In the beginning (or first), it is necessary that a man examine if she is a woman; then he must introduce his finger into her vagina and use a stone
If it came to pass that he inserted his finger into her vagina, then let him apply the obstetric forceps, so that he can introduce his finger into a virgin's vagina and inquire about the stone after placing his left hand on the hymen and compressing her with a good compression.
If it came to pass that he removed the stone from her vagina downwardly toward the lower part with all his strength, until she reached the base of her hips.
Then let him place her on the side with the opposing knee of his left leg next to the base of the hip, and from there he takes out the stone; so that his finger does not move off the stone and it is necessary for a division first. Then let him insert the ramrod into her incision.
Then let him insert the ramrod into her incision. If it is necessary to remove the stone by way of incision, then he adds the ramrod according to a quantity proportionate to that of the stone removed from her.
And you know that stones are many in kind. From him, it is uneven and big, soft and rough, long and round, with hairs.
Therefore, you know the kind of stone from this very thing by which that happens to her above.
If it occurs that she loses blood at the time of intercourse, then let him apply a certain remedy and hold it for an hour until the blood stops flowing.
Then you will have your remedy ready for her and hold it while she is on the operating table until you remove the stone; so that when you are prepared with those instruments which I mentioned to take out the stone from a man, you can help them by using these in your own operation.
If it occurs that you lose blood and know that the removal of blood is from an artery which has been cut; then let him apply a sponge to the place and tie it with a strip of linen with good binding strength; do not remove it until you have done so: release the stone, but do not extract it. A woman will die in childbirth. After delivery of a child
Then the womb will be open for you after the period when the uterus is healed and the location has been cleansed with a suitable medical procedure so that it can again be used as an operating table.
The 62nd chapter.
To remove the hernia.
The ramekins are not full unless the quantity of moisture is balanced with cold water; this condition occurs when both the testicles and the anus are held together.
And when it is within the pouch itself to its own part that nature prepared for it in a way that was no good enough to be completed; this condition occurs when both testicles and anus are held together.
The generation of these bags is from a weak force that harms the testicles; it flows to them this material. And when it happens due to a blow above the testicles.
This moisture has many colors. Or it could be from its stains towards the white color of the chalk, or due to redness, or from excrement, black, or from water, white, or from something else.
The signs that show when there is a balance between moisture are these. If it is on the pouch white as we mentioned before, then it looks like a round circle to its length more than that figure; and you won't see testicles because moisture holds him in every part.
If it is due to the pouch holding moisture itself, then the sign looks round with some of its part; and this way a man can see that there's something else.
If it is due to the moisture between testicles and anus being white, then you'll notice it under your senses.
When therefore the understanding of colors with moisture comes to be, you will find a color with moisture on the sign next to the opening, whose shape precedes it. I enter with a view towards what I expect from this instrument [the instrument being used for surgery].
After we have entered into the hands of him who performs the surgery with iron tools, it is necessary for you to become blindfolded so that he can operate safely on your part if possible [of your body], and ensure his operation will fill up your body completely
Then you must place a cover over him and many towels beneath him.
Then sit on the left side of him and give the minister to sit on his right hand [the surgeon], who stretches out one of two fingers towards your face, and reaches for the other finger of the opposite hand
Then take a narrow strip and cut through it lengthwise from the middle up to your nose, then draw [a line] according to an equal length which cuts the finger, until you reach the white part of your face; and observe him or examine him carefully while washing off any remaining [part], so that you may cut him at all points.
Then make a large hole in the strip for the water to come through completely and take away all of it.
Then divide the strip between the two lips with a finger and spread it out to its highest point; don't touch the completely washed [part of his face], because you want to cut him as much or little as possible depending on your skill. If you do not sufficiently scrutinize the incision and it is not secure [or safe], then water will come through again.
If outside of your hands touches him during the time of surgery, when you have made an incision into his skin, then immediately cut off and reduce it. Then close up the two lips with stitches [of the skin].
And then take care of him as you would a wound until he is healed.
If outside enters into your hand and is black or dirty from ashes [ashes] or other things, then you must wash it immediately with those that are wet because of the fear of blood flowing.
"After cutting away the suspensor and suspending it, remove (the part you have detached) with care; next proceed to what we said.
"If water is collected into two parts, then you know there are two branches; therefore, remove the other branch equally as it was detached from the other.
"If they are equal to you, then proceed with one operation; next remove (the part you have detached). "Take a rope and tie it under the section of the tongue in oil or in rosato; then put another loop onto the same part you submerged into wine and olive oil; after expanding it over two tongues, look at its veins: next place double folds on top, they are thin; and bind them with the sixfold knot according to this form.
"Two pieces are tied on each side and they tighten; the one is attached to the tongue with a sharp knife or wet wool, according to this likeness: after it reaches its extremities, either attach (the part you have detached) from the back by tying it to the bottom of the shoulder blades. The second one attaches to the breast bone: both are tied over two inferior cowls and two other ones over two inguinal regions; after that all folds will be gathered in a total knot at the base of the arms.
"After cutting off the suspensor with a sharp knife at the place where you want to make an incision and you have made it so that you collect the subtile cautery; you dry (the part you have detached) after cautery is applied; when it is heated, according to what we said.
"Let Greek letters be assimilated.
"After that you have attached the cautery, when it is heated until the humidity has completely gone away.
"After that you have spread out the cautery with your fingers and wipe it carefully off after igniting a subtile cautery; make an incision according to what is possible for you until you remove all of him.
"You must not touch it with fire.
"You know that this operation is more beneficial than one involving blood flow and better still without the need for surgery.
"If you encounter a section that opposes your wishes in the first hour of surgery or the heat from a cautery needle, either the flow of blood, or something else: then it is necessary for you to cure whatever brings about opposition by means of the care that was granted to him beforehand.
"If the patient is timid and does not anticipate this surgery because of his fear: then administer a perforation as I have mentioned.
"When you confirm with me that the aforementioned matters have been understood and accepted by you, then it is necessary for you to support the patient's head so he can lie down.
"Then perforate an aperture below his buttocks with a narrow slit on either side and place the perforation according to the length of the body, so that it is wide enough for water to pass through completely.
"Then place a ligature above the slit and tie it off, so that the water can flow through in its entirety; then care for him until his wound is healed.
"If the opposition is encountered while you are perforating that slit and it is not removed until after because of a white patch on the incision, which prevents water from exiting; then it is necessary for you to introduce a pen or some other tool with which water can be extracted, as follows: either in addition to the operation of his wound, or an instrument similar to one used by physicians who practice hydrotherapy.
"You know that water is excreted after menstruation and sometimes before or after it. "Therefore, you should administer as follows: care for him in the same way as before until he is healed and has had his days to recover.
"Chapter 63.
"Of the treatment of a sore on the skin of the ram's face.
The incision above this ramus is filled with dread and fear of destruction in many dispositions You should get rid of it as part of that
And I am the one who remembers and repeats the operation in this manner.
Therefore, when many needles fall from the body to which they belong and cause them to be cut off, it happens that this is caused by multiple causes.
Or due to acute or severe thirst for testicles Or from a blow
The pain of the aposteme is as the color of the body and it does not hurt him: he is gray and pale.
Or perhaps the aposteme may be a stone whose color is dark and who has no feeling for himself
Sometimes it can also happen due to a blockage in the arteries and an increase in their pressure: just like what happened before with his memory, or from an increase in blood vessels.
Therefore it is due to the above mentioned when you compress him with your fingers you realize that it is an aposteme. And do not let his touch be too strong.
This is what happens when it occurs from an increase in blood vessels but does not spread anything with your fingers when you compress him.
And it is possible that a section above this type can be made and above the rest of the muscles, in order to cut off the testicles. Then extend your hand upwards and remove him from the rope with a white handkerchief, release the arms, tie up the hands again, and cut off the ropes when you have freed him from all sides.
If his hand has been bound with newly-cut flesh then it is necessary that you grab hold of him and cut off his hand.
And if there is a separation between something from the sheath or inside of his hands then you should free all that and cut her off with a round incision.
If an injury has occurred on a part of the body where the birth of flesh is situated behind, then you should remove all of it and take out the skin in the same manner as we mentioned before.
After your operation has been completed then cover the wound with a bandage soaked in oil and honey; thereafter take care of him as prescribed before he is cured.
Head size 64.
With regard to treatment for baldness caused by vitriol (nitric acid).
The eye is moved out through a small opening with the help of a similar instrument as that used for the nose; it causes great difficulty in movement and exercise, and walking.
And in its treatment there is fear because of what preceded this remedy in remembrance.
Indeed it should be done as they mentioned the operation previously.
Therefore I say that it is necessary to keep the patient lying on an elevated bed. And then pull down the support of the nose towards the lower part. And then hold on to the support of the nose with your fingers and its moisture that is near; keep it there and let another person stretch it out by a gentle movement.
And then make a straight cut across the narrow part of the nose with an acute pointed instrument; until it is detached from both sides.
After that remove all parts as we mentioned for removing veins previously.
After this fasten the double rope around them where it occurs; and then fasten it again at the last of these places. After this remove all that is added from corruption by moisture with a straight cut according to the length of the body and take out what has been added; so you will have cured him completely without any part remaining.
After the care of the wounds and the wounds of the veins with which you have to heal, let those that nourish one of the nostrils be cut off; so they will go down in order to bring about death. It is not evil because of this.
If the wine has spoiled all of its juices, then it is necessary to extract them from the testicle with the veins: that no nourishment may come from this, because of the incision, and so it may excrete or be eliminated, but not leave any residue in them.
Head 65
Of the cure for rectal sores.
The excrement of the rectum is extracted from the incision which has caused it to ooze through the anus and into the perineal area as if it were urine
Therefore, they descend down the intestines due to that rupture at one testicle. And this rupture may be from the anus itself or the extension of its wall.
And these two species may occur due to many causes: either from the blow (blow or impact), or from a sudden movement of its wall, or from a loud noise, or from the violent death of another cause, and similarly.
And the mark when it is from the extension of the anus. It happens sometimes with time that it is long and does not happen immediately; therefore because the anus was compressed by the testicle.
The mark of it when is from the section of the anus because it makes immediate pain at its origin; and it differs in appearance beneath the skin, and that way it goes out through the intestines and its course to the outside of the anus.
It may happen with an intestine hernia; and it is called this of the intestines, and the hernia; and sometimes it does so with effusion.
It may happen that it flows through the intestine of a lump, and held there; and it is with it because of the injury to be very painful, and especially when pressed down upon it.
And in the collection of the causes for fear of this with iron is necessary that it happen to the occasion within her.
And the mode of operation is, so as to remove quickly and reduce the intestine in his hand towards the inside of its own cavity if it was reduced. In your hand place them [the eyes]; and with your fingers touch them
After this, you should extend the eyelid towards the upper one, and then dry it completely in length from the roots of the eyelashes. After that, you should make two incisions on both sides of the nose with a small knife to open it up; and then cut the eyelid in half by its quantity so that it can be opened completely from within.
After that, you should cut open the eyelid and what is below it; until the white part of the eyelid has been opened completely from all sides; then insert your finger-tip into where the eye follows, into where it is between the two eyelids, and absolutely with it towards the posterior part.
After that, you should move the eyelid with your right hand towards the inner cut of it; and with this you should extend the white part upwards, with your left hand: and touch the whole eye with both hands together so as to stretch it out completely; and you will find complete solution for the problem.
And ask your fingers not to be inserted into the slit of the eyelid because that could cause damage inside it. If anything comes out from there, then pull it towards the lower part.
After that, you should take the thread which is attached to it from ten stitches; and put this in front of the upper eyelid slit, i.e., the one covering the eyelashes section; then cut both ends where they come out from the thread, until there are four threads. After that, you should bind some of them with others in a figure like the cross; and tie these to the eyelid where we have described it, because this is the ligament of the eyelashes beneath the upper eyelid, so that nothing can be inserted into their veins through there towards those parts which feed on them, or else they would cause pain. "And then place a second ligature beyond the first one, extending it with two fingers. "After that, remove the two ligatures from between the fingers, placing one beneath each nail of the thumb and little finger; then strike off with both hands the remaining one according to its roundness.
"Then dry the lower part of the thumb and little finger, from which a flow of blood arises; as we did when it was first released.
"Then apply a band soaked in oil and tie the ligature that has been released. "And when we have burned the ligature as mentioned before, fearing a flow of blood from it after its removal. "But this often happened many times. "And remove the ligature until it falls by itself.
"If this happens after a long time has passed and its removal is difficult due to the swelling of the blood vessels; then apply it with warm water and place over it that which we mentioned before until it falls.
"After curing the wound with the remaining treatment for wounds, until healing occurs.
"Chapter 66: The Treatment of Burns
"From a skilled barber.
"In this chapter I did not see anyone who had been burned while receiving treatment with iron.
"And some said that it should be treated similarly to how we treat the wound on a barber's chair when wet with vinegar. "This is that when placed above the burn after it has been cut and dried in the middle; then apply a bandage as we mentioned before with vinegar, so that they do not fall out of place; finally cure the wound as mentioned before until healing occurs.
"Chapter 67: The Treatment of Injuries
"Of the injury which happens to the buttocks.
"When an injury occurs to the buttocks as mentioned before; it remains there and does not descend on the fingers anything from within the intestines; if it descends, only then is that a small wound with a bandage put back into all four corners: when time passes while using this treatment for a long time, it adds a cut in the ligature until intestines drop out of it.
That happened through a wound caused by the sword as we have stated before Which is because of the length of the sword; then it becomes soft and the place where it entered heals over time
And his care was with caution as we have mentioned before.
And sometimes he cared for him with a knife, in the same way; and it is that the sick one lies on his back between your hands. Then the dried place where the opening of the wound was located and its extension through a length equal to three fingers on either side
Then stretch them tight as the sword is held in place until it reaches its tip, which is below where you hold it.
Then take a handle and lay him on the elevated place from the sword; then press down to the depth of his chest.
Then hold them tight above the farthest part of your hands from the sword; and tie both together with a stitch one to another; then remove the farthest part of your hands
And do not break all of them completely or stretch them, nor anything else like that, as I taught you to know in the course of the intestinal fistulas.
Then his care is with ulcers. When you reach that point, open it up, and restore the ulcer until it has healed over.
His blade will bend backwards, but not to be added to the elevation of the opening.
The cautery is better here because it is close to healing.
Chapter sixty-eight
Concerning the softening of the testicles.
The skin of the testicles becomes softer on some people because the muscles that are between them become soft and the appearance of the one is affected by this.
Therefore it is necessary for him who asks about the care of them to press down on his back a sick one and cut all of the softened skin above the natural skin.
After making an incision on both lips and stitching them together, if you wish, apply some softened skin with a couple of stitches or four, and firmly sew that too.
Cut between the stitched parts.
After taking care of all the wounds and stitching them up securely, then let it fall off naturally.
Head 69
About castration.
Indeed, since castration has been cast out from our law (i.e., the canon law of medicine), and for that reason it was permitted to me so as not to remember him in my book like this; and there is no need to remember him unless by two ways.
The only way that it should be remembered when a doctor is being questioned about this; and so he knows the cure for what happened to him.
And the other way is that we are often practiced on castration among animals, for our own sake; as in sheep, goats, and others of that kind.
Therefore I say it should be done according to two ways. Or by gradual attrition. Or by a cut and removal.
The way it is done by gradual attrition and a cut-and-remove operation is as follows: we would make the animal to sit in warm water until its testicles are softened up, then they let them stay down while remaining limp, and at that point you take hold of them with your own hand until they stop moving and don't show through touch.
For the castration by cutting and removal, you must hold tight the animal, and press down on his testicles with your left hand.
After ligging the suspensors and drying all over them with one section, until when both sides have been done: then you make an incision on where the cut was made after it has been dried off from above as well as below that part which is under the tail.
And this way of castration is better than one by gradual attrition because the gradual attrition sometimes causes loss in testicles and that is why it was desired to not cut them off.
Therefore, ulcers should be cured.
The 70th mode (of treatment).
Concerning the cure of hemorrhoids in two modes
Hemorrhoids are cured from urine through two methods. The cure is brought about by the urine passing through either a slit between them or through the grip of their base, which lies between two of them, resembling the vulva of a woman and having hairs; and sometimes it flows from that part where it enters the cleft behind one of them.
In women there is another mode of cure; and it resembles the vulva of a woman above the fold in such a way that they resemble the upper urethra to one side only, and two on both sides just like two testicles.
The cure of three kinds (by urine) and two by women is as follows: for it must be that the added flesh is cut off until the impression has gone away. Therefore, ulcers should be cured with the help of the remaining parts (of treatment).
In the second mode for men is urine taken from behind one of them that lies between two of them, which does not operate and has no cure at all.
The 71st mode (of treatment).
Concerning the cutting off of the foreskin and elevating the flesh on it among women.
By this means the foreskin is added above nature until it becomes tender and looks like a swollen part of it; but sometimes among certain women it magnifies itself so much that it becomes as large as one would find it among men, when it has extended as far as the foreskin.
It is therefore necessary to hold the excess of foreskin with one's hand or a knife and cut off; but not at last in cutting it as far down as its root, especially in its deepest part so that no blood flows.
Therefore the ulcers should be cured with their help.
The foreskin is the one born in a mother's womb until it reaches out; and sometimes its removal will be for the sake of resemblance with tails, some people call this the tail-like grip. "Therefore let us make an incision like that of a fistula and heal it as we would a wound.
The female urethra is not perforated by the stone.
Chapter Seventy Two
Albucasis' term for the urethra or bladder stone. It is either physiological (normal) or accidental (unexpected).
It is accidental when it precedes by the slip of the foot or hand; and may be added from the flesh, or from subtle poison, or from spit (spit being an old term for an emetic); and may happen in the profound matrix [of the uterus], or in the side thereof, or above or below, or at menstruation.
The knowledge of its cause is obtained through an inspection of the birth marks (obstetrical examination).
If it is not visible then seek its cause with your finger or by using a probe.
If the inspection reveals the presence of two lips (labial ulcers) then this may be the cause; and to remove it is necessary to separate both the ulcerated parts.
And if you find two ulcers on either side:
Then put both your fingers together and place the woman's hand upon her back with your arms extended. Then extend the two lips strongly until you see through inspection what caused it.
Then take hold of the hand and drink its contents; then place this upon a spot: and for as long as it remains unfastened, let the woman copulate every day until no other spot is left unfilled.
If the ulcer is large and deep then you must separate it from a similar piece of cloth with a small hole for spitting out any poison or phlegm.
If the cause is from a flesh wound then bind it up with cotton and make an incision: use as medicine for stopping bleeding without causing injury to the flesh like acacia or dragon's blood, and so applied together with alum.
In the meantime use a large clamp to hold the nose in place and let it stay like that for days until such time as you have applied the ointment made from linseed. And then apply the linseed ointment after that, if necessary, to cure any remaining inflammation with care
Or when one of the nostrils is blocked by a growth or something similar to it, you should use scissors and cut along this way until there's no longer any cancerous tissue remaining; otherwise do not allow iron against cancer.
The thirtieth head.
For hemorrhoids and bothor rubs on the vulva of women.
Hemorrhoids are the opening of veins in anus, until it runs out of blood and sweat profusely.
When then the hemorrhoids are treated, they become thin; and I have already described their signs and symptoms in my last passage, and what is done to them for treatment, and what is not.
I therefore declare that hemorrhoids which are in the opening of the womb are not visible to the senses; then there is no cure for them with iron.
Those which fall into the womb through the vagina and onto which falls the sense are those which are treated.
Therefore it is appropriate that a woman enter her house cold. After this, Athethel cuts them off with scissors or strips them off using a cloth, and slices from their roots.
Afterwards he washes them off near the blood flow of one incision and without any cutting or mutilation; like acacia trees, dragon's blood, and similarly with other things
Afterwards he moves his feet to the wall for a short time. After that, he lays her down into cold water.
If the blood flow remains interrupted; then you should let her rest in a mixture of chamomile and roots, and walnut, and garlic, and similar things.
After that you should take the ointment made from barley flour, and wrap her up with honey and vinegar, and put a bandage over it on top of his back.
If blood is severed from it, that's good; if not, make an incision in the back of the hand and milk the breasts without scarring
Then take the rope and immerse it in heated oil; then apply it to the tip of your nose or to the tongue, as desired.
When this has quieted down, anoint the spot with ointment and wait until it is healed.
The wound on his hand resembles that of a leopard; its appearance is terrible.
Therefore let you strike what is visible from him according to what I said earlier; and care for him until he is healed.
This was done by an expert with 72 surgeries on his head
The wound resulting from the opening of the matrix
Many species of leeches have been applied to the matrix as one would apply cancer, and wounds, ulcers, abscesses, boils, hemorrhoids, and fistulas; in short, all kinds of sores and excrescences
I have already said all about the leeches and their signs and cures; it is necessary for me to mention here what kind of wound was inflicted on his hand when he had applied leeches which cling together, so as you can understand how this opening occurred with a knife.
Therefore let you ponder. Then if the pain of leeches in his seizure is acute with a blow and fire and fever; you can see him red because it falls on him; when the sense goes over, do not approach with the wound itself; and care for him while he suffers from above maturation until the heat of accidents has subsided.
Then let you put the woman down on the bench where she reclines two benches and leans back or rests her head; let her feet be gathered together above their lower part towards the inside of the thighs: and let her hips expand, and have her arms below her shoulders bound with cords that are well fitted to each other.
In that sitting position she holds an instrument which opens up the holes of the womb
And when she has mastered using this instrument, then it is necessary to proceed with the vaginal examination as carefully as possible so that nothing more serious than a slight injury occurs from the instrument itself, and the examiner suffers no harm.
If the instrument is more than necessary for the procedure, then it should be covered with a gauze over the deep part of the womb to prevent any deeper penetration into the womb and to put on a finger or something similar (to detect leakage) at the top side to keep the instrument still and allow it to move in order to uncover the womb.
When this is completed and touched by hand, it should be gently removed from its own head with a soft and smooth material placed over the top side.
When the vagina is rinsed out and dried with a soft and smooth material placed over the top side of it, then you need to lubricate (insert penis) completely underwater using a slippery oil or similar substance and hold it firmly while inserting into the womb.
And you must place something on top of both the vagina and the clitoris to lubricate them with water which is already wet from previous use.
Then it was cured after two days when she had been oiled in order that it might be prepared.
And when the womb and vagina have been rinsed out with water mixed with a lubricant or similar substance, then it is rubbed with the root of silphium (a plant) until they are moist and ready for oiling.
If the vagina has been hidden between the folds of the womb then it should be extracted from her with forceps as described previously and gently removed from there.
The head of one hundred
The art of childbirth is practiced on pregnant women in such a way that the exit of the fetus does not follow its natural course (way).
It is necessary for an obstetrician to first recognize the normal form of a birth.
When you see a woman bent downwards towards her inferior side, and desiring to take in the air, and is relieved by something over her which was above the birth and festinates with the death of the embryo - then you know that this birth corresponds to its normal shape, and the exit occurs from it's head, while being supported or suspended at the belly.
Therefore, when you see these signs, then it is necessary for her to be restrained so that she descends with the embryo quickly.
When he descended over his head, descending in turn with him and breathing in a good way from those things which are necessary for life.
He who is beyond this birth is unnatural, praised be the Lord.
Sometimes the fetus descends over his own feet before descending its body to it's head, and then his feet and hand one at a time, or he may descend with both hands - but in any case the embryo is transferred upwards above his back supported by images worthy of praise.
It is necessary therefore for the obstetrician to be careful and subtle about all these things, and cure himself from error and death: And I am showing you every figure out of them, and how it is an embodiment of wisdom in that one, and it is set upon itself.
When the fetus descends naturally with it's exit from above over her head, and very difficult birth occurs for her - then support her on her back, or women should hold onto her: And pour water upon him to ease his pain, mixed with oil of figs, and with olive oil.
The obstetrician then inserted into her fingers a spongy thing, and finds it with him second time, and she holds it with his finger until the embryo descends.
If it does not come down, then it is necessary that a woman be castrated with an instrument of bronze, while applying honey.
After she has been castrated, then apply a compress to her after the castration with this formula and hold her mouth and nose closed for one hour. The fetus will be delivered immediately.
If two hands are needed to deliver the fetus initially, it is necessary that you reduce them as quickly and easily as possible. If the fetus does not descend at the time of delivery, then place a woman on her back and lift up her feet to the ground. After that, put the hips above the ground with both hands supporting it so that she doesn't fall during labor pains.
Therefore if the hands are not delivered and the fetus dies, then make an incision in them and remove the remaining fetus. After that, tie up his hand with a bandage and remove him while being equal to each other so that he will be delivered.
The death of the fetus is from below downward. When the fetus descends over its feet, it is necessary that you push them upwards. After that, turn the fetus quickly. After that, make him equal to each other.
Then one of his legs will be caught and extended easily.
When they have descended to the hips, then apply a compress and fix her into position for delivery with this formula. The fetus will be delivered if God wills it.
If the head does not descend with him that we have held onto, then reduce the fetus quickly and hold it while it is in its original position. Therefore he will be delivered from below downward easily.
If the whole head is held onto with that which we have grasped, then take out of its hold the forehead and apply honey mixed with salt, and put on it a bandage soaked in good oil so as to cut open from below downward into the mortarium with a sharp instrument during labor pains. After that tie him down firmly to her body while his head is lowered downwards inside hers. "Then let her be placed in hot water until she is cooked.
"Having heated her to the point that her bottom was on fire, then put a silphium poultice on it and keep it there. "When you hold tight with one hand for an hour, then place her over the fire. "Then let him be tightened by compressing his face and nose; and press downward on the lower part of his throat to make breathing difficult. "His head will quickly swell up as a result.
"The fetus falls from the womb and hands. "When you enter by gently placing your hand gradually inside. "Then the woman is positioned above her own hips and pend down with both of her feet towards below; she herself lies on her back and puts pressure on it by placing your hand there. "Then press downward upon his throat gradually. "Then remove what is beneath her feet from the buttocks and let it be exposed at the bottom until it is prepared to be put on display. "If not, then take both of his feet and drag them quickly away from him. "Then press downward upon what is above the buttocks gradually until the fetus ascends towards the top. "Then put your hand inside gently and adjust him gradually until you get the fetus to descend.
"The fetus then hangs downward from his hands. "You pull on him with a gentle touch, and you will eventually remove him "If not, then drag the woman along by pulling her forward.
"Then place her on top of his head and press down with your feet to put pressure on him.
"Then administer the poultice you prepared from the mucilage.
"If he pulls her away during childbirth, then place her over the fire. "In order to study the reduction of the hand and its proper position for both genders, first hold it level as it would normally be in a living body; then teach a woman how to contract or close her fist.
"The fetus descends from its own column and stretches out of the way with its hands; after that it reaches back towards the mother's back. "The obstetrician holds the fetus by the hand and gently moves it around quickly while keeping it in balance.
"Once you are balanced [in position], then hold its head with your right hand and gently pull out any remaining umbilical cord and afterbirth.
"Then teach her to move it slowly. "Once you have done that, then place her on the bed and teach her how to turn her face towards the right side. "Then teach her how to contract as shown in position [i.e., hold it level].
"The fetus descends from the right side. "When it has descended into the mother's vagina in this manner [i.e., with its back towards the head], then you grasp it gently with your thumb and hold on until water is expelled.
"If the fetus is held in position by its face and neck, then you must strike it gently on the umbilical cord to release your grip; otherwise, it may die.
"Then gently guide it towards the vagina and teach her to squeeze tightly; for when she has done this [given birth], it will be expelled.
"The exit of twins or many fetuses. "It is known that twins are often born together and sometimes three and four [fetuses] at a time are born. "This may be accidental or rare.
"There are five things that come outside of nature and do not fit into the law; they stay together however many there may be after their birth, except one separates from its brother by a sharp blow.
When a fetus descends like that of an individual at birth and is born naturally, easily; but when it descends from an admirable source, as if descending from a noble person
If some of them are difficult to find near the birth and need help with that which we mentioned from unnatural figures, then let us care for them as if they were infants: And may it be a gentle one who does not harm him in any way, but rather helps him according to his nature while helping him quickly and carefully.
A reminder that what is formed from the fetus within its matrix will be aborted.
Sometimes when one, or two, or three, or four, five, six, seven, ten, and more fetuses are formed within the matrix; now I have been supplied with a means by which women can abort all of them at once, along with other multiples as well.
That is done through the measurement of glorious wise ones.
Therefore, it's necessary that all knowledge about obstetrics be held by wise men (or women). And indeed they will certainly oppose him with what is fitting for them.
Chapter 76
About the extraction of a dead fetus.
When you care for a dead fetus with what I said about division from the treatment and he doesn't descend, then use surgery to move it along using your hand; at that time, pay close attention.
If the woman has good virtue and is not with anyone from accidents from which she fears loss; then it's necessary that she be supported by her shoulders to the front of herself so that her head may be bent downwards towards her chest, and both her hands held out in order for her body to be taken up off its own weight. And let someone hold onto her at two points or bind her to a support so that he is not dragged away from his corpse when extraction of the fetus occurs.
Then she will wet the vagina with warm water and oil mixed together, and gently massage it while saying prayers; then she will conceive.
After a midwife has taken hold of her hand with these tools and instruments, she then introduces that into the womb gently And as soon as it reaches its place where the umbilical cord is coming out of the fetus and the birth canal opens up to that location
If the fetus is ready to descend and its head is about to come out, then look at it from its eyes or face or nose or throat (mouth) or palate or chin or under its beard or near its ribs or below the breastbone.
If the fetus descends from the feet downward, then look at it through the chest (mediastinum) of that part of its body (costum).
It is necessary to hold the umbilical cord with the right hand and put it into place between the fingers of the left hand: she then introduces that into one of the locations we have mentioned before in order for her to finally reach what is being sought after.
After that, she pulls the umbilical cord towards herself or to one side if it is not straight but slightly curved; so that the tension remains equal and does not move away from the belly (partium).
After that, the cord is gently stretched to its full length equally, and not so as to follow only a certain path towards the belly (partium), but rather until it is pulled back from all parts of its body in order for him to be born; just like when you bite or strike at the umbilical cord near its end.
And there where that part is between them, it should be gently stretched. If a part of the umbilical cord is pulled away from that, then it should be introduced by the midwife with some fingers and tools in order for her to follow after pulling back what she has retained.
If part of the fetus comes away then they are pulled towards another place that is higher; do this until it becomes fully detached (pergrediatur foetus totus).
If part of the fetus comes away and it is not possible to reduce its hand because of a constraint (coartatio) then she should let herself hang down over that hand. "Having thusly freed her, when thou hast gathered her together, cut off the hand and foot separately; either at the juncture of the palm or the cubit (i.e., from the elbow); so that one shall be done with thy other hand, while in two feet.
"If the fetus is great (i.e., if it obstructs delivery), or an umbilical cord injury occurs, or there is a mass of water on its head; then let him introduce by way of a spike a thorny spur through his fingers and find with it the head, and extract the water from beneath it: or let them sever what is called Almisdac (i.e., the umbilical stump), whose form unites with that of the remaining instruments in the section which follows.
"Likewise let him cut off the fetus if its nature is great (i.e., if it has a large head); then let him extract [it] with scissors, as we have said. "Then take up bones with hooks.
"If the head is freed but its base remains behind at the furrow (i.e., if it has been freed from above but not below), then let him search for until the humidity which is on his chest is extracted.
"If it does not become entangled or does not reach exit (i.e., if the fetus remains free but cannot be removed), then cut off its head as far as possible.
"If it has gone into the womb (i.e., if its base is between your fingers), or there are some impurities on it; then let him perforate [it], until the humidity from within [it] flows out.
"If it is above its own feet (i.e., if the fetus hangs down), then drawing [it] becomes easy for you and directing towards its mouth are the eyes.
"If it becomes entangled at the furrow (i.e., if it is entangled beneath you), or on its chest; then let him extract [it] with a cloth which you have bound around your hand: and find below, until the humidity within them flows out.
"If any of the remaining parts are left after it has returned to its head; then let the midwife introduce her left hand. If the mouth is opened by force, then one hand should be inserted into the opening of the mouth and hold its head with it; after that, the other hand shall take its head as far as the fingers can reach up to the mouth; thereafter, one thumb or two thumbs shall be introduced in turn.
If the mouth is closed with a cold finger that has caused injury to it, then at this point one should not allow anything else to be put into its mouth; instead, one should administer a soothing liquid or solution such as water, juice, or wine: and afterwards place in their mouth something soft and moist.
If the fetus is above its own length, then it would be possible to equalize; at that point one should administer what we have mentioned as appropriate for the fetus.
If this is not possible, then a great effort shall be made and it must be extracted forcibly.
It should also not be allowed anything to enter the second nostril of every single individual.
After you have completed your surgical procedure, one should administer what we mentioned earlier as appropriate for the cold fingers that cause injury to the mouth.
If bleeding occurs from the wound, then one should descend into it using tweezers and administer any remaining cure.
I have also heard of a woman whose fetus died within her womb; thereafter she was impregnated with another fetus and the other one later also died. Therefore, a cold finger caused injury to its navel for an extended period of time; thereafter it was inflated until opened, and then began emitting pus.
I have spoken about the care that should be given to him; for a long time he was treated and no healing occurred in the wound.
After putting something very strong, like a powerful plaster or cloth over it from which pus escaped, then it exited from that location through its mouth. Later on he died and the other one exited as well. I am amazed at this because there is no mouth present within the womb.
"I think therefore there was a dead fetus in the womb.
"I examined it and took away many bones from a woman who was better off than others; then she remained as long as time allowed her to remain there.
"But I was not able to examine this thing here because there is knowledge of it and assistance towards that which a physician administers with his hand through care.
"Chapter 77.
"Of the necessary instruments for taking out a fetus.
"The shape of the hook used for extraction is described below:...
"Here is the form of the hook, which makes them equal; having two equal wounds on both ends of two logs. "However, this hook should be more slender than the hooks for the bones; and it can either be made of bone or from the log.
"The width of all the logs should be like two fingers; and the edge on both sides is almost as a finger, and the length on each side are palms and half-lengths; in the middle there are two indentations out of that kind of wood which have been set into these ones whose length is half the palm plus less. And the width of both should be like two fingers or more.
"These two indentations are inserted into the mouth so that they can be opened with them when you need to come out of them.
"...another shape like it but thinner and lighter.
"...it should be made of bone or from the log, according to its similarity to the hooks. "However, there are two indentations on it like those here above; and the length of all of them is as half palm.
"When you want to extract the matrix while holding it with this, have a woman hold down her head over the board, hanging onto her feet with hers, and open what is between her legs. After having introduced these two instruments into one handle... and you hold the inferior end of the instrument between your thighs, near to the joint where it joins with the thighbone After you have taken hold of the instrument like you would take hold of fingers... until the obstetrician instructs you to do so
The other form is different from what was previously described, it's called the "form of the impelling force" that guides the fetus
The form where you hold a large head... and with your fingers you grasp it as if they were teeth at the end of your fingers
And when a nosebleed occurs... you grasp it like this with the fingers of that form, as if they were teeth, similar to how you hold things with your fingernails
You have one spine in the grip of these hands.
You have two spines in the grip of these hands.
You have two handles for grasping the neck.
The form of these two small handles is also long.
All of these instruments are used... and the number of their kinds increases... and they are put into use by craftsmen, either for performing an action or as a tool to assist them in their work... because of their size, one is useful for surgical operations and one is useful for people,
Therefore you should not throw these instruments away, but put them aside. It is therefore necessary to keep them.
Chapter LXXXV of the extraction of the head.
Of the extraction of the second
When the Second is held at childbirth... then it should be as weak as possible so that it can hold on to its own desire. Then make the same action as before... and put your hand over his mouth and his nose. "Therefore I consider it beneficial.
"If not, then take that and cut out the bone in front of it; put herbs around its mouth as you would do for a dog when he is sick, such as calamus [turmeric], rue [wild carrot], etc., and bring them into contact with fire.
"Then take the [already mentioned] herb and put it on top of the opening of the dog's mouth; hold her until she drinks some water, then let go.
"After that, make her vomit as we described earlier. "Secondly it is beneficial with ease.
"If after this treatment you do not benefit from it, then take to the obstetrician that he may wash his hand with sesame oil or mucilage of aloe. "Then approach her with it; hold on until she has taken the second herb. "Having therefore approached her, take her and quickly stretch out to her.
"If she had been caught up in the mouth of a dog, then take her hand as we described earlier until she has taken the second herb; quickly stretch out to her so that no bone is trapped by the powerful force and it may be thrown aside. "This one had been eaten then, she was saved; given back to him from the trap.
"If her mouth is caught up [by a bone], as we had mentioned earlier; cure with vomiting and from the treatment of dogs.
"If you do not benefit with all that is described earlier, then be careful that you are not dragging her through the iterations of extractions.
"Indeed it must be so as to benefit from her mouth, lest she should go to waste because of exhaustion. "Then apply the ointment Tetrapharmacum with a cloth. "The flesh will rot after one day and dissolve.
Nevertheless, when it spoils, a foul odor arises from its remains which go to the belly and head, causing illness in her. Therefore, they should use suitable fumigations for it.
Some ancient experts know how to perform a fumigation of the sick person's bed and room.
A tool form for performing a fumigation on a woman during her confinement in Second House (during pregnancy) or menstruation
Let the tool be of a similar form or design; and let one end be wide above the fire: and then perform the fumigation over the fruit: hold her until she has consumed that fume: repeat with another woman.
Chapter 79th
The treatment for Ani was not applied.
Many boys are born, and none of them have been treated by Sifac the subtle man. Therefore it is necessary that the midwife apply Sifac's finger to this, or if not, with a sharp Spatumulus and Cautios; for fear of hurting him (the boy).
After putting it on them (the boys), spread upon them a cloth infused with wine and oil. Then care for him with the children until he is cured.
If there are things to be taken out of his way (i.e., if he is unclean), then take from him the money and let it stay until after many days when a boy has grown up enough to earn it.
And the treatment for Ani is also used in conjunction with the urine of the nurse or the midwife. Therefore it should be ensured that the consolidation is taken care of and then he will be cured as mentioned in the treatment section and from his money.
Chapter 80th
The treatment for fistulas which occur in the lower part.
Fistulas that occur in the lower part are Nodation and Grossitude which occur near anus or in one part of the space; and there is a single fistula or several.
"As soon as the (hand) grasp relaxes and flows with clear water, either from a subtle spring or thin pus.
Sometimes, there are these penetrating fistulas. Therefore, those penetrating ones are recognized by that which is forced out from the discharge, and by the stench when it is used by an exhausted one with a forced discharge; and perhaps there may be one who has been forced out of them as well.
And those fistulas are from within when they extend deep inside the body up to the liver and also up to the flesh of the bladder. And those fistulas are from within when they reach right up to the pubic bone and even the tailbone's knot.
Therefore from that one which is recognized as a penetrating fistula up to the finger you put inside it; and also for an unpenetrating one there's another way of putting in by means of a slender tube from the air or iron when there isn't any tortuosity.
If there is any tortuosity within it then I put in by means of a thin lead or a feather from the horse's tail until you are satisfied and then use your finger.
If you do not feel the penetration and it proceeds from nothing other than the discharge or the stench or exhaustion then you know that this is unpenetrating; therefore take care in your treatment.
And when the fistula is penetrating up to the liver or the bladder; then its meaning is from the discharge coming out of it and a prohibition upon it so that the place may be solidified with medicines.
If it is penetrating up to the pubic bone or the os of the penis; then its sign means that you must try to insert something into it until it reaches this point if there isn't any tortuosity until here and an invention of pain around part of it, so that pus always comes from it and a treatment without unguent won't solidify with it.
In all those fistulas which are penetrating there is no universal treatment and the treatment of them is hard work and sweat from those medicines by means of which it is formed.
In that which is not penetrating and is not ancient hope healing with iron; as I have shown you before, it works thusly: place the iron over his back so that he lies between your hands on his back, and move up to both of his legs until they are above his hips Afterward you will insert a tube for air or water if there is a fistula with twisting. Until then you do not know where it has been inserted.
If the patient feels something in his finger, at that point insert your index finger into his mouth.
Therefore, if you feel the finger has gone all the way through and reached the end of it that you know for certain that it is penetrating; do not work on him unless he can be healed as we have said before.
But they say that healing can occur with some people when flesh is used as a medication and it hopes for the disease to go away; so do this: apply a subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as before, and then insert the heated iron into the fistula until he feels around his finger. Afterward do this again or another time until you know all the flesh has been added and it is similar to the veins of the penis in shape; then proceed as before with inserting the heated iron into the fistula.
Afterward treat it with heated irons or another substance until all the flesh has been removed; after that treat it with ointments and consolidants.
If so he is healed, that is good news.
And if not, then do not treat him with another treatment at all.
And if the finger goes in further and does not reach your finger that is in his anus; then you will know it has passed through the skin or the fistula membrane; so dry off from the beginning of the fistula with a heated iron until the finger is completely removed, after which you will remove the iron as before.
"After filtering out these cooked meats, which are fed through tubes in the mouth so that nothing is expelled from them.
"If you spill blood while feeding through the tubes or during your operation, then it is better to hold those cooked meats with tongs and burn them by fire (charcoal), or apply an acute medicine.
"Because the tongs have burned off good qualities and scorched the cooked meats as well, you should apply a remedy to stop their bleeding, get rid of the excess flesh, and remove moisture.
"After that, you should apply a remedy with a mixture of vinegar or salt to the meat until pus is released and they are taken away from the pus.
"After that you should apply a remedy with solidified ointments to harden the flesh and give relief from stiffness and exhaustion.
"When they are finished eating, then it is healed up right away, without further repetition.
"If the fistula has gone through to the very bottom of your arm and is accompanied by an excess amount of body fluids, then you should insert your finger into that fistula and examine it.
"If it causes pain when you try to put your finger into that fistula or near the opening of the fistula, then there is no operation to be done there unless trust and confidence are established.
"This is because there are three ways to treat it: you can either cauterize the fistula itself as we have already said; or you can cut away that part until its excess flesh has been removed so that you will be able to insert a needle and take care of it from afar. "And do not proceed too much with the cutting so that you do not cut off the sensitive skin on your finger and cause it to be wounded by a violent exit of feces without any desire. "After that, apply our remedy as we have said.
"It may heal by itself, or you can stretch it until the excess flesh near your finger is removed, as we have said before; or you could try to push through with some other acute instrument. "After passing through and filtering those meats that are in the section until you can examine them with a probe.
"After restoring the entire intestine by cutting through it until you reach an opening on top (a stoma), and if there is a fistula that has opened up within the anus, then this will be above the sick one.
"And sometimes you treat the fistula in this manner, by trying to insert a probe into it. And if you manage to get inside and see that there is an opening at the lower part of the anus near the surface of the body with your finger and its edge, then take hold of the perforated end as a needle would - namely, the point where these fingers meet. "And you insert into it five threads around it. "After trying to enter the fistula with a thread until there is pressure against its interior.
"If then there is penetration into the anus from within close to its margin, then you take out the thread through that opening and put your finger in it and remove the end of the thread and tie both ends together tightly: and after tying them tightly, let them fall away two by two, until they have fallen off. And if more than one thread penetrates into the flesh, then tie them well, until those parts which are between the two threads fall off - at that point you treat the fistula until it is consolidated and healed.
"If there isn't penetration into the fistula opening, then you make sure that it penetrates deeply as much as possible. "There is no one else to whom this can be done but you, so do not touch anything with it except the fistula itself.
"After doing as we said until it is healed.
"The shape of the fistula that is being sought for a probe, whose severity was acute on one part and mild on another - so that you do not touch what is not necessary to touch as per your instructions.
The thirty-first head
"About hemorrhoids, whose treatment consists of cutting them off from the flow of blood from their incision: and about hemorrhoidal cure.
Are two hemorrhoids. They are either internal or external, like those of the anus, or they may be granulations in urine And among them are small ones and large ones; and blood always flows from them constantly, and it is one, and there are many of them. They are outside the anus, on its extremities.
However, those that are outside the anus are very few in number and of wetness; from which blood flows constantly or just a little bit, depending on how red their skin is.
The care of his that is inside the anus consists in holding back as forcefully as possible so he does not excrete until he gets to the outside; and when he has reached it they will be visible for you Therefore, therefore hold with nails or hold them by your finger. After that, strike them near their roots.
If not held by nails, because of their wetness and softening; then fold them with a cloth or hold them up with the edge of your nail or remove them using your fingers. After that strike them off and clean some hot coals over them after the cut so they will stick to their place in the fire. Or burn them according to what was said in the chapter on cautery After that, care for them with the remaining care until they are done.
If not held by nails or the finger, then you must apply a small clamp to where the cutting is most severe so that he may hold onto it until he has excreted himself, or when he has expressed himself.
If the hemorrhoids are outside of the anus, it is easy; and it is that you hold them with your finger or nails, and strike them off. After that, care for them as was said.
"And he who is averse to cutting with iron must have his sutures administered in this manner. "Take the thread tied and knot it tightly around that point. "Then withdraw the thread from beneath and insert it into the other point; so that he penetrates with a sharp needle on one side, and goes along both sides tightly to form a knot below; leave two ends of the thread in the lower part, one above and one below; tie them firmly. "Then remove the thread from around that point.
"With all of it tie a knot tightly; then take away one end so that he may run along the excess of blood.
"Then put a bandage soaked in honey or olive oil on his head; and put it over the wound so that he may rest. "Then remove it so that he rests.
"When the knots come undone with ointments and care until they recover.
"Of the cure of wounds. "Indeed many happen from excessive heat and constraint in nature.
"So when the constriction happens and he is unable to reach the doctor's needle or the finger: then let him apply the salve of Spatumilis, or use his own finger until they become wet; and let them be wiped away with an upper cortex that prevents their adhesion. "Then cure them as needed until they are healed according to what is prescribed.
"If they do not become healed as before, then repeat the treatment with more reason and more frequent care until their blood runs out; and let them be cured again after being washed, so that they will recover.
"Of the care of wounds on others, but not to themselves; and the application of sutures, and of ants.
"The 82nd chapter.
"Know that the wound of an ant is a round knot according to its color and similar to the head of a fly; it reaches throughout the body, especially on the lower parts of the feet and fingers, causing pain when walking.
"Therefore let it be cut off which is on the outside of your hand or foot and held with hooks, or with a knife, so that its root may be removed.
"Then attend to it (i.e., the cut off part) and cauterize it according to what precedes in its chapter.
"Another member of this group is the thumb which is erect above the surface of the body (i.e., pointing upwards). "Many accidents occur on the hands of children.
"His care is that you stretch it out (i.e., the thumb) and cut it off either by tying a thread around it or with a nail until death. "And if you are, cauterize it according to what precedes with fire or an acute medicine; and the thumb will be eradicated when it rises up and not by any instrument I say.
"The ant is also another member of this group which is erect above the surface of the body and extends into the depth; when it comes down with cold, a similar bite from an ant occurs on its body, causing death to all parts of the body, and many more happen in hands.
"His care is to tie a thread around the leg of an egg chicken or that of a strong ant; and put it above the ant until its circle is complete from his parts. "Then return your hand with the thread until you cut off what is on the outside of the ant; and put it into deep flesh and remove the ant from its root.
"And if you are to do this with an air thread or a hook according to that form.
"Place the superior part of the thread above the head so it is extended beyond the grasp of his hand and its resolution.
"And if you are, cauterize the ant according to what precedes in the chapter of cautery for the thumb.
Chapter Eighty-Three
"Of instruments which are used against a boil and the remedies given to the throat and colic.
When the needle is extracted from the bone, or the ear, or the sinew, or the tendon
And when it is taken out by these instruments, large and small, as they are used to administer them.
This therefore, which is administered for the care of small boys' hairs, shall be a small one; and as their age is weak or suffering from pain, so also will that hair be small.
The big needle.
The superior part of the head to which a needle is tied with thread shall be large according to this manner; and there shall be a distinction as to tie it on one side like that done by the hand, and on the other side similarly but shorter because of its extremity, weak, mute, lax, stretched out towards subtlety, and in one side thereof are two foramina, and on the other side an opening through which the thread can pass easily.
The opening of foramina shall be according to the size of vessels and larger ones but shorter; and they should contain medicine from animals' veins or from papers shaped like the palm; in which there is one root.
The foramina shall be opened with great force and the space between all foramina according to the size of a finger. Afterwards they should be tied with strong string from raw silk which is made of ten strands or around it and joined to the extreme end similarly to this manner. When therefore a needle is tied into its head with thread between two distinct portions with strong compression. Afterwards the needle was bound or fastened up with it.
This is a depiction of two circles drawn here and the foramina.
The quality of binding with the needle is as follows: to keep one extreme tight or with a hot medicine which has been heated according to the amount of tolerance, so that it may not be too warm but only slightly so; also if it were cold, then too cold.
"Then the patient lies on his back and withdraws the limbs upwards; and raises them above himself.
"Then he holds the extremity with a towel, or a blanket, or a sheet, or anything else. "Then he introduces himself into his anus gently. "He then receives a minister with both of his hands simultaneously, and expresses it gently as he empties himself completely from the towel into his bowel.
"Then he withdraws the towel and raises the limbs above him.
"If medicine intends to lead him towards his exit, then let it hold as much as it can. "And if he has slept with her for a whole night, then the remaining is further away from his expulsion.
"If however he has been put into a cloth soaked with the juices of his body and is to be led towards his exit; then another towel must be used until he is restored.
"If there are hemorrhoids or anal fissures, then the towel must be smooth and soft; so that boys can use it.
"And this is how towels should look like in order to be used for delicate skin.
"The 84th chapter.
"Having said that about the care of wounds, I am going to say this concerning their care with a hand and by medicines according to its complement.
"I am therefore going to say that wounds will be diverse depending on where they happen and the location above which a wound falls.
"Therefore those wounds that are numerous, act in the same way as a sharp stone acts; or cutting off flesh with its edge; or striking it with an arrow; or striking with a stick; or splitting through it by means of a shuttle.
The ulcers which are formed in certain parts of the body behave similarly to those that fall on the head or neck, chest or belly button, heart or armpit, and similar places from these members
And I am reporting cures for some ulcers so that they may be reasoned about and regulated over the remaining ulcers.
And I begin with simple ulcers on the head, because the recollection of the writers had not begun at the beginning of Chapter III.
Therefore, When the simple ulcer on the head occurs and no fracture of the bone happens: then it is necessary to consider whether this ulcer came from an impact with stones or similar things; it has become big, and it is also above the sick person's elbow; here, immediately apply phlebotomy with warm water. And do not delay that because he may have just come out a little blood after coming from the ulcer: if this were prohibited by phlebotomy, especially if there was only a little blood flowing in due to the ulcer itself. And let the phlebotomy be taken on the opposite side of the ulcer.
And let the phlebotomy be taken on the opposite side of the ulcer. Let him drink wine and food that are suitable for his condition,
If any prohibition on reducing weight is in effect then let them eat again from the food and not approach meat nor wine.
And if the ulcer above occurs with a warm finger or an armful of oil, or when there is wine that has stiffness in it,
If you are secure from the finger or armful of oil and there is no obstruction in him, then place above the ulcer if it has blood with itself and did not let air escape because I will tell about another method after a short time: and if there was an obstruction in his air, then put on top of him some unguents so that he may be healed.
If the ulcer is big or came from an impact and similar things have happened to him: then do not let his lips go up through the nose holes; instead attach him with sutures as I will tell you about stitches for ulcers of that sort in another time.
If the wound has already been detected by bone and is hanging down without retention of its grip, unless it falls into a support. Then cut it off Afterwards care for the wound with medicines, and restore it to its original place on the skin; bind it firmly so that it does not loosen, as if held by a strong fist, bread cooked like a head, and millet cooked, until it stops pulsating: and they are similar in this regard.
If there is decay of the flesh within it, and does not adhere to bone, then cut off all the putrid matter, and throw away the remains; thereafter care for that one.
If there is an artery within it or a vein from which blood flows out; and does not fall off with medicines, then investigate above the artery. If so, then dry it using a sponge or bind it tightly. If necessity arises when we did not give that which was said earlier, then cauterize it until the blood is removed.
If these wounds are simple and small, then the treatment for them is easy; wash over it until pus has been removed from above that one which has become consolidated before it can be moved.
Mode of performing a bloodletting on a child Take one part of the liver and two parts of the blood from a dragon; do not use any calcified parts as these are three in number: mix everything thoroughly and strain it well. The resulting mixture is to be applied directly on the wound, and bind tightly with good cord until it adheres firmly upon that one. Then coagulate it with blood.
After this tie it down well with a bandage and remove it gently so that nothing remains sticking to the wound; in such a way as not to be left behind. The medicine does not remove it immediately, until healing occurs.
And when it is done by itself alone, or if you are not present with liver and dragon's blood at the same time; then do this same operation in many great wounds, when they have been placed above and tied tightly, as recently mentioned before.
When something has been altered in the air for a certain time period especially when the air temperature is high then it's not on the mind of this person to perform their intention: Therefore, you should place some unguents (ointments) above or below the affected area depending on which one I mentioned. You can either put them on top of the affected skin with some cream made from flour and water until they release pus After removing the unguents, wait for healing to occur
If you encounter a broken tooth, first remove it gently using your hands and then tell me to show the cure for fractures of the head that is coming up next.
The Pillars
If a person encounters a lump on their neck then there is no difference between it and any medication, but when the lump on the head is simple.
If a person has already been given medicine for a lump on their neck or an artery then if the lump on their head is simple there's no difference except that you should apply treatment as described above until pus releases from it just like before and tell them similar things. Because the veins hurt and they are against each other.
Do not put anything cold on the lump at all, because the substance of veins is cold and its continuation with the brain which is superior to other parts of the body, it's that way how treatment occurs from gentle medicines just as a stone lota mixed with sweet water many times soaked in olive oil or roasted or ointment when released even with sweet water. And the remaining minerals according to this method and moist unguents.
If a lump is large then apply sutures, or else use a cloth soaked with their own saliva if it's not available to bind up the wound. After removing the unguents wait for healing to occur
If a person encounters deep swelling or the lump occurred and went into their lower part causing pus to accumulate then you should pierce it in more depressed place inside of them.
If the incision has already been made into an artery and blood flow to it has been obtained, then it should be separated or dried off (depending on whether one wants it to remain as is for further use, or if it needs to be cauterized due to a necessity) and ligate/sew that artery.
If an incision has been made in the larynx or trachea (and any other parts), and one is saluted by it: then gather up the lips of the skin with stitches around the laryngeal tube, do not touch it with your hands but keep its height equal to a normal figure. After that, you should tie it in good stitches and release (let go of) it after several days. Then take care of it with ointments which contain both stiffness and itching, until it is healed.
If an ulcer has already made a mark on bone (meaning it is healed), then you should remove all of the pieces which were separated from the bones and either throw them away or what you can take off them: so that if they are not prepared, let go of this until decay occurs in the ulcer, and be removed along with his egress.
If an ulcer is recent (meaning it has only recently occurred), then crush it over it while crushing a certain amount of the thing which was poured on to it earlier. If one sees an ulcer in the mouth and a fistula is formed (meaning there was a hole made from the ulcer), then take care of that fistula with whom whose memory it entered into its chapter/section.
About ulcers on the palms of the hands.
If there is a penetration from a spear or dagger (meaning it has entered into the body), and you see its depth to him/it, then consider that. If therefore a certain ulcer has caused the illness of someone else when you wish to know because it is mortal (meaning deadly), then you know that the ulcer is fatal.
If not its depth is known to him and it is recent with his own blood, do not put anything on it the first time but leave it alone, nor tie/sew it up so that the blood does not stay within its depths for a long time and return back to the heart, causing death of the ill person. But if you are doing this out of necessity, then smear it with a favorable ointment and let it be in two days.
The flesh of the finger is not present to you at this moment, so place it into your own wound as a remedy for that which has been withdrawn from it through dampness; and make him fall asleep above the wound while he is drawing towards it what has gathered there within
If the finger has been absent for three days or more, and no spasm of weakness occurred to it, nor a bad tremor from its heart, nor a constriction in the artery leading to the hand, but you remember his good dispositions; then know that the wound is a sore Cure him and with remedies, until he recovers.
If his illness is cured and opening of the fistula occurs, then you know that it has been done. Cure him from this wound on its own head.
And if the wound is from a stab or a cut, and it is simple on the chest surface, or the back; then cure him with what precedes his injury through stitching up, if there was much bleeding; or with pulling out, if there was little.
If he has already made an impression on the bone and it occurred from him flowing out; then inquire about the wound to see if there are separate parts that need to be extracted. If they aren't separated, then let go of them until the wound decomposes and extraction is no longer possible.
The judgment on the disposition of his limbs among other members to be cured and their cure is what we have said.
Of wounds from the vagina, and the issue of the intestines, and the closing up of them.
Disruption that occurs from within is great or medium in size, or small.
When it comes to the intestines, then either it is a great disruption, when it may lead to death of many; or the number of the intestines.
Why this occurs, and their stitching up is harder and more difficult.
"The disruption is also difficult in a different manner. "Therefore it follows that if you do not approach his place promptly by the method of his entry, because he will inflate and then crush; thus entrance to him is difficult.
"Consequently, the medium of disruptions is improved because if the reduction of the intestines does not cause difficulty, it follows that the dissolution into two kinds is easy.
"It should be noted that sutures are made according to four ways.
"Commonly used sutures join to a suture of the belly and that of the ribs of the body; two different ones communicate with other limbs. "However, they are more proper to a suture of belly; and I, for you once with an exposure, and a proclamation.
"Therefore I say because when there is a fistula, and it comes out of him something from the intestine; then it is difficult to reduce it; thus that is for one of two ways. "Or because of a disturbance of the disruptions as we said; or if there was an inflation of the intestine due to air cold.
"Therefore when that is so; then you need to warm him up, or cool the sponge with cold water alone. "Or if you heat them [the intestines], and they get cold; or if you squeeze the sponge hard with it; until the inflation is resolved.
"Whenever he does that in a drink where there is a bitterness, and it's better than just water alone in resolving the inflation.
"Since you have already resolved the inflation; then warm up the intestines with a drink made from the boiled water and honey, or mint. "This is because of his disruption when introduced in another way.
"But if the returned to him after this treatment, then find only the disruption with an instrument where hemorrhoids are treated.
The first care is better when it's prepared, than cutting; and there is no connection between what follows in need of preparation and the instrument's flaw
One part of it is sharp and acute, while another one is not as such, the middle part being soft, yet opposite to it, that which resembles a sickle like this.
When the ulcer is enlarged and inflamed, then it is necessary to reduce it back to its natural shape within itself at its own place if this is possible; because that which is better
If the rupture is broad at the lower part of the belly then it should be treated as a wound on his back and elevated with its limbs higher to its head And if there is one at the top of the belly then it should be placed on his head and elevated higher than its lower part
And similarly if there is a rupture in two parts of the belly then place your attention and care always here so that the part with the ulcer should be higher than the other part.
And thus, you must administer to them generously and in moderation.
And for those ulcers of small size place it according to what has been prepared for you.
Then make it so that this one is placed in your hands as a helper who holds the whole rupture with his own hand and gathers its lips together. Then remove from that one who follows sutures something then another; this is the common method of a suture.
And it is so that you take by measure and number according to the amount of ulcers' size. Then you will dismiss the quantity of the rupture from the fingertips of a doctor; that is to say, you pull out one thread through two cuts on both sides and until it penetrates into another part; and when you have gathered together two parts with their lips then four orders are made.
"In a single motion with two threads tied around its circumference, where they are gathered together at both ends into one knot on the nose; so that when it is stretched, the two nostrils are closed.
"Then release the excess length of your fingers as well, and place a knot in each one; after that draw it with thread like you did before. "Therefore do not bind the fingers together with those from above, until all of your nostrils are closed off completely.
"The middle finger should be between the excess length and subtlety; because subtle fingers easily pierce through flesh, while thick ones are difficult to penetrate a knife, so that they may have both the necessary subtlety for grasping and strength.
"It is not necessary that the finger should be placed too close to both ends of the skin; so that it does not easily pierce through flesh, and opens up before the formation of its own knot, nor do they extend or become longer when sutured, so that the nostril may not be obstructed.
"Then cut off the end of your finger; put aside a patch from the skin all around it, so that they hold tightly to the end of the thread; and release them when you know the nostril is already closed.
"This way of tying with two threads, as it suits the nostrils equally well. "Since one thread is sufficient for tying them together or using more than one, or tying around them instead.
"The second way is common, so that you gather the four threads together; two for the sides and two more for the middle, tying all of them to form one with thread as before, but using it equally well in subtlety and strength.
"Then when you have inserted the four threads through the nostril as before, remove the thread from the side where it was first attached; so that there is a knot on the upper part of the nostril; so that it is tied like tying clothes together, and place an equal amount of thread between all of them according to the size of your fingers.
Men know how to sew
And with this sewing I sutured my own finger wound that had happened inside me, which was previously wounded when it encountered a tool and there was disruption of the wound greater than one palm. And from the intestine middle an exit occurred to both palms out through the middle of the belly.
I therefore removed that finger wound from inside him after 24 hours had passed.
After 15 days the wound was consolidated and I treated it; he became well; and after that many years he remained sound and healthy and lived his life according to my disposition.
And they judged that he would not become well.
But it happened by a miracle that I was unable to treat the wound with ointment. Because I was present at the place where no ointment could be applied and nothing from medicine came into play. Therefore I washed my own finger wound twice a day with warm water and finally it became healed
Two distinct types of sewing stitches mentioned in the sermon.
And there is one that starts with a sharp stitch and goes inward to the inner part
And as the needle goes into a wound and reaches to the skin from outside inward, so too does it go through the whole body's length and breadth; and remove the end of the thread that you stopped at one side, making it penetrate to another side from within outward in the other extremity.
And as you make it penetrate so too does he make it to another side from within outward through that thread and remove the end of it at one side making it penetrate to another side from within outward through his own thread until it penetrates all around.
Then begin and also from this same side with that extremity which is opposite the first remove it from the skin as you have penetrated it already.
"Then cut the lower part of it [the finger], and remove its thumb-part (symphysis) to one side; after that pull out from under this thumb-part what lies on the outside of him, and make a single piece of this in one place, and similarly do with the other part also. And thus make one piece of both, until all is done according to this pattern.
"And the whole suture [or closure] should be done in a manner similar to how one skin-flap is sutured; that is, the thumb-part of what you have removed from under another part shall be sewn back on immediately after it has been taken out by another person.
"The second type of closure [or suture] is as Gale said.
"His speech was as follows, so that one suture [or closure] should be made in the same manner as some surgeons do; namely, that all the parts are gathered together according to their nature for a convenient comparison of each part with another part: and apply the thumb-part on one extremity, having removed it from the other extremity. "This is what I have said [or done].
"It is allowed that you put the thumb-part of this close to your next neighbor's part on the outside and make it enter into him from the outside alone; then remove both thumb-parts. "Then apply again and make it enter into him from the outside to another part alone; then remove both thumb-parts.
"Then again apply to each of them and make it enter from the inside to the outside into both thumb-parts [that are] on the opposite side; namely those that were removed.
"This manner of closure is better than the common one and is a reminder of what was previously done.
"That is therefore Gale's speech also.
"Others said. "The closure of the entrails should be done with two hooks or needles. "One of the two vessels is to be introduced into each one with its own tube and start by introducing the needle through that tube towards another vessel at right angles, until you reach another vessel whose arteries are equally close together.
"And know that when the disruption occurs in the middle of one vessel, it is more difficult to suture than those of another.
"The judgment between a surgeon and his patient's wounds is also the judgment between other surgeons' wounds.
"What is to be considered if you should consult a wound with its own blood before another does and reduce the intestine of one while the other's has not yet become infected? At that point it is appropriate to apply a poultice over the incision.
"If the other wound has already been infected, then apply a poultice that are present to you until they will heal and the stitches go down. "Then care for it as if it were the care of another's wound until it is healed.
"If you do not have the medicine present to you immediately apply it over him promptly and let its discharge start, then change it twice a day as if I taught you until it is healed.
"But when there are only simple wounds, do not take another course of medicine from many dispositions.
"If the wound communicates with principal parts of a body in an injury, then it is appropriate to apply the cold oil tempered with warm heat or hot oil around that place and under the ascalies.
"If it feels pain or a pus discharge from the intestines (for this often occurs), then clean that with a strong wine, black, and hot water until the opening is penetrated even to its depth.
"And you know that what comes out of the large intestine is easier to heal than that which comes from the small ones and it is more difficult to heal.
The intestine known as the jejunum does not receive healing from a wound that occurs in it by any means: and this is due to its multitude, which comes from veins, and the greatness of those who possess it, and also because of the subtlety of its body and its closeness to its own nerves.
If what occurred due to the wound is a hernia, and you want to remove it - reduce it according to your measure of reduction by which you have reduced intestines equally in size.
But if you find a space or a hernia, and it is also due to the injury - then let's make sure that you hold it with your thread above the place where there was a vein cut through from within, so that no blood flow occurs. In the hernia are veins and arteries
Afterwards cut the part that is beyond this ligament with two threads hanging from below - on the outside of it towards you so there will be an upward pull for him and extraction at the time of hernia, and blood letting from the wound.
Remember that the wound occurred in the intestine.
When the disruption occurred in the intestine and it is great - then there are some people who can restore to him by removing the obstruction with a lance of some sort, if he has been injured on his own stomach while using an injection (lance) or if he had a fistula (fist like opening) which came out from within.
I therefore seek the care of him until I was not deceived by his healing - neither did I cease to make it subtle, until he was healed and the place was made stable.
After I saw that the place was already stable - I was afraid of something bad occurring on top of him because he had a bad fall into his own stomach: and no bad incident occurred due to this one. And it remained in better health by itself, eating and drinking well, being full of energy, and taking baths, exercising as a result of its diet.
"Some experimental surgeons said that when a wound occurs inside the bowel, and it perforates (breaks through), then it is necessary to sew it up according to this method. It is as if you were carrying large heads of garlic Then the two lips or mouths of the anus should be placed, and one garlic clove inserted into them through which their mouth is open over the two lips of the anus. When this then falls upon it and it closes its mouth, pulling away from its head, it remains hence, but is not desirable.
Then put another garlic clove next to the first one, and do not stop doing it with that garlic after the garlic until you have placed all of them into the anus in their proper order according to the quantity of wounds in total.
Then pull it down, and its wound. Those heads remaining attached to the bowel will not be eaten until the bowel is eaten, and it will be healed, but otherwise a wound or break of the membrane should not occur.
And it is possible to sew up the bowel also with a very fine thread: which has been withdrawn from an animal's intestine, and attach it after having introduced it into this place.
It is as if you were carrying the tip of this thread out of the intestine, and discard a great amount. Then sew up with that very fine thread at its end which has been withdrawn from an animal's intestine Then introduce this thread into the bowel and with it sew it up. Then pull down to its disruption (break)
And this mode of sewing with garlic and the intestine is not only according to the quantity of wounds in total, but also according to trust and hope.
For the wound which is big and wide especially if it occurs inside a very narrow intestine: then there is no remedy except for subtlety of threadwork (fine sewing), nor its healing universally.
About treatment of fistulas
It is known that every wound either of a finger when it grows old and withers or from an ulcer and becomes a hole, and does not get closed up, and emits pus always, and cannot be discarded: then the name by which it has been called universally wherever it occurs is Fistula, and we call this one Zuchemen.
The fistula is a connection formed by the truth of the incision, which is hard and white; without pain it has tenderness in the hand's fingers, because of this some call it by the name of Risati, that is the penis.
It can be found on certain occasions when wet, emitting pus. And sometimes the moisture is cut off from some of these situations. It can be found that there is a lot of moisture in certain occasions, and it has little; and it is large, and it is delicate (thin).
And I have already mentioned this earlier when you asked about ulcers that do not heal or arise from it due to flesh, which is nothing but the cause of one new disease.
Of which one?
I have already mentioned all these causes and signs of ulcers and their treatments with medicines; now it is necessary for you to know the care (cure) of fistulas and sinuses through hand operations.
Therefore, note that a fistula occurs in all parts of the body. These are the fistulas that extend to veins and arteries, or nerves, or bowels, or ears, or any part of the back; or to certain parts on either side of the body; or to a place where there is a joining of the two sides together: just like hands and feet.
Thus the fistulas arise in this manner and are difficult to heal; they do not receive care or occupation until the work is done with great difficulty and ignorance.
"If the fistula is of such depth that it cannot be reached by these methods: then take a snare or an anchor and secure its entrance with confidence in his care, so as to draw out what lies within, either by means of the beak [of a crane] if the fistula extends downwards, or by iron instruments if it runs upwards.
"If there is twisting within the fistula, then snare it with a fine-tipped hook. "Because of the softness of his body and the surrounding twists, he must be handled gently to prevent injury.
"If a fistula is full of many orifices that cannot be reached from the outside by the methods previously mentioned, then you will not be able to indicate what lies within it. "Therefore, secure its opening with his own orifices.
"The moisture that enters the snare will enter through another of his openings as well and run out from there.
"Then you must inquire how it is possible for you to identify what lies within: whether by means of the beak or by means of the nose: and if there are many orifices on one side, you should reach into them all at once with your full strength; but if the fistula has a long concavity near, or proximity, or if it is one with many orifices around, then reach in through what orifice you can to touch whatever lies within that area. And remember: when you use force and make an attempt on pain of causing harm to yourself by compressing something without knowing what it is.
"Since you have reached its station securely and safely with your hand, then turn to its care now with confidence: and remember that if it is a fistula nearby visible, or close at the entrance of one opening, or on an artery or vein, or on any single of those I mentioned earlier, then dry out the fistula according to what was explained before by my writing, and take from it whatever lies within through its orifice. And please do remember: until you get a safe exit.
"If the fistula is very deep and according to its own nature then you must secure it securely by grasping into as deeply as possible. "After removing from all the corrupt parts.
"Next, with a medical instrument such as a scalpel or the like, remove what remains of the flesh that has been corrupted by fistulas, until the acute medicine completely removes all remaining corruption from fistulae resulting from corruption.
"Then restore it with ointments which heal flesh, until healing occurs.
"If not healed by that method alone, then burn the fistula as described in our previous response.
"If the cause of fistula is known to you, examine it and remove it in accordance with what we have previously described for you; if this does not disallow something from your hand or arm, burn it as instructed.
"If you find out what the cause of fistula is and there's evidence of corruption inside it; then burn that part until all corruption has been removed. "After removing its corrupt parts as described before, care for it with what incites healing so that healing occurs.
"If not healed by that method alone, and you know now that you did not remove all the corruption; then burn it in accordance with what was shown to you.
"Then examine further upon that second thing and strive for its cure by all means within your power; then remove the corruption with utmost force.
"After removing it, restore it in accordance to our previous instructions. "If so, then you know that the corruption is very deep within your body and you were not able to remove all of it. "Therefore, you should either leave it as nature intended or seek another method for removing the corruption from that part.
"If a very small fistula is present, remove it with fine instruments used in surgery to treat such things.
"If there are many bones, then strive for the removal of all those bones without removing anything from them with your strength.
"If something contrary arises from the moisture (such as an abscess) and you are not afraid of incisions or error; then cut through those moist areas if they exist there and release the bones.
If you do not have a preparation of the bones from your time for eating them raw and let it be placed above the wounds that would rot it; then release it after it has rotted, so that what is putrefied around the bones of those who ate them may also become rotten.
And ensure the wound does not solidify And you ensured that a section was made according to your method of operating. If you place it on top of itself if necessary, with the help of sulfur and trefoil with oil; or else put it into a vessel made from Egyptian unguent, or some other unguent's juice.
When those become putrefied by humidity and are separated from the bones, their release is made; and they draw in others.
If there is a large opening such as the openings of the thighs or anus, and similar to them; that which has become corrupted from it is part big; then remove it by its last reason until it has been made into black and corruption. After this, you restore the wound.
If the part of it that has become corrupted is big and corruption has already been completed with the bones; then it is necessary to clamp down on it and strike it totally until it reaches the location where corruption occurred; then care for it so that it solidifies
And I say to you the manner by which a wound occurred on your own flesh; that you place it as an example and support above your method of operating.
There was a man in his youth about thirty years of age who had pained himself in his flesh because the cause which moved upon him inside his body until the matter reached his thighs and became great; and there was no external cause to it
Therefore, time passed with him as long as the physicians' error continued until he opened up and confronted many materials. His care was continued until his thighs were opened up and many openings had been made within him; all of which let out pus and the moisture of the body.
"In that period two years were needed for its treatment by many physicians, and it was not a person skilled in the art of hands until he spoke his name aloud, and I heard his voice; and from him I took the crusades (sword), which they use on their bodies. And everything related to this man's body had already been eaten up; and its color was blue.
"I therefore attempted to enter one of the openings mentioned earlier through the force of my effort, but I could not gain entrance into it.
"Then I examined thoroughly all of them and tried to enter through every one, but was unable to do so from any part of the body.
"Therefore I turned to one of the openings among them and attempted to enter through that part with force; but in entering it became corrupted, being already rotten and stained, and having been perforated, until finally I was able to reach its center.
"Therefore what had been detected by me from the corrupted bone was prepared for separation from it.
"I therefore took that which was not on the bone excepting corruption, which I separated off and severed. "And I had already removed it from its place.
"Then I placed the restoration of the bone with the strengthened medicines in a long space. "And it was not reinforced.
"Therefore I turned to the next one above where the first was detected; and entered into it with continuing corruption, along with the bone; and severed what had appeared by me also from that corruption.
"Then I attempted restoration of him (the man). "And it was not restored.
"Therefore I turned to him again and did not cease to strike the particular place; but attempted restoration of him (the man); and it was not restored until finally cutting off his bone through almost all its length, and taking that with his brain.
"Therefore I restored him with the medicines and it was strengthened and became healthy; but this repetition of mine was not necessary for his operation and cutting, except out of pity and compassion towards him (the man) and fear of death: because he fell by all means from too much evacuation and syncopal evils.
"Is it necessary to treat a complete injury? If so, the injury was caused by hard bone and good arrangement of the bones within his body; he had strength; and there was no impediment in any movement that would cause damage.
"If a bone of the body has been broken at its place, then you should lift him up as much as possible in that manner; it is to catch his ligaments and pull them taut on the prominent bones; hold fast unto him who stretches him upwards; and put another ligament over from coarse thread. "Then put him back onto the flesh where the bone was broken; and stretch his extremities so that you may drag him downwards; and hold fast to the limb on which he stands so that he does not fall forward; and then you will take the limb above from beneath, lest it become loose.
"Then place a stick or board below the bone so that when you do this, it is not permitted to conceal the spoiled limb.
"It is necessary to have the sling above the spoiled limb so that there will be no injury from a crushing blow; and it does not appear on its own sense of touch, and he grasps towards his own sling with another.
"If the bone is spoiled and it's not prominent, then its parts will continue with another; and the injury is in between him or on his part. "Then place a stick below.
"After that the sling is put from the first part where the injury was, until it continues to the second; and the sling will be according to its length in opposition to the injury.
"If the injury is from the joint itself, cut off the spoiled joint; and then sling as much as possible from part two.
"If however the injury is between the two joints, there will be no damage except for cutting off one of them.
"If the injury is on the hand or foot itself; it then becomes very difficult to treat that part. Indeed, you must know exactly how corruption appears before your eyes And you must grasp it, and apply that to whatever disposition may be most convenient for you, and with any kind of correction performed on your part, if the vein does not give forth its flow or the artery.
And you shall know that bones for incision are many in size and shape, according to their position within the body, and their preparation, thickness, subtlety, magnitude, durability, rarity, harshness, and scarcity. For this purpose you must bring to the use of all the instruments of every kind for that operation.
And you shall know that these operations are indicated before your eyes when you see a very long tool in use. The knowledge of the modes of this art is a proof of its severity; for now you see that through you he brought into use what was done with instruments against every ailment.
And I will stand steadfast to you at the end of this chapter and give you examples of instruments that are used over what strikes, as well as a trial for you to try them on others.
The alternative form of surgery.
Form of tying up knots The head is the knot to be put together according to a star shape; and its points are arranged according to the design of the needles that tie it.
And not when it is tied together with him as a knot, unless its head is torn apart or large and swollen.
The form of tying up big knots.
"Surgical form for the left ear
"Form for the right ear, as it is called.
"Form for the other side of the head (right ear)
"Surgical form for the right ear
"Form for the other side of the head (right ear), as it is extended and turned.
This is similar to the radio (ear), and the extremity resembles a nail; it should be displayed in various places by reason of the bones.
"Surgical form corresponding to its perforation through the bones
"The extremity has a triangular shape and is pointed at both ends.
"It fits or suits well. "Similarly, everything that we have said from the ear incision and saw should also follow this surgical form for the middle ear.
"Of the incision of extremities and cutting through bones
"The extremities will rot either from external causes or internal ones.
"Because of your being a doctor and having made the effort to care for that corruption with medical means [i.e., by trying various treatments], yet you have not been able to prevent its spread: then it is necessary that you cut out this member from where its corruption proceeds up until when it affects, so as he may be saved through that [member] and avoid death or the greater harm which would come to his member.
"And the sign of that [member] which has been harmed is that it is dishonored by its own name; either it will be burned up with fire or rot after death; until it is incised from that point on through to where it follows, and then spread throughout the body.
"Therefore proceed with its incision and similarly if it is caused by the strike of various creatures; as a scorpion in the sea or a weaver or a miller.
If an injury or blow occurs at the extremity of a finger, then strike that finger and not allow it to be spoiled by the corruption, so as to reach up to the remaining hand.
Similarly if it happens to the hand itself, then strike off from its root the finger that is injured by a sharp blow and do not allow corruption spoil it until it reaches up to the arms.
And if it happens to the arm itself, then strike off from its joint the hand that is injured and do not allow corruption spoil it until it reaches up to its own junction (the elbow).
If however a corruption passes around the arm, then there is death for that part of the body. In addition to treating what has been corrupted by care, virtue amounts to quantity
And similarly when an injury occurs on a finger, then strike off that finger at one joint and if it falls to the foot of the leg, then strike down the entire leg. If however it ascends towards the elbow, then strike off the arm from its junction (the elbow).
And if a corruption has already passed above the elbow, then there is no movement left to it except release and let go of what remains to be dead.
And the mode for striking a member is either by binding it tight or holding on to it and hitting from below, depending on whether you want to strike it with one ligature above or another ligature above its place (the location). And the other way of extending a ligature is by stretching it out to below and the other one up to above. And you separate the meat that is between two ligatures with a Spathilus blow until the entire arm falls down (into its proper place). After this either it is struck or bound tight.
And you must lay down the blanket from all sides of the foot and not hit on it a healthy place (the sole) and strike to death what remains added and then release the cold finger.
And if you strike to death what remains inside a vein while working on it (or) immediately cauterize that place or lay down some other finger-tips cutting off the blood. In the meantime continue with your own treatment until it is completed
In the meantime stretch the injured limb with a suitable ligature and treat it to restore movement, until it becomes healthy again.
And I will tell you what fell upon your foot as well, that is the same accident which happened to me.
This is because a blackening occurred on your foot as well, due to the combination of dust and fire causing damage; this same accident also caused damage to my finger first, until it began to damage the entire hand.
Therefore the man took his own sword after having experienced damage to a limb due to excessive heat from it; and he then inflicted that upon an incision, until he became healthy again.
And after a long time had passed, the same accident happened to his finger as well on his hand's index finger.
So then he came to me and desired to recover that excess with him while he was applying ointment on his body after the completion of it; but no extra fluid remained, and he began to make incisions elsewhere in order to restore health to both hands until the corruption had taken hold of one hand entirely.
Therefore he came to me in order to make an incision on his hand; and he did not want that there should be any excess from me upon the death of his excess fluids; and I also feared that a death stroke would come upon him at my incision as well. Because the man was skilled in weapons.
Therefore after he had despaired of me, he returned to his own land; and came back to me because he thought so, and made an incision on both hands completely until he became healthy again.
And do not translate this story unless you are a helper for what falls under the heading of these hardships; and that its meaning may be understood as it is written down according to how it is done.
The care of yours with the quality of healing with the medicines.
When a vein ruptures and bleeds into another part of the body (e.g., eye), it is sealed off by ligature until the bleeding stops; at that point it is known as an "eye fistula.
Its care is to treat the wound completely like it was made; and especially when it's delicate, as if it were a bandage being applied: and trust that it won't be placed with the location because of its own corruption.
If the skin is damaged and it does not follow from that injury the last corruption; but if there's a wound caused by the flesh being cut off, then the care should be given to him with a needle (i.e., suture). And it is to consider going towards the Sinus as well
Then if it is great and what goes out from that is foetid odor; then the needle should be inserted into him with the medicine of Egypt (i.e., bandage). And the parts receiving these things are equal, they will accumulate in your way: and they become covered by fire until the doctor arrives.
Then take what is necessary for you from that; and dissolve it with water and honey (i.e., bandage), and bind the Sinus with him as well. And close up his wound, and leave the medicine within him according to the quantity of two hours.
Then take it out with an expression; do that for days until the Sinus is cured and the odor is removed.
And when the bandage is being burned with water of wine (i.e., alcohol), and it's not within your reach at that moment this medicine for ashes; or take ashes from wood or coals, and pour them on top of her. Then apply the bandage to it, and bind it with that until you are sure the Sinus is healed.
"If you are weak and cannot tolerate the smell of Egyptian medicines, nor drink their poison (i.e., urine), then wash him with water mixed with honey until some medicine prepared from aloes is applied to him. "Wash him with water mixed with honey and vinegar until the excess of both liquids is removed; wash thoroughly to remove any remaining odor or residue left from urine.
"When you have done this to some extent and are confident that the corruption of the nose has already receded; then wash him with the mixture used for making meat, so that it may be applied to him.
"And there are others to be used with the mixture of egg whites; and dissolve him with olive oil and vinegar until he is clean from all traces of them. Or wash him thoroughly with certain medicines, ointments, which I have written about in a treatise on ointments.
"If the opening of the nose is narrow and cannot accommodate a cannula from clisteris; then expand him with stronger force by means of iron or apply to him the unguent of Egypt or the unguent of Basil for expansion.
"And similarly if it is an even wider opening, then close the mouth of him with stitches and release a quantity from it equal to that which should be added without additional ingredients.
"And similarly if the opening from which the discharge of pus flows downward is widened; it is to be released upward towards the upper part; then dry him in a lower place where he is, so that it may flow out through this and reach the bottom until when the discharge stops because the flesh is prevented from generating there.
"If it is not possible for you to dry the nose from below as described; then scrape gently and prepare a membrane by which the discharge of pus will flow out with ease, just as that has been prepared for you. "Scrape gently and catch anything that may remain from the discharge of pus; and take consolidated medicines to be placed above the sign. Extend them above the linen And place the linen a certain quantity of it so that communication may flow into the whole sinus (sinus means nose). Then make an incision with a sharp instrument at the entrance to the hole on the head of the sinew so that it opens wider than before. Next extend the other linen with slender fingers in proportion to the size of the holes and place it on top of itself, longways so that its outlet is opposite to the opening of the sinus.
The one that is above the opening of the sinus, is he whom you remove at all hours so as to go away what has gathered in him from pus and thus you know if it flows out through him or not.
And considering the place of the sinus itself, if there be a lord's pain in him or not and whether it is there a hole or not.
Thus your treatment proceeds so and you know the matter which is placed over the opening of the sinus; then you know whether it has adhered or not.
If however the flow from the sinus is subtile and long after a delay of many hours or days then you do not worry for its release because it seeks treatment by those who hasten the generation of flesh in their bodies and by those who hinder him,
If however the flow from the sinus is many days long and digested then you know that the sinus does not adhere.
If therefore the delay of its release and prolongation of it happen then you will add to their treatment the application of medical ointments by physicians so that the medicine may be moist and slimy like a linen; thus as the unguent of dyafininicon is added into him when he has excesses in addition from excess.
And further than that which is being treated, you will apply the unguent of dyafininicon and it will be dissolved with sweet oil and there will flow into him old wine equal to its substance.
"In this case, insert that object with him and use it.
After doing so, when the object is not currently available to you, remove it and then perform this operation on what remains of him/it. Take myrrh or aloes, or both; tear and pound them thoroughly; cover it with oil while it is still hot over fire. After performing this operation on him/it, place a bandage over his head and tie it to the top of the rope; then draw out what you tore off carefully so that it becomes one piece again; cover it with oil after removing it from the fire.
And sometimes when administering this operation on him/it you will find Aristolochia longissima and Lilium, the roots of lilies of heaven; and there is also centaurea. Use them individually or in groups, tear off the chaff/shells and cover it with oil; then use what remains of him.
If the matter has already been prolonged from his sinus and not healed by this treatment; then you understand that corruption is already deep within him/it; or it makes an impression on bones or tough parts like ligaments; at that point treat him for fistulas according to what was prescribed.
For the treatment of ulcers and nails falling off: and cutting them off with a knife/sword; and making a cut in addition to that.
An ulcer is born under the thumb/finger of the hand or foot; and sometimes it is born on one of the other fingers.
If the matter has been prolonged and neglected treatment of him; or apostemated by cold hands (hands); or it is burned off with fire; or it becomes corrupted from root to end/tip of nail, as far down as nose; sometimes it covers up corruption all over, sometimes leads to corruption in mouth until odor of the foetus arises, and results in loss of finger tip.
When you cure him/it as prescribed by the surgery; and when you cut off with knife all that remains from his finger... After cautery, burn a wound. Cautery is an instrument of healing.
If you are healthy and the hand is also good, then it starts to cut into the meat from its interior, it starts to itch itself, it is itching: at that point it needs to put a subtile Radium under an angle of the hand which bites the flesh, and pull her away. And once she has been pulled out by this instrument made of corrosive medicine, then place on top of what remains from meat after removal of medicines with corrosive agents until all is removed. Then cure it with ointments, until it heals
If however corruption has already occurred at the mouth, then you should cut away that part and remove it immediately because nothing can heal while something corrupt is left inside.
If you see that corrosion and corruption have entered the finger, then cut away that part from one joint, according to what has been remembered of him. Then cure it, until it heals
If you have injured the hand or hit it, then there must be given first to the patient a phlebotomist Then dry the limb with quick and severe sectioning downward from the top toward the bottom.
And be careful lest the section goes into the flesh beneath the finger, for you will cause pain to the patient who is under it, and there will remain a spot added by birth of flesh where that happened
Then cure the place which causes the pain.
The hand that is added to the people, may be very useful for all flesh; and bones of some are also present in it, and the finger has a nail: and there can be born from its junction or from one finger's knot some persons' births. He who is born among the fingers cannot be removed; and he who is born from the finger's junction may possibly be removed.
"For him who has mastered these (surgical techniques), the section for him is easy. To hit upon a root with a club or cudgel from the left side.
The care of him whose birth is at the junction of the incision, is difficult. Do not then cut off (his hand)
To him who is born from the finger at the end of the nerves, it should be so that you hit his hand with a round knife to the nose. Then cut off his head with one of the knives suitable for such purpose. And then take care of him until he is healed.
The consolidation which has struck the fingertips is often followed by birth, that is, he was born with it or from burning wood, or fire, etc..
It is therefore necessary to cut off the consolidation so that his fingers can return to their original shape. Then place a ligature between them or weave the pannus into olive oil so that they do not heal immediately but are separated; then put a thin strip of lead between them until the consolidation is complete in accordance with what is necessary.
And similarly if a consolidation has struck the palm of his hand, then dry off that consolidation in accordance with what was prepared and fitted for the shape of the body part.
"Of cutting off the vitriol.
The veins are often burst from the swelling and overflow of melancholy fluids which occur in many parts of the body; and most frequently they come out in the arms, particularly in the arms of those who work much and labor hard, as well as in those that carry burdens.
Therefore it is necessary to administer a purging with black bile frequently by a strong discharge, so that the veins may be restored and not burst too often due to swelling and melancholy fluids.
Then take care of the patients who have suffered from venepuncture in his arm.
Curatio and cure with iron is done according to two methods The blood is removed as they proceed And the other method is to puncture a vein and remove it with the whole.
The section (of the body) must be done according to this way First, with warm water, stir until the bad blood is released. Then, tie the lower leg to the upper thigh using a rope. Next, cut open an area on one side or both sides and make it wide.
Then take the bad blood from your lower leg up to the top and put it into an empty container on one side or both sides first. Next, cut off the leg up to below with it and let it bleed as much blood as you can until you have enough or tolerate what is left from the weakness of the patient.
Then bind them and give the patient something to prevent nausea from black bile: and do another evacuation and phlebotomy when they are needed and it harms him.
The removal is done according to this way. Remove the hair on the lower leg if there are many hairs there. Next, put it into a bath or stir with warm water until the vein becomes red and the veins are released, one way or another.
Then, make an incision along its length on one side or the other and tie it off at the knee or below for removal.
Next, open the incision and remove as much of it as you can until it becomes black or dark red, then take it away from him so that he may see it clearly. Now when you have cut open the incision make her white like a cord.
Next, put it under a glass container until you cut open the incision and remove her from the skin.  Bind her with a rope on one side loosely.
Then make another incision near it for three fingers Then remove the skin from above Then hold her with one hook like you did before and suspend her with another hook just as you did before.
If necessary make more than one incision to reach the desired result. Then remove her from near the heel.
Then take her out to the incision above her.
And do this until you remove her from the upper incision or from all sections around to the point where she is whole; then make another incision.
If you cannot remove her through the upper incision or all sections around to the point where she is whole; then put a double-hook on either side and tie her securely there; alternatively go under it with a hook: and come back with your hand to every part, until you reach her completely. And that's all. If you cannot remove her in the same way as before or from above; if this is not possible and you lose hold of her, it will be difficult for you to pull out any part of her, because she has become weak due to loss of blood.
Once you have removed her completely; then put a hook under the arm or leg and pull it out with oil or wine; alternatively give it a good rub of oil until she is healed.
If the veins are contracted and difficult to remove due to their tortuous nature; then it is necessary for you to find a way to pull her out of all parts affected by this, and cure these incisions as well.
Then suspend her with hooks; until you remove her completely and tie a knot at the place of your incision to prevent injury to her there, or support her through her ordeal, for it will be difficult to remove her or pull her out from under such conditions. And show great care in all that you do.
Form for cutting off fruit
Form of applying unguent
It is not to be administered in the same way as other unguents, nor for extreme cuts or bruises; so that it would have harmed one of them (if applied with its own force): but because if it were delicate and tender, it might cause harm through its own gentleness: so that an excess of this ointment should never be excessive, except when it is fat-like.
Extraction of veins from the leg.
This vein is generated on the feet of the Arabs and the cold lands, like the veins of Alizegi; but the dry land and the hot land it generates as well, because its tender parts are lacking there - that is to say, in places where no herb or tree grows.
And perhaps veins may be generated elsewhere on the body beyond the limbs.
Its generation is due to the corruption that occurs beneath the flesh, like how snakes and vipers are born inside the bodies of men; so too do its births occur from the corruption between the skin and meat.
The sign of its excision is this: if it causes inflammation on someone's thigh. After that place must be seared off. After that the vein is excised from its place of excision, as if it were a root of a plant or an animal.
When that extremity appears after it, then he must apply a bandage soaked in the same weight of silver coin to cover its surface; and it is held fixed by means of a leaden strip from head to foot - until two drachmas are released; and let him release the suspended lead after it.
For as long as there is something to be extracted from that vein externally, he must bandage it with silver coins soaked up to its surface; and let him release a leaden strip all the way around - until two drachmas are released. If prolonged much, then he must cut off its part and bandage what remains. Do not cut it off before all of it is extracted completely. "When a lancet is inserted against (the body), it holds and draws blood into itself; and thus it inflicts injury on the vein with which it comes into contact, causing death to the part around it, and ulceration of bad quality.
"Therefore it ought to be handled with care, gently withdrawn from the body at once and as quickly as possible, so that no trace of its having been there may remain within the body; for thus by withdrawing a little bit every time, it may never reach any part which is beyond five palms in length and ten. "And so I saw (it), because its path was obstructed by a hand from the XXth palm.
"If a lancet were to be inserted into you during the time of your treatment; then its path is interrupted by that vein's entrance, and it penetrates the said vein deeply for a long time while touching the body until all that remains from it in the material has been exhausted, and administers the rotting of place with medicines on the days after. "Then he turns his attention to curing the lancet's injury.
"This vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the insertion of a foot, or on that same foot.
"Therefore he ought to cure this one as we have said regarding division and with what was previously mentioned.
"Of the incision above worms of the womb; it is called 'Bouina's sharpness'.
"This 'sharpness' is called 'Bouina sharpness', because many worms have been made by it and are now few in number; for they arise between the skin and the flesh.
"And it is spread throughout the body, ascending and descending; and appears to the senses during the movement of its member towards another, until some trace of having been there disappears from any part of the body.
"Its generation is from the putrefaction of certain humors. In like manner are worms and snakes, that is, laths and lice on man
For he fears the evil of his Because when he himself entered into the body and was elevated to his head, and settled there, then suddenly he opened upon him and delivered up [his soul], and destroyed his eye; and he killed that one many times
Therefore, how to care for him and remove him, then it did not happen there except from his walking around and the appearance of that one's senses.
Therefore, so that you hold what is above him, and what is below with a strong cord and constriction. Then dry up [his] above, and remove him from there.
If it penetrates into the flesh, then do not let him out of this place with a cautery [instrument] while fire is present, until he dies.
And greater fear there was, corruption to his was, by which his eye was corrupted like what we said.
If you now wish to remove him from near the head towards the eye, then hold it below on his forehead with a strong constriction. Then dry up [his] above, and remove him from there.
It is necessary that the weak one must be made to pass away through corruption of his own body with drugs that dissolve bad smells.
And let him feed himself from food-givers causing putrefaction.
About the section over the burden of Nakir.
This burden is called Nakir on our earth, and there was a pain that struck some of the members; then it transfers from one member to another member.
And I myself now saw him, as what I have told you. I am called upon by a sick woman among the women. And he took his arm and saw puffiness of the vein in both arms.
After an hour has passed and one has had a haemorrhage from the veins with a knife, as it would happen to arteries when they are cut open; so that he may ascend to the location of his elbow as much as possible: thus let him be like running blood when flowing from one place to another.
The pain therefore subsided at this place and was fixed at the elbow
After a short time had passed, and when blood continued to flow from the remainder of his body, until it reached another arm.
After that, I was told because he had lost consciousness throughout his entire body as I said earlier.
Therefore, it seemed to me that the movement of his limb from one member to another had been lost. And I myself did not see this agitation in my eyes as it was happening according to that way. However, I saw many who changed the pain from one member to another; but I did not see him with his eyes as he was doing it like a woman.
Therefore, I do not think that this is because a woman was present among those who are accustomed to detecting the sick with their eyes; hence it seems to me that there is an agitated feeling being changed by its movements.
It is necessary then for those who are delighted and whose bodies are full of delight to not be present among those who detect the sick by their eyes, and the hidden ones.
Thus, with the care of his senses and feeling the pain as a patient feels it; if you see this agitation in your eye, as we said earlier, then tighten above him and below too on him; and as long as he stays there without moving, so that the agitated feeling is cut off.
If you do not see him with your eyes, then carefully remove his body and accompany them by the feathers of the little birds, the feathers of the swallow or any other that is similar to those.
The extraction of the arrows
The joints differ according to their nature and the places where they fell off the body.
Their difference is because some of them have sharp points, and others are blunt; and some are concave, and some are convex. And from these there are three angles. From them there are the tongues And from these there are stars.
The second type of difference is according to the two modes of those which fell off through the members. Or if from the main parts of the members those which fell off through them are by the two modes as is the head and heart and liver and lungs and kidneys and bladder and all similar things When therefore one of the members falls and you see signs of death which I tell you after this then it is necessary that you should pull out those joints from there because death follows him in many positions. And if to you these bad signs are not evident and the joint is hidden in the member's depth then pull it out and make sure it is secure.
From the head when it falls and it penetrates the nose and it is covered with phlegm which is above the head there are those which fall from him sneezing and blindness and vertigo and redness in the eyes and swelling and redness of the tongue and spasms and mixture of intellects and cholera death. And it may also be that blood comes out through the nose or ears. Or the speech may be cut off and destroyed by the wind. And it may also happen that from a wound in the head there comes forth white pus-like fluid. And it may come out of him like water and excrement.
If therefore these signs are evident then stay from the cure and pull out the joint if it is not removed
When an arrow falls into the heart, there are two possibilities: either it lodges near the left breast or by chance it fixes firmly on the hard part of the chest and does not fix onto the soft part It is possible that an arrow falls with a force similar to the force of the heart's pulse, and it may run out through the wound, causing black blood to flow forth. It is followed by extreme coldness in extremities (of body), and cold sweat, and numbness. Therefore, it can be said that death was close but not quite at hand.
When an arrow lodges in the lung, it is said to be a sign of death by blood's exit from the wound; and those that follow behind may cease, or change their color, becoming pale. And the large breath expires high up in the air, seeking cold air's attraction.
If an arrow falls into the arm, it is near to the back; and there occurs a great breath with pain in the shoulder, accompanied by a sigh, and all the members of the arms may tremble.
If an arrow lodges in the stomach, it is possible that some indigested food will come forth from the wound.
If an arrow lodges in the rectum or anus, it may cause something foul from the wound to come forth; either excrement, or a ruptured part of the intestine that has already been disrupted. Therefore, there is no hope for his cure and no way to remove the arrow.
If an arrow lodges into the bladder and urine comes forth from it, something foul will come out; there is a stronger pain on top of weakness; you know that this is mortal
The muscles and the joints also give out in many ways like faces; the collarbones, the shoulder blades, the elbow joints, the elbows, the wrists, the buttocks, and the thighs will also be affected when an arrow does not reach a vein or artery; it is an arrow that has become useless.
I tell you what I learned from Albucasis about arrows, that they are used in conjunction with your treatment
Because a bow struck the eye of a man while he was crying and entered his nose Therefore, I removed it from the other side of his face and placed it beneath his ears: he was cured without any harm to him.
Therefore I took another arrow from the Jews who had struck him under his eye, beneath his lower eyelid; and it was hidden so that its use did not come through except for part of his cheek near to where it would have been attached on his wood: and the arrow was large with a curved shaft like the Turks' arrows made by iron, which does not have ears.
Therefore, the Jew is cured without any harm to him from an arrow incident injury.
And I took another arrow from Christians' quiver:
It was an Arabic arrow and it did have ears. Therefore I put the two arrows over his head together, and she was hidden beneath them in his quiver. Therefore I became skilled with her, until I took away from him; and the Christian is cured.
And we thought about it because he was suffering from this arrow.
After thirty days had passed by him and no change was made upon him from the dispositions of his own, I took the arrow; and my mind put it there for use, and I removed her; and he is cured without any harm to him.
And I saw a man whose arrow had struck his back: and it was set fast upon her. After seven years the arrow left from his waist.
I saw a woman whose arrow had struck into her breast; and it was set fast upon her. And the arrow remained within her: and no change occurred from disposition of hers, and she did not receive any harm from any of her own actions.
A man struck another with an arrow in his face and the wound was closed, but he did not endure much pain; similar things happened to others
A royal arrow was drawn out from the head of a man who had been hit by it through his nose; and it had already declined towards the right side
I am therefore to look after him until three days after he has removed the arrow The wound of the arrow was firmly closed
I tried with great effort and did not feel it; and he himself felt the pain in his ear on the right side from being hit by the arrow. I therefore believed that the wound was caused at the extreme end of the arrow
I therefore placed a bandage over the place where there was attraction of the arrow's power and digging out; confident that this place would be removed, and it showed me the sign of the arrow so that I could draw it away from its place: and it did not happen at the place in which the arrow had been stuck.
I therefore kept bandaging over him for many days; and it did not happen to be injured because the wound was closed temporarily; he remained weak from drawing out his arrow until he felt an arrow in his nose on a certain day He told me this.
He told me this. I therefore put over this wound an acute medicine, corrosive for many days; until it was opened up; and with great effort tried to draw him, but felt the subtle end of the arrow which was sticking into the wood.
Afterwards I added to the opening of his wounds that acute medicine; until it appeared before us how far the arrow was sticking out, and there remained with me for about four months.
Afterwards when the wound had been enlarged and it became possible for me to insert my fingers into it and move it around; but it did not obey at its exit: then I did not stop twisting around with the methods of children until a certain day came with very painful efforts, according to which it was shaped out in the end, until I drew her away. I have restored the wounds
And doctors say that the nasal cartilage should not be repaired. Therefore I have restored this one and it is now healed in its entirety without causing any harm to him at all.
And I inform you of the quality, extent and position of those things that need to be removed so that you can place them in their appropriate rule and meaning as I have indicated.
Since the parts of this art and their distinctions are not comprehended with the narration; nor was it comprehended by that book or wise artificer (craftsman); he was compared to a little for many, and when absent from what is present, he brought down a new operation and a new instrument among external things in those arts which had happened.
I therefore declare that the arrows are not drawn from the members to which they are attached except by two ways. Or through attraction from where he went in. Or conversely the parts of another.
That which is drawn to where he went inward may either proceed from there as a shaft penetrating fleshly; or it can be drawn by attraction toward itself.
If it does not arrive at the exit from the hour that he falls; then you should let him rest a certain number of days until his flesh decays around him and he is freed by the force of his own going away.
Similarly if there is a figure in bone and does not arrive at the exit for you; then let him rest equally that number of days until he has been removed by attraction and motion every day until he is drawn away.
If it does not arrive at the exit after days; then you should perform a figure of arrows from all sides around him from each side gently with a subtle spear until they are expanded. Then draw her away and remove her.
If the arrow has already been removed at the place of the body and is hidden or concealed from view; then examine it with care when you take hold of it. If you feel it (i.e., the arrow), then tie it up securely with some instruments that will hold on to its removal from there.
If you cannot hold onto it because of the swelling or length of the arrow, and there is no opening, no slit for removing it; then find somewhere above to hold it tight until its swelling decreases and it becomes possible to remove the arrow.
If you hold onto his ears tightly, then release the fixed meat from all sides and with whatever force you can break it loose; if not, use your ingenuity to snap or bend its ears until he releases them.
And when you administer the extraction of an arrow wherever it is, use your force with both hands and instruments to all parts until you remove her; and with ultimate subtlety, so that she does not break, making it difficult for you to pull on it and its removal.
If you cannot remove her after one day, then let her remain for several days until she becomes rotten or spoiled from its position. Then you will repeat the process; if anything goes contrary to your order it causes a flow of blood; then administer what we have said from care in its chapter and guard your strength so that no wound is inflicted upon you or an instrument used.
"And by every way possible to administer any vein as you like; and that should be done with ease, tranquility, speediness or patience, firmness or gentleness, according to your will.
"You should do it while you hold the vein so that weakness might be according to its figure, as it was at the time of cutting from the vein. "Since then (i.e., after practicing) "If not that, you should administer the one which is possible from figures.
"The vein which is named from the contrary part of another one or has already proceeded to something external; it does make weakness at the extremity by feeling from above the closest parts of the skin and you recognize its prominence, so therefore over it, and should be cut according to how much they can carry in it with their fingers.
"After that you hold her, she becomes easy for getting out.
"If you hold on to the bone, then stretch your hand according to its roundness until you press the vein into the bone and it expands itself; after that you should pull her.
"And if not, let it go off for a few days: then repeat it until you get rid of it.
"If the vein is found to be made from bone, then pull her with it.
"If the vein has been found to be cut from bone, and you are ordered to administer pressure; then insert into her an instrument curved so that its fullness is put inside of the artery of the vein; after that pull her with it.
"If the vein has been found to be curved, then pull her into herself with an instrument inserted into her. "The vein is cut through that way.
"If the vein has been found to be poisoned, you must, until you have finished all the meat from which it is found; if possible, do that. "After that, take care of her in what was suitable for that.
"If a testicle falls into the chest or abdomen or scrotum, or anus, and is grasped by the hand while being pressed down upon it; then if you attempt to pull out [the object] at that instant as it comes out of its place (its own) towards your body, an extraction can be made from it. Then wash away with a solution and cut off any pus, or remove it.
"Then seek medical attention if you are able to do so, until it is healed.
"This [description of the instrument used] is how testicles are extracted.
"The limbs resemble a bow when they grasp it; but once taken away from the testicles, they do not give back.
"Many shapes and sizes are produced by them; great ones, moderate ones, small ones, and ones in the middle according to their size of testicles and the power over them.
"This is how they help or assist when grasped upon [by someone].
"And this [description] shows the opposite; they hinder and prevent when taken away from.
"This is like a radius to enter into the testicles with an outstretched finger and assist them as you press upon them.
"Of [venous] bleeding.
"The veins of which are customarily found within the body are thirty.
"From which there are six veins coming from the head; two veins for the ears and their names, two arteries visible only in the upper part of each arm with their names, two veins named Aspicientes running behind the eyes and the name of one vein behind the nose. "And two cervical veins "And two veins running within the upper lip of each mouth. Two veins which are located in the lower lip These are the veins called "Algecherich". Two veins which are below the tongue
Veins that branch off from these veins mentioned earlier are five in each arm
These are the facial veins and one vein located at the back of the skull is called 'ulnar'. The basilar vein This is the media vein and it is composed of branches from both the Basilar and Cephalic veins, and is called 'brachioradialis'. The basilar vein which runs through the back of the skull and one vein located at the front of the arm are called 'brachioradialis' (the veins in the arm) and 'Titillicus' respectively. And this is the internal jugular vein This is the funicular artery of the arm and it lies above the elbow joint; from this vein comes that which is visible when the hand is dropped down to one's side.
The Salutation artery and its two branches are between the annulus and the small artery, and they supply blood to the arm.
There are three veins located on the forehead and foot respectively. These veins run from the back of the hand to the front of the wrist. The second is called 'saphenous' and it lies at the heel behind the ankle joint, from which vein runs that in the hand to the thumb. The third one is called 'Nesse'.
There are three more veins on the forehead similarly to those mentioned earlier.
About the phlebotomy of two veins after auricles
The phlebotomy of the two veins mentioned after auricles consists in cutting off the ear and the nose and making an incision at the back of the head, and in treating with old remedies, bandaging, cauterizing, and curing the wounds of the heads.
The quality of the phlebotomy is according to what is narrow. It is necessary that a head dressing be applied and hair of the forehead be shaved with scissors. After this, the patient ties his own collar using thread; until two veins are visible on each side. The ears lie down behind the temples at a height of two fingers below the top of the head. Therefore take them with your finger and when you find their roots under your finger, there tie a knot with resin.
After this, take the phlebotomist's bowl; it is called Incidens by some. After this, put him into a bandage so that he may drip the blood onto the mouth Then take hold of your finger with a bandage and cut off one vein at its top. The length of the incision should be equal to twice the length of your fingers joined together; either straight or in a circle around it and release the blood as much as you can.
After this, tie him with threads until he is free from pain.
And now the beginning of the book has been introduced and their cauterization has taken place.
The subject matter of two veins which are cut out in time is that by means of phlebotomy the ancient and modern methods should be known to us; so also how we may make a quick incision, quickly extract the flowing blood from the eyes.
The quality or manner in which you remove them is according to what you have been told. The patient ties his own collar firmly until two veins of the face are visible; and their pulse will be felt under your finger. Then tie a knot with resin.
Then take hold of the finger at its top and put him into a bandage so that his drip may be onto the forehead. "Cut it off like you did with two veins and others; then make a current flow from its blood according to the need.
After that, take hold of the vein with one finger at once Then grasp your own hand and its fingers, and strangle it by a strong constriction; then release it, so that the patient may recover.
And now you have finished their remembrance, their incision, and the extraction of their book.
The wound from the first venepuncture after cephalic phlebotomy is after old-fashioned bruises on the face; to its swelling and bleeding; and a sore or ulcer
And the quality of that phlebotomy is according to what you have opened up in it. The patient's hand with its fingers is bound by a strong constriction until it appears After that you take the thing called the forceps.
Take the highest point on the head of the forceps and strike above it with the fingers or another part as necessary; then release the flow of blood according to how much you need. After that, take hold of the perforation with one finger at once.
And sometimes when you are with a venepuncture on the opposite side. However, it is not necessary that the phlebotomy be from the very tip of one's hand as in other cases; rather it should be from an open palm. The venepuncture is done according to the incision; which is close by, and it may be that the phlebotomy breaks when it is soft.
The wound from the venipuncture of two lachrymal veins is after old-fashioned bruises on the face; to its swelling and bleeding; and soreness of the eye, and old-fashioned pains on the face.
And the quality of the veins is such that when they are pressed with a tourniquet the injured limb will be drawn towards itself After the veins have been taken, you place them on his head
You tie a tourniquet at a point that is below the length of the veins but above their size, so as not to obstruct them where they exit the body. If the tourniquet is too loose on the extremities it may break.
After this you draw off as much blood as necessary for you. And place them on top of each other and tie them at night so that they may be loose when needed.
The veins of the nose are taken because they cause fevers and chills, and redness on the face as a result; especially when ancient.
And the quality of his veins is such that when pressed with a tourniquet the injured limb will be drawn towards itself. Then hold the nose of his left hand and take a subtle vein from it; and tie him between two veins that were distinguished by the nose according to their lengths. Because one cannot see there, and because blood starts to flow immediately.
And you should tie the tourniquet at a point that is below the length of the veins but above their size so as not to obstruct them where they exit the body, and draw off as much blood as necessary for your benefit. And ligate her at night one. His will be restored quickly.
The veins of the eyelid are taken because they cause a desire to constriction and the expulsion of scabs, and black spots on the face; and with ulcers, and wounds caused by biting creatures, that is, reptiles.
And the quality of their veins is such that when pressed with a tourniquet the injured limb will be drawn towards itself and remain fastened on top of his head while he lies down
After removing the vein and stretching it out for a distance of one hand's breadth Then remove from the blood an amount equal in temperature to what you see as necessary for that And then repeat the same with another vein.
Afterwards, sew up the ligature of each of these two veins so that they are not easily parted. And remove it from your hand. Then take care of the wound.
Of the removal of veins by Albucasis The purpose of the removal of veins by Albucasis is to drain blood from the mouth and gums, prevent ulcers on the tongue, heal wounds, sores or cuts on any part of the body, as well as those inside the nose or on its surroundings.
And the quality is such that you can perform it without causing harm to an ill person in your presence, and sew up his neck with a thread. Afterwards return to the lips and gently apply two veins, one on each side of his mouth; then demonstrate their respective positions by examining them in red light. And this is it because the veins are very small and black. Then cut off both with one incision.
If you are doubtful and don't know which ones they are, then make a larger cut that will reveal them better.
And then make the same cut for both veins that are in the upper lip, and it is customary to do so when you have them; then cut two veins that are in the lower lip.
Of the removal of veins below the tongue after cephalic vein phlebotomy The purpose of removing veins below the tongue after cephalic vein phlebotomy is to drain blood from the throat and ulcers, as well as prevent further erosion of the mouth and lips.
The quality of phlebotomy should be such that the patient lies between your hands and is exposed to light from above; and let him have one lancet on each side, with which he may pierce his tongue.
Phlebotomy therefore both of you to attend that your hand is not injured in the process. There are arteries beneath him; and perhaps he may suffer loss of blood from these arteries
The three veins that are usually used for phlebotomy, located in the hand, are common to all men.
Phlebotomy of these is done according to two ways Either by piercing with the lancet made from myrtle wood or using a sharp edge for cutting; either by pulling gently upon the vein and twisting it; or by scraping off with the phlebotomist's knife: that is phlebotomy in its simplest form. And this is how he does it.
The large and narrow forms of phlebotomy using myrtle wood are as you would expect them to be. Phlebotomy agrees with opening large veins and cutting through fat ones, making them visible, full of blood, red in color, broad in size and filled with thick, dark blood.
The phlebotomist is of narrower dimensions than the large phlebotomy form, and more subtle than that one.
Phlebotomy agrees with the subtler veins which carry clear blood.
The church which is one of three places for phlebotomy is set apart. Because it gives rise to blood from the arteries in the neck and armpit, following which part of the body is unknown; therefore phlebotomy should be made with care by the phlebotomist so that he may take a sample without fear, for there under it lies an artery If there is an error and it was added while taking care of the vein puncture, it will cause injury to the artery, and blood flow stops He should not strike a vein when puncturing with the phlebotomist's needle: let there be a separation between them
If the basilica of an appearance is not manifest at that time, it should be taken as if he had another vein, and you are to change over to another one, or else you may wound someone's arm with his own phlebotomist needle: or else strike a vein somewhere in its elbow. This is manifest and let her go along with the phlebotomist of Anesil as we have already said
However, if you are to perform the phlebotomy on this same vein of his own, then it is necessary before making an incision in the arm so that you strike a place, until you know exactly where the pulse is located. After striking on the place with a heated probe, afterward you make an incision in the arm and then let one vein be cut off with the phlebotomist of Anesil as we have already said. And so that no injury occurs due to striking at a space within the artery.
And when you know that with tightening of the ligature and inflating at a place where you have struck with a heated probe, then this inflation is an inflation artery: so therefore she was inflated.
If you see blood near the phlebotomy go up with urine as a child does, and it is clear that there are fine veins, then this is because the artery has been damaged through blood. After that you press firmly with your finger upon a space for a long time and then remove it. If the blood is cut off then tightly hold on to your arm and let it go; and there will be an attack by weakness of his motion; and so it must remain over fear in him.
And not move this for a long time until he is cured.
However if the blood is not cut off and you see it then do not stay present at your moment of medicine; and so strike an artery as he appears to you. The hand is amputated and bleeding blood
Remove the fist bone and take hold of it; then take one medium sized thread and tie it over a fresh healthy vein with a knot and the thread's end tied up until another day.
Once the hand is amputated, it is good If it fails and the memory of those who preceded him has been forgotten by the flow of blood from the cuts: then cutting off his own blood is not difficult because of the abundant veins or possible use of a bandage
The vein of the arm is a type of phlebotomy that carries blood from the top part of the head down to the lower body; because it's made up of parts such as the artery to the brain and the artery to the abdomen, just like I said before.
The bandage was placed over the vein from which blood flowed out of his body; because below it is a nerve If he added a wound to the phlebotomy and it caused him to faint from shock: then his treatment was difficult, possibly resulting in loss of consciousness.
The nerve is seen by many times If it is hidden by some people and is thin so that it's not seen; then you should put your phlebotomy over them like the one I described, making a cut with an alnesil and tying up the nerve with your strength.
If it's between two nerves, find one of its lengths.
From the vein in the head. The vein of the head is a type of phlebotomy that carries blood from the top of the head down to the eyes; because it's part of the artery in the brain.
If you're using this one, then tie it with a phlebotomist or the myrrh phlebotomist; because it is better than any other, as it isn't a vein and doesn't have a nerve.
"However you must meet with the phlebotomist to receive only the head of the hare and you will find a lesser place; but it shall not harm him if he does not come together with the first blow, so that he may be hit with the phlebotomy afterward.
"However, it will occur to some men when they do not have phlebotomy during the first blow, but it shall not harm them that way.
"About the usefulness of phlebotomy and caution should be taken about it. "The quality of phlebotomy and its accidents from which one must consider to correct oneself.
"First of all, it is necessary to know that phlebotomy must not be administered except for the sake of health and its preservation, and caution against the entry of pain.
"And that phlebotomy should be given to three veins which are in a hand, namely the cephalic vein, and the femoral vein, and the basilar vein. "And that phlebotomy should be given at the beginning of fasting and during sleep, as well as after eating; but not afterwards when signs of repletion appear.
"And that phlebotomy should be given on the first or third day after going three hours without eating.
"However the phlebotomy given to someone on pain is not determined by a set time; but when it was agreed and necessary for that person to have it, either during the night or day, and at all hours of the day and night.
"It is not necessary for children until they reach fourteen years old to have phlebotomy. "A woman must not have phlebotomy before the fourth week or after the seventh week. "A senior (someone aged 60 years and older) must not have phlebotomy.
"Therefore if someone decides to have phlebotomy for whatever reason it is necessary that they cleanse their intestines beforehand with a laxative, so as not to draw from them the excess of waste material harmful to the main veins.
"The patient is not to be cauterized while eating; i.e., he should not vomit after eating a nauseous substance. The patient was not to receive any treatment with the use of urine.
After intercourse, he was to be cauterized with a passion again and again until vomiting, urine, and the flow of the stomach, multiplication of sexual acts, and work, exercise, food, eating, all things that have dissolved the strength from his body or animals.
After considering the subtlety of humors before this thing if blood is thick with food and drink or medicine; If possible for him.
After considering the subtlety of humors before this thing if not prohibited by anything else: or exercise another exercise to make the blood subtle.
And put the cauterization of his in the heart on the third day as we said; and conary to make him vomit all the accidents from animals' bodies that day like distress, anger, fear: and with all the body's accidents such as labor and punishment and supererogation and similar things.
Let him make these present with whom he is accustomed to using from the use of aromas and smells and steam as much as possible.
After he sits in the patient's hands who is higher than the phlebotomy of the ear, after that he pulls his arm out and frightens him with his hand twice or three times. After he stretched the ligament along with correction, then again pulled it once more.
And let the heat be tempered because when there is a difference in stricture or by excessive tightness, it prohibits the flow of blood; and also with softening, that too prevents the course of blood.
After the stricture is done so that his hands frightens at once with the incision and they are felt by sensation.
The phlebotomist takes away the phlebotomy of the patient slowly with a little oil, according to custom.
In order to grasp or hold on with his right hand the thumb of left hand upon that vein whose phlebotomy he desires (to prevent it from escaping), but only if this does not cause injury; otherwise a blow must be delivered to the thumb Because he has taken the vein as if it were a slackened bowstring near to phlebotomy; and on these veins is there fullness of breath (or air); when you place the phlebotomy upon her, she will contract beneath the phlebotomist's hand, and the phlebotomist falls. And should this not occur, then he must deliver another blow to the vein. But if it occurs, immediately it shall be tight, because of that; therefore it is necessary for him who causes the phlebotomy (to do so), in order that he may struggle against all these things.
He released or let go of the phlebotomy. If then the vein is opened by chance from its own fullness (of air), it is beneficial to that one who causes the phlebotomy. And if not, then again another vein must be sought from beneath or above him with a fetter; should the place fail there
If he fails, either by accident or because of weakness, then let him abandon his task on that day; or in two days more. And do not bind the ligature. Fearful indeed is it if the vein should be taken away by frost. Nor shall he enter the chamber of air; that is, the skin pores or venules.
He will try again if he desires phlebotomy.
If the opening is small or the blood flows gently (that is, the quantity of blood drawn must be within certain limits), he will try again from this same vein and on the next day at least; add to his work as little as possible.
And do this with a fetter before the place is opened; for a place must often be sought from phlebotomies that are very poor and many times by different men when phlebotomizing.
If indeed you have found him who has already been phlebotomized (that is, he should not be phlebotomized again), do not try to go over and above him in any way; for this cannot excuse anything on your part. Using olive oil from above puts something on top of it because it cleanses/cleanses blood flow The use of olive oil is better here than any other kind of oil and the rest as well
In all veins of yours where the veins run through, they apply olive oil to remove iron stains and make them bright again, and when it is placed on one spot
The blood becomes thinner and lighter as time passes when it's thick.
If you apply it to a large spot where the veins run close together, and this happens repeatedly especially for those who are not phlebotomists except using that one way opening/pathway, then you put a sponge soaked in water and salt into the spot immediately: you heat it up with warm water as well. And after a while tie it down with a string: because it becomes thinner.
It is necessary that you do this after the blood has left using your own thing and adding something else, or from another source
If after a few days something is left behind in the spot or urine, do not worry, just put something on top of it like aloe or myrrh sellers' extracts, or from mint extract, i.e., burning with warmth and similar things.
Many people get stains in the veins of the basilica.
Therefore you should place your hand on top of it and if there is a lump above that spot press down on the clump: then that stain becomes bad. And so to put something on top of it from what we said earlier. There is no blood in the arteries due to that.
But if you put a lump on him where there was stiffness before it will become loose/loose up. After this care for him with the rest of your cure until he is healed
You have to remove all the blood from everyone according to their strength. And what appears in a bright color on top of the blood.
If the skin is black, it must be removed immediately; if the skin is white, then remove him (the patient) with a razor blade gently and carefully to ensure smoothness of the skin
The skin must be extracted with a single razor blade if he is full and strong; to increase the blood flow of one's body and make it straight forwardly; but for those who are weak, then extract him using an opposite razor blade in order that they may be stronger
The skin must be extracted with the help of veins if he is in a state of thirst; to ensure that it will become narrow and tight: better than any other way because administering blood flow works much better than making a cut or piercing.
The mode of phlebotomy is safe due to the flow of blood; and from the incision of nerves; it's better than any other way because administering a blood flow works much better than through width or length.
If the man preferred to drink while phlebotomy is performed at random intervals; then he must drink before phlebotomy occurs with a moderate amount of warm water which will cause him to sweat; but if the man becomes hot during the process; then extract blood from his veins by three or four of them.
If the man's face is burned; then he will take before phlebotomy a piece of food which has been infused with honey of my kind or with honey mixed with aromatic spices or with honey mixed with an unpleasant smell.
If it is preferred to drink before phlebotomy at random intervals and if there will be a loss of blood as a result; then take water with the help of meat and scented syrup: so that you will breathe through your nostrils, make yourself thin and make a groove for his mouth in order to do this.
If someone prefers to amputate their arm and drink the blood of them quickly; then take the phlebotomy of him who is due to a great deal of evacuation because his power is weak so that he drinks it gradually by the amount of strength in continuous days.
"When he is about to amputate the arm and cleanse its blood with the second lancet, it becomes strong; then let him perform this operation within seven hours or eight days at his first phlebotomy.
"Whoever is about to draw blood from the other side of his body towards him; he must allow himself to be drawn on the second day or at most three days.
"In a person whose body has much blood and is heated up; he sweats and brings on fever. It must be done that some blood be drawn out from him in one vessel, and of quantity many. And the opening may be made as wide as it wants to accid until you are accustomed to all the conditions of phlebotomy: and when your hand is placed upon his chest at the descent of the blood so that it does not fall at once. "Indeed, many times it occurs when the phlebotomist does not know how to do his work and is careless.
"It is not to be done when one has already cleaned the arm and cleanses its blood with the second lancet; since at that time the opening of the vein will become hard, so that it may cause death prematurely or very quickly. "This operation is a bad thing to do; therefore abandon it unless you are second phlebotomist.
"Or else remove the thing that has coagulated from within the opening of the vein and place upon it something dissolved in water. "Or else place on top of that something from a sponge or a towel; and press it lightly until the blood flows.
"If already the thumb is used up, then let go of that one immediately; and do not press it tightly until it stops bleeding.
"If a necessity arises to draw the second blood; and there is no excuse for it, then either place him on top of that one or another arm at once.
"The veins of the forearm are phlebotomized on the Fossa and the Basilica; since they do not penetrate or are occluded because they have been made from them.
The quality of its bloodletting is such that a sick person puts their hand into warm water and holds it until the wound bleeds brightly and clearly.
Then, gently but firmly, it is bound with medium tightness to its surface. Next the bloodletting is performed gradually and sideways, neither longitudinally nor transversely; with a wide opening to avoid pain during bloodletting, and with your phlebotomy tool as you connect it to the hand higher up.
If the loss of blood is forbidden by death or other circumstances, then put your hand into warm water and release the blood to run freely; until you need its removal.
If however you are in a state of illness or old age, then you may excuse yourself from further hand use in warm water. And most importantly, the course of bloodletting is performed in hot water for as long as it takes to achieve its purpose.
The first tool of this kind is superior to all others because it is not dull or heavy in use, and does not tire the hand.
The right hand's bloodletting tool is a gift to those who are left-handed, as it is designed to help them more easily perform the procedure.
The quality of its bloodletting is such that you gently but firmly bind your hand with a cord or your own hand after putting it into warm water until the wound bleeds clearly and strongly to the eye. Then the bloodletting is performed by moving it across the surface. If you are too weak to perform the bloodletting entirely yourself, do not let it harm that particular thing at all.
And continue using your hand with the tool until its purpose is complete and the wound has stopped bleeding brightly and clearly to the eye. The veins of the hand are removed from the flesh by it, as a preparation for bloodletting.
Then put your hand into warm water and release the blood to run freely within that same water until you need its removal. But if you do not put your hand into warm water for this purpose, the blood will coagulate within the wound and prevent further bleeding.
When you take out a certain amount of blood due to necessity, then place over that one oil and salt so as not to be lost or damaged
And similarly, when doing with every branch tightly
From the left hand you take away from blood vessels of necessity; for this is connected to the spleen with veins: and similarly do when doing in phlebotomy that one, as you did it equally on the second
The phlebotomist takes away the blood vessels of necessity; for this is connected to the spleen with veins: and similarly do when doing in phlebotomy that one, as you did it equally on the second
The quality of phlebotomy is such that the phlebotomist introduces an exhausted foot into a warm bath and applies friction above it so as to make them go away: and binds above the joint of the leg with correction. Certainly there is a place at the heel, visible to the foot; and they are drawn out from it on both sides of the leg.
So that phlebotomy is done with more branch and at the heel together; for it is better and safer.
If the phlebotomist does that on the face of the foot then squeeze from beneath those above with the hand to the face of the foot.
You put your phlebotomy as that you will strike her; and there is a phlebotomist Nesius.
If the exit of blood is prohibited then on another foot put his into a warm bath; and let him drain the blood flowing to that one until they are done.
You put one phlebotomist into the first bath; then he does with phlebotomy to the upper ones because there is safety and not danger from him when you drive away in correction as we said.
And similarly, with one foot of another equally.
The place for sciatica is as we said at the heel from the side; it is extended downwardly.
The veins of phlebotomy are painful when they are caused by cold blood
The quality of phlebotomy is such that it becomes weakened by the touch of cold water, and tingles; and to stretch from one heel anchor up to the top of the calcaneum with four fingers, using a long thin needle; for it does not seem until then.
When therefore it seems, then the phlebotomy can be done according to whatever ingenuity you have, or through a transfer; and it is better either to strike with an incision, or to cut off by section. The location of him is hidden among many people
The location of him is hidden among many people If you are unable to see him when he is not hidden among many people; then the phlebotomy must be done by someone else's hand on their back and over their ear as well; and then draw out from their blood in proportion to how much it flows.
After this restriction, put the place of phlebotomy on the skin carefully, and stretch that spot. Then it is healed.
About venipuncture, its use
They are inserted from the arm and from under the ear and from above.
Venipuncture can be done in two ways. With a scratch and the extraction of blood; and another way is venipuncture without a scratch.
This way that does not use a scratch is done in two ways. Or else it can be with fire. Or without the use of fire
The places where venipuncture is done with a scratch and extraction of blood are thirteen in number. The venipuncture that is done at the back of the head is called Alnocrati; and it's below the chin; and the one above the ears, there are two flaps on each side; and in between the eyes, it's under the jaw; and over both elbows, and they are middle to both arms; and above both knees.
A venesection without removing any blood from the vessels by punctures on your skin, and because of this, his virtue did not descend into these, just as it is with venepuncture It should not be administered if you use fire or without fire when there is some sort of astringent that comes from squeezing; until the entire body is drained off completely
If there is a need for venesection due to astringency or customarily so, we administer it at any time from the beginning of menstruation until the end and throughout this period as well as whenever that may be.
This is because from men it happens that when the blood is multiplied in him, until he becomes extracted by venesection of his, with a head injury occurred and death occurs.
And from these it happens that the face had redness and bleeding on its own head, and its neck as well. And from these it happens that the face had itching on his face, forehead, darkness and blindness of the eyes.
And from these it is that the place for venesection was located. And from these, its blood is multiplied. And from these it happens that the taste of his blood was entered into his mouth; either he spits out the tongue or he ejects the blood. And from these, its sleep is multiplied. And from these, he sees his blood and bleeding, and the destruction of it, and those things are similar to this.
Therefore when we need something from these and if it is at the third period of menstruation; then venesection must be done now, after two or three hours have passed.
The venesection of the nape is as follows; because this one causes bleeding on the head and it also goes into the eyes. And it should be that after the removal of all body parts are done.
This is a translation of "this spot is for removing blood from the head.
And if it's too cold to make use of that location when there is mucus present as well. He gets a large amount of bleeding.
And because of this, it's not advisable to use that location if the head is cold and the person has cold sores on their scalp.
If someone stays in proximity with the same face for a long time, it can lead to an injury on that side of the head.
And because of this, it's advisable to remove the hand that is in close proximity with the face as soon as possible and move it downward to avoid injury from the side of the head caused by an overly close grasp.
The use of the Ventosator or the Alkehel is for removing blood from the veins and the arteries, while the use of the Phlebotomia Basilica is used when there are constrictions in the veins; it's also recommended to avoid tools like a fist as they can cause injuries.
It's advisable to push the Venosator with the Alkehel downward if it is placed on the inferior part of the body as this can cause weakness and dizziness.
The use of the Venosator or Alhagdaghim causes accidents on the head and eyes as well as stomach pains; it can also cause perforations in the roots and pain in the teeth.
It's advisable to remove the Venosator quickly lest you cause injury by crushing a blood vessel and stop its flow of blood.
The use of the Venosator under the tongue causes issues with saliva in the mouth as well as with dental hygiene and other similar injuries that may occur from sores or blisters on the lips; it's also advisable to have an alternative location for phlebotomy near both ears where they can be used.
The use of spatulas causes issues with the face and cold temperatures as well as redness on the skin around it; using spatulas is not advisable for phlebotomy purposes.
The use of phlebotomia on the inside of the two thighs and three veins (the Basilica, the veins, and the head) is used to pull blood out quickly from all those places in quick succession; after this they draw minute amounts of blood through larger veins until a full amount of blood has been drawn.
And it is necessary that the Ventosiator not proceed too far with his excision; for although the place where he operates has been stripped of flesh and under it there are veins and arteries.
And a vein that extends above the anus is called an ani (hemorrhoid).
And it is necessary that the Ventosiator proceed only slightly with his excision; for the place where he operates is quite thin and easily torn by a strong force, and there may be serious damage to delicate veins if excessive excision occurs.
The veins are cut with great diminution; for they draw blood from all over the body and cause severe pain in the arms, legs, neck, face (nose), and abdomen; causing menstruation to occur early as well as causing bothor (an abscess near an anal fistula).
However, they weaken the body much and cause death in many people.
The abscess near the anal fistula is very close to that of the veins' excisions.
The quality of the Venosiator's position is as follows: first you should open and heat the veins gently; do not prolong this position too long but rather quickly remove them or move them back to their original location, so that the spirits coming from there will be equal (in terms of quantity) with those going in. Do not repeat this act until the place becomes red and swollen; then you should make a significant excision followed by frequent excisions. Then consider the disposition of the body.
For one who is thin and delicate should be operated on only once; so that he won't get an ulcer.
And the Venosiator should proceed with excision by increasing its severity and depth; but he must heat up the vein gently so that it is easily removed or moved back into position using a gentle grip on the vein while pulling out slowly.
If there is much blood in the veins, then you should operate on him twice. In very subtle incision of blood, and its opening; And in the second indeed most exquisite purifications of great amount of blood
If the blood is foul tasting, then let there be a third incision; so that it may bring about an end to things.
And when we wish to quickly or more rapidly draw out the blood, one incision is sufficient for us. If we want multiple purifications of great quantity of blood, then let there be an incision with many incisions.
And if we measure the blood to be thick, then let there be an incision with deep purifications; and when it comes to a certain depth of purification, it is necessary that the incision has reached its end, because the depth of the skin cuts off.
What should be administered from oils at the position of the ventricles; and what should be tasted?
To one whose skin is thick and hard and narrow pores; it is necessary that the areas of the ventricles be rubbed with oils in a gentle way, soft, fast. If this is done during the time of eating, then let olive oil mixed with honey or with oil from the tonsils be tasted gently.
And if this is done during the time of drinking; then let nectar or wine be tasted mixed with honey or with oil from lilies and rosemary, just like these others.
If the oil is too thick and cold; then let bitter oil or wine from balsam be tasted mixed with honey or with oil from aloes, just like these others.
If the oil being tasted is of great quantity and very tender; then it is necessary that there be prevented from using an oil to rub with, and afterwards to rinse the areas of the ventricles gently with rose water or cold water or sun-warmed water or water from cucurbits, or water from purslane.
That one whose blood is of much moisture, will be able to rub the oils gently with vinegar or water from myrtle and honey; just like these others.
"When the excess of bile becomes thick and heavy, it should be treated with wine or old vinegar, or by decoction of senna (a powdered laxative), or with a mixture of these.
"And it should also be treated by vomiting with vinegar or senna powder, or given after exiting the bath to cool and then again after a certain interval (two hours).
"Nor is it desirable that anyone fall asleep immediately after emesis.
"What should be done to regulate the vomiting, or to stop bleeding before vomiting?
"After this should be considered first, whether the vomiting is choleric (due to bad blood and inflammation) or phlegmatic (due to cold and dampness), in order to stop the bleeding and inflammation, one must apply cold remedies such as vinegar, lettuce, etc., just like powdered mustard. And also for epilepsy with vinegar, lettuce, and other similar remedies.
"And afterwards the vomiting should be treated by eating food that is light on stomach, such as eggs or lean meat, and then with astringent drinks, just like those mentioned before.
"And to the one who has a cold stomach should drink syrups made from honey or almonds, or those made with the bark of asclepias (a plant), and also with aromatic wine which is in between old and new, so that he may eat sparingly. "And afterwards the vomiting should be treated by eating food that is light on stomach, such as eggs or lean meat, and then with bitter drinks (which were mentioned before), just like those made from Columb's flowers.
"It is also desirable that the amount of drinking after vomiting and bleeding should be more than food, so as to prevent swelling in the hands and feet, or medicines made from sea-bass (fish), namely muscaria or alesselith before vomiting, and before bleeding, or afterwards, so as to soothe and thin blood. "It is not desirable that they should be warmed with hot drink after vomiting.
Without scarification The veins that are without scarification when placed upon the ear, and wiped with a sponge, and poulticed (pressed) in, and near the navel, and over the root of the finger, and places on the face; because these members did not endure scarification at all above themselves.
They are not sought through them unless a touch from the member of blood to the body is made; thus we placed the vein upon the breasts during menstruation, and flow of blood into the navel We put them on so that we might pour upon them cold and dampness from the member; thus we placed the veins over the navel. Indeed it makes the member more slack and releases the cold, but disperses the pain because it has resolved this wetness.
They are placed upon the veins when they occur due to a poultice, or stone The force of its attraction opens up the hair growth (poultice), or removes the stone from its place.
And similarly when placed upon the ear and wiped with a sponge during wetness it does both of these things.
The veins of Venus are administered with water accompanied by a single cut (poultice). And sometimes when they are administered with fire.
And sometimes when they are administered with hot water during menstruation; and that is how the vein is made big or small, it can be either hot water alone (such as heated herbs), or water mixed with heated herbs.
The administration of the veins of Venus with fire.
The size of the opening through which it goes into and comes out is determined by how we formed it; its quantity in depth should be half an inch long; and in the side where it is located (near the middle), a small hole must be made, so that there will not be pain at its place upon itself. And also for passing from above to below through this vein, either by air or iron, when it is placed with fire.
"Now it is a large vessel which has been opened up, greater than what we could expect and less only than that one; according to the skill and age of him who uses it.
"The vessels of children are different from those used by youths; they are thinner than those used by men and larger than those used by the elderly.
"The quality of opening this vessel with fire is to make an incision on the skin more accurately or to light a small flame from a wick; and place it over a medium-sized flame that should be at the center of use in order to adjust the heat of the fire so as not to burn the body if it's used poorly.
"Then place it over the skin; and put your finger above the opening that I mentioned until we hold the vessel in our hands; when we touch it, we withdraw our finger and it goes out of the opening quickly.
"Afterwards, apply the flame according to its own nature, and repeat her if she becomes inflamed.
"The vessel used for urine administration with water is not a urethral one; and it's not administered unless water is applied to it and placed over the skin.
"And this is its form.
"The bladder (ventosa) used for large quantities of water is larger and better than the one used for smaller amounts.
Suspension of blood vessels
"Blood vessels are not administered with many of them, except when the position of the openings is impossible for them due to their small size, like the lips and tongue. "Or by removing the member from the flesh as if it were a finger or nose, and similar things are done to them.
"The quality of using these is that the veins from blood vessels in water will be sweet and those from rotten water are bitter.
"They then are removed at daybreak and bedtime in sweet waters until they become weak, but nothing remains in their veins. The body must first be evacuated with phlebotomy and followed by the use of a pessary Next remove the skin from the limb until it is numb They are placed over the top
Once it is applied and removed, if there was no success then the mouth must be washed with vinegar. Afterwards much water is used to wash away any remaining blood
If the flow of blood continues after a cut to the vein, then you must apply a cold compress over it and remove any residual blood.
If the bleeding increases then apply pressure with a tourniquet or use glass splints and do so until the bleeding has stopped.
Or place weights over the wound to press it down and remove them when the cloth remains stuck on the site until the bleeding has stopped.
If a change of tourniquet is needed then replace it if possible.
If the bleeding cannot be stopped with a tourniquet or other means, then wash away any recent blood from that site. Or if there is something coming out of the wound at this point, wash it immediately to prevent infection. Afterwards they are removed when they sense anything coming from the blood so that they can be removed promptly.
When it is time to stop bleeding then apply pressure over them with something like a tourniquet or salt and let them fall immediately.
This chapter is also very important for the practice of medicine and includes healing fractures, dislocations in bones.
Beware sons of mine because many doctors and wise men have learned from this chapter which was never read by the ancients nor has ever been written down in their books.
For this reason a mode is suitable for us as it has been introduced by scholars into our territory I never used it and was not proficient in it; however, after reading many ancient books and studying hard with their scholars, I acquired the knowledge from them
Then, through experimentation and study, I gradually gained proficiency in that mode.
I have described to you everything that my knowledge contained; and after the completion of my experiment, which I had shown to you before, I handed it over to you through the occupation of elongation [the act of making longer], and afterwards shortened it through the act of abbreviation [the act of making shorter]. And I showed you how I formed many forms from the shapes used in that mode, when added with declination; just as I had done in two previous chapters.
Chapter 2
It is fitting that we speak at the beginning of this chapter on eloquence, and sums of sermons; as well as chapters which are addressed to those who are first taught in this noble craft: namely you, and the prompt ones among them; so they may know or learn how to practice this noble art with their own abilities.
I say that when a fracture or dislocation occurs to him; then it is fitting to seek out the first-aiders who are in proximity by his side at the time of this accident: to bleed and drain him if possible, as well as give him two waters separately, unless any prohibition is given. If it concerns an infant from those who are young, or a decrepit old man; or because of excessive heat or cold that has affected him.
After that there is a need for food of his own; and cold drinks, and fat foods; and drink prohibition [of alcohol]; and large amounts of meat; as well as replenishing with blood, from any available food. "When you are completely secure in your operation and the material to the member has not been affected by fluid effusion; then it will be healed through its own natural course, according to his custom.
"If the mouth is broken and needs to be restored, then it should receive much nourishment from foods rich in oil, salt, vinegar, which are beneficial for soothing its dryness; as if meals were cooked with water, wine, and cheese, bread, fish, eggs, cheese, and butter, until one feels satisfied. "With this regimen the healing of a fracture will be better.
"You know that bones broken when they are in the first youth or old age and weakness cannot continue to be maintained and consoled according to their nature forever due to the dehydration of their members; but they will be strengthened and continued as if they were those of a child.
"However nature has attached something similar to the mouth broken from all parts which contains thickness so that it remains and tightens itself until they return to their original firmness; as if meals were cooked with water, wine, cheese, bread, fish, eggs, cheese, butter, etc., due to this cause we must feed the patient food rich in fat and dryness.
"You know that the species of fractures are different according to the diversity of members; for example, a fracture of the leg is different from a fracture of the head or chest or back bones; and similarly all other limbs also have their own unique species. And I come with the remembrance of every kind of fracture being presented in its separate chapter. "The species of fractures within themselves are different as well.
"Because it is a broken fracture over the stars. "And sometimes there was a fracture of his bones according to their length; and the fractures were due to blows or kicks from fists or feet; that is, stars [that is, bruises] and additional scratches resulting, as are found on a comb when it is used for writing. "And not due to kicks or blows from the head; and there was also a fracture due to striking with an elbow, or fracturing of any kind.
"And all the art and skill that is necessary to restore him, according to which he cannot remember [the restoration procedure], must be clearly specified in his places.
"From that [procedure for restoring a fracture] by which one knows how to treat fractures of bones; there is the tortuosity of his case, and its prominence; and an appearance of it on his sense [i.e., where he can feel the pain]; and also a sound from him when you compress him with your hand.
"Therefore if there is no tortuosity in the place to be treated [i.e., where you can feel his pain], neither a sound from your touch with fingers or agitation; nor did he have much pain when you compressed him, then it was not that fracture but rather perhaps there was tortuosity of bone, or a little fissure.
"You know that if it curves and splits into two parts, except for the blows or kicks from fists or feet; but all the rest of its parts are to be released by you.
"If you hit him with a cold spit [i.e., apply ice], then release him in several days until he is quiet. "Then restore him according to whatever way of gentleness and skill you can.
"You know that the restoration [of his bones] and its matching is easier than with them where blows occur.
"Then restore him according to what you do not remember from him.
The member being fractured must be extended with two parts by means of the hand if it is a hand, or through the foot if it is a leg; and either with your own hand if the member itself is intact (i.e., not fractured), or else with two pieces, or with two hands working together to extend the part that has been divided into two pieces.
Place your hand or foot firmly on the member that has been divided into two pieces in a manner consistent with its natural shape until both parts are extended: then, using all of your strength and skill, you will pull these additions toward each other in any way you can manage within those boundaries; moreover, apply one bone from among your pair to your colleague's so as to achieve the best result.
When the time comes and you are able to grasp it with both hands. If therefore something different should occur there, correct it according to the measure of your strength.
With utmost extension and strongest compression, as many strong men do; so too you must extend this member. For many a time they strike with their hand or foot to the same degree of coldness and compression; thus we see it from their operations too often.
Afterwards apply the joint to its proper place, and perform the necessary cut and cutting motion; then firmly hold it with your hands or foot while making a tight grip on its member, and relax and soothe it until its firmness is restored; and gently draw the weak one over onto itself as well. And hold tight to it so that it may not slip in the time of your strongest blows; and sleep on its restoration to you, and your agitation, and under your own ejection, using all of your strength at last. And that so it may not be in a position with the pain where it follows, but rather you will hold it securely in hand or foot. This is because when it feels the positions of its member painful or injury-causing then you must move it to another place that does not feel pain or hurt in order to continue with your work.
"If he lies down on it such that its position is equal to his own, straight; so that it does not get tangled up with any twists when restored.
The quality of the fractured member's structure.
Alas, when broken members differ in size and shape from one another, and their magnitude.
Therefore let it be wrapped with soft, tender clothes so that the fingers do not get tangled up when they are restored. However if one or more of them is large as a thigh or an arm, let it be wrapped with broad, strong clothes so that the fingers do not get tangled up when they are restored.
Since the long sinew has connected the large member and held it tight from all parts equally so that no part could become injured through its connection with another.
After you had removed the bandage from his position and placed it on the spot of the fracture with gentle touch Then begin wrapping the sinew around that part of his fracture with three or four movements so as to hold it and your hand together more firmly with the ligament
Then turn around and wrap him over to the upper part of his fracture and hold it with less force than before so that you may have restored the broken place. Then stretch out with him wrapped around as before and make it soft gently until you have restored the large part of his body to health.
Then take another bandage and wrap it around again so that he may be wrapped up with bandages on either side of the broken place Then turn around and wrap him over to lower part of his fracture. The operation of your bandage should be with wrapping it gently and making him soft just as we have said before for the upper part of his body.
Then put between the bandages or some other cloth with which you can equalize the twists of his fracture if there are any; otherwise do not put anything on it.
"Another wound after this one. After the wounds have been treated equally and quickly as possible, if there is no swelling at the wound site or inflammation caused by frostbite (neither of which are present), apply cold water for cooling and numbing effect.
If there is swelling or frostbite (neither of which are present), then apply something to reduce the swelling and apply cold water for numbing effect afterward. If it does not help within a few days, remove it. "After another wound...
The wounds should be dressed evenly and skillfully according to their type - either with gauze strips from bandages, or with wood where there are no other materials available; the strips of cloth must fit tightly around each wound so that all wounds have equal fullness and shape as they need it.
However, it is necessary that the bandage placed over this treated wound should be larger and wider than all other wounds - its length should match to some extent with the size of both hands taken together in terms of their respective lengths and widths.
"After another wound... After another wound, tie it with the same bandage as before and securely - its tightness should be greater than the tightness of any other bandage after this first one; if there is more length to the fracture then there will also be more length added by tight bandage, but less width (stricture) lost.
The middle strip should have equal fullness and subtlety while being soft from linen.
If the strips are thick, like those tied by strong stitches of linen cords that were twisted in making them - such an error is great, because when these strips come off it loses its fullness and quality.
The middle strip will not match the second time - this is because you cannot adjust their tightness with these strips as they were before.
It should not be less than one finger's width between all wounds.
If a limb is injured after dressing the wounds and there was some slipping out of bandage from one or both hands - then apply something soft, like linen cloth for example, to keep it on until nothing more falls off.
When a fracture occurs with an injury and disruption of the cut, I recall [the necessary steps] according to my experience
You also know that every member fractured must be treated right away with splints on the first day. This is because when the member is large it's not advisable to put a splint on top of them unless at least 5 days have passed or up to 7 if you prefer for safety reasons and you want to ensure that they are warmed up properly after removing the splint.
And this is how splints were used by earlier practitioners who placed them on top of fractures and dislocations.
The common method of splinting is to place them on multiple occasions over a period of time, especially for women and children because it helps prevent heat or cold from getting onto the area that was injured.
And it is important to ensure that the splint is not too tight and that there are no sharp edges where you can hit your skin when moving the arm or leg; this means making sure to use a soft splint that won't cause harm even if someone accidentally bumps into it, ensuring it fits well without being so loose as to slip off easily. Then use it.
Another way of splinting is for fractures, dislocations and twists/sprains. First add aloe vera and marshmallow root; then add a mixture of laurel leaves, mugwort and enulae; next add sugar mixed with myrrh of various kinds to flavour it; after that mix in the juice from aloes with water; or use almond oil if the splinting is too hot. Then use this splint. This splint is good for restoring broken bones and making people sit up again after being laid down
Another way of splinting that also covers fractures and twists. First mix aloe vera and marshmallow root; then add a mixture of laurel leaves, mugwort and enulae; next add sugar mixed with myrrh in various kinds to flavor it; after that mix the juice from aloes with water or use almond oil if needed; finally administer this splint for use.
modus for cutting and separating bones, from their places they are; to heal the pain caused by accidents with a bone saw, and fractures Burn the wool that has been spoiled (damaged), and immerse it in vinegar; then make a decoction of olive oil to put over the place
The bone saw (emplastron) is not useful for restoring health, but it's a good thing in soothing the heated pains; and it will expel pain truly
The modus for setting bones Burn the spoiled wool; and burn the wool of the sheep-shearer, with both; everything else, make an implastron from it.
The modus for abbreviating the bone saw and administering to the healing of fractures in bones; when you are left with a resolution after the soothing. Recipe for the high roots and chamomile; and flowers of the violet, and saffron herb; from all things one share is taken away; then everything else, they are made to be mixed with wine if there is not a heated membrane
If the membrane is overheated, then mix it with humid water or just with water and eat it.
Another modus for the bone saw (emplastron), stronger than this first one; when a heated pain is caused by an accident at the time of healing of members. Recipe for the high roots and semen lilies, and balsam of Gilead, and mallow leaves; from all things one share is taken away; then everything else, they are made to be mixed with salt water or sweet water or wine. Everything this (the implastron) according to the heat of the members and his calm heat is done.
Hippocrates said nothing in his book (the Corpus of Medicine) that a bone saw should be put on the broken member for healing, except for cauterization made from coal and oil; nothing else was written; but he instructed, so it might serve as an intermediary between grossness and subtlety.
"However it should be noted that when there is a fracture near the restoration of the part, as with myrrh and aloes wood, they too need to be applied.
The manner in which plasters are used for healing and relieving pain This recipe includes myrrh, and rue, hairs of the human body including finger and toe nails, salt, and others; they are to be applied, rubbed in, and mixed together into a plaster for healing purposes.
The quantity according to which it is appropriate so that the ligature can be maintained, then loosened up, and is thus considered when it does not happen from a weak pain or itchiness; it is not resolved for several days unless he happens to be injured in his mouth. If there is a itchiness or pain that occurs at the time of application; then apply immediately, and loosen it up when necessary with a warm cloth soaked in water.
If there is a itchiness or pain that occurs at the time of application; then apply immediately, and loosen it up when necessary with a warm cloth soaked in water. After this let the member rest for one hour. After this apply a hot cloth soaked with vinegar and oil or with olive oil to it at night; let one ligature be applied over the member during the night so that it is warmed up by another ligature in a warm bath; then the swelling will cease, and the pain of him who has been injured.
After this apply a small ligature; and do not tighten with your own constriction first, but gradually ease into it so that he is healed.
If you are aware of any pain or swelling that occurred before the application, then apply another ligature and tighten just as you did initially.
If nothing else occurred to the member from what we mentioned above; then do not reapply it unless three days or four days or five days or seven days have passed. When one day of fasting has passed and you have been able to eat until the members are restored as we advised, unless a fracture occurs while eating or during drinking and it is necessary for coagulation of the flesh above that: add also then in stricture more than your first stricture completely; and also add in the swelling of food to some extent according to what preceded his recollection.
If you know that the place for fracture has already been prepared and it is necessary to add more than was advised before a fracture occurs; then remember that nutrition must be forbidden from being brought in there. Therefore, let him be immersed with hot water around all the vessels where he is present and may this last for three days, and pray for a more severe stricture.
Therefore, let it follow [the operation] to the member of nutrition either to be healed or later on.
However those who restore a member after fracture of the vessels by drinking another way when it is not restored initially as advised, according to what they must do and are restored according to tortuosity: this error from their operation and great fear; if there was a rectum, these were recorded in their books, and performed with him.
And I did not see any of their question in that one, but I thought it was right so that this would not be done.
Of the fracture in the head
Fractures are of different kinds and shapes; their causes are distinguished from them.
Of the fracture that occurs from impact with a blow; and the blow produces a complete wound up to the nose as far as it goes under the bone just like an axe strikes wood, so this is called these types of fractures Axial.
Or a blow to some bone strikes the face of it and does not penetrate down until its extreme; this is called these types of fractures Kalakian, that is, the complete fracture.
"The wound is either large and deep, or small.
"Also from the fracture is known as the extent of it; whether it is a cut or tear, and the reason for this is striking with stone.
"This fracture is also known as one that penetrates and becomes a tear, which occurs under bone; or on the face of bones; it's either large or small.
"Also from the fracture is known as one that occurs in the bone with subtlety of a hair; and it's called this kind of fracture 'species fracturae Capillarise'.
"Also from that is a fracture, which occurs by the strike of stone, and they are similar to those who enter into the bone in order to reach the inside; so that it happens at once; just as when a blow falls upon them by the force of air, and a part of theirs enters into the inside.
"Indeed, that is it most certainly in the hands of the bones of the children; just as are the heads of the children.
"There will be for all these species of fractures a separate category and I'll be with the memory of that whole one into his place.
"We all know these species of fractures through the observation on her and the examination of them with their strings, and the removal of the corrupted tools which are above them.
"The species 'Capillarise' is known through this; it is detected above the nose and removed, and it is polished above him with soot; for indeed a black fracture appears.
"In the treatment of fractures, consider first and foremost the accidents to him; if you see from the accidents what is clearly apparent above fear; just as a man's cholera and extension, and mis-take intellects, and cut off their voices, and syncopia, and acute fever, and egress of eyes, and reddening of them; and similar things from accidents in many dispositions, not healing afar away: and if you see that there is no accident causing to you, and hope for salvation, then begin the treatment of him.
When a wound is first opened up and starts bleeding, you need to study the abcess with great care every six days until it heals completely
And if the abscess is formed on a day when we are sick, then you must remove the pus before it becomes corrupted under the bone and any accidents which happen to us should be treated separately
If a bone is broken and has reached the skin, you need to attack it with a knife, remove any loose or attached parts separately.
And you should remove the head of the ulcer by any method that is possible for you, and in accordance with its shape, and what is above a sick person.
If an abscess occurs as a result of a blood clot or cold frostbite on your bones, then apply something appropriate to it immediately. And if the abscess is caused by putting fat on the ulcer and hot oil, then let it rest until the frostbite has subsided and there are no more bleeding issues. Then begin with the treatment of the bone and the removal of the abscess.
This will be done according to one of two methods.
The first way is to cut off the bone with a very sharp knife and remove it from there.
Another method after removing the bones closer to that location, which will leave an incision as its shape.
And then you should apply another knife further away and also according to it.
The second way is to have a different number of incisors next to you and some are wider than others, while some are smaller, all of them should be sharp enough that they can cut through flesh easily, but not the head, so it can remove the bone cleanly without cutting into it too much.
If the bone is very hard to cut through, you should first make an incision around it before applying the knife with a different name for incisors which do not penetrate deep: and these ones are not called so unless they reach all the way up to that thing under its head, because the Terebra has a round tip above that part of its head in a shape similar to a circle but cannot submerge into flesh or pierce through it.
To you it was granted that you might receive from these Terebris a great number of them each one of which by cutting into the quantity of spit bones should come to be present for you all Crane of Terebrum: whose extremity and acute quantity in length and breadth is according to the amount of spit bones of those cranes.
And this is the form of three holes of Terebrums or Trepanos
The quality of perforating into the broken bone is this: that you put a Terebrum upon your mouth and keep on pulling it with your fingers until you know that your mouth has been penetrated. Then exchange the Terebrum for another place and put something which is between every hole in the quantity of the breadth of the radius or around that.
Then strike with the Incisors what is between every hole out of bone and do that subtly as you can above it from the limit of breadth or around that like we said until you open your mouth either by your hand or by another instrument which you have put to this: just like the teeth, and the small holes.
It is necessary that you use every caution not to touch the Terebrum or Incisor anything from the sheaths.
When you have finished with the perforating and separated from the sheath if it was continuous with that and removed him you must know how to pull off his remaining part of the bone with another instrument like an Incisor. Nevertheless, be sure to have them thin and subtle more than others' Incisors.
If there is something left from the bones by a little bit and the teeth you take that with ease along with what is at your place from instruments. Afterwards take care of the wound after this with linctuses and ointments which we have spoken about.
Another method of surgery is easy to do but it has the fear associated with it because what said Galen and was praised by him greatly: this is his saying. First of all, you must detach the broken part from its place using your fingers or some other instrument to isolate it; then after having isolated this part and placed it under that end (of the lens) of the incision on the hand holding the fingers, you will have made a complete detachment with precision.
The lens part itself is not cut: but the sharp edge of it, facing outwards and directed to both sides of its width as you see fit, will be placed with a blunt end against the object it strikes acutely.
Then, when you have detached the broken part and placed it under that end of the incision on your hand holding the fingers, you will make a complete detachment with ease; so to say, by means of a small blow against this very incision made gently without contact or touch of any kind upon the object which strikes violently: but striking back quickly after it has struck.
And if the physician were a more skilled man and knew it well, he would not be sleeping; but then staying in such place with his finger or some other instrument, when he has detached that part and placed it under that end of the incision on your hand holding the fingers, you will have made an easy detachment from him as easily. It will be released without any trouble or fear.
But if the fracture of your fingers does not reach all the way through to the bone and that which is detached from the bone has a rough face: then you should strive for its roughness (or asperity) in order that it may be removed by those blunt instruments with which you have prepared so many numbers, amounts, quantities. So when you will have done this operation on your hand holding the fingers, you must break and cut off that part from bone and shape it as you were able to administer it most conveniently and rightly into whatever place is convenient for them according to what was done by the operation; then do fracture its face or form of it. So you must administer with your reason as first and foremost using your fingers more, then applying the blunt instruments which are more suitable for them. Then you will use after that a more subtle instrument of it.
So you must administer with your reason as first and foremost using your fingers more, then applying the blunt instruments which are more suitable for them. Then you will use after that a more subtle instrument of it. Until no further harm is done by doing it in accordance with its continuous nature until having emptied them for administration and handling of the most subtle of all
In wounds that remain after removing hair and breaking them gently, it is necessary for you to administer the remedy in order to rectify his condition according to what was done when he took [the medicine]
And there is that which cannot be hidden from everyone who has made any kind of study in this art and remained over what we have written down and demonstrated in the large fractures.
If the loin is detected and you are to take it out when you have removed its os: then it is necessary for you to gather up the loin according to their quantity of wounds, and lower it into rose oil, and place it over the opening of the wound. Then take another loin or three of them and lower them into wine and rose oil as well, and place them over the first loin; and so do this with greater ease than that on it, in order to avoid any harm being done
Then administer the ligature over it; and do not bind it, unless according to how much of a wound holds onto it; and loosen it with this care one day or two days until six are securely bound from above. After that, loosen it and administer remedies with those which are in excess of dryness; such as the roots of mallow, flour of herbs, and ashes of turpentine, and aristolochia, and similar to them: and so you will do from these medicines more use than what is done over the wound just like the scab.
In every one of them administer every medicine whose property it has so as to stop and not cut. So that your skill may be used well so that the wound becomes clear; and neither shall there be any unclean odors from unguents or foulness.
So that your skill may be used well so that the wound becomes clear; and neither shall there be any unclean odors from unguents or foulness. Neither should you allow the wound to be gathered together on every part; for when it is gathered upon the loin of the brain, it corrupts him and putrifies him, and causes him to fall upon the sick after such great malice: and now he has fallen into the scalp when his mouth is opened up, particularly when he neglects his care, a black spot on its surface occurs.
Therefore, if they occur to a sick person, you know that it is harmful because of its proximity
If the person is not burned but by medicine placed on top of them and it works as a remedy for that person's illness: then you must take one part from honey mixed with three parts olive oil and wrap a linen cloth around your head with this mixture After placing it on the siphon (a type of medical instrument used in ancient medicine), you should then apply care to him as best you can until he is cured.
In case of a break in the restoration process
You know that the nose breaks in two pieces when only two of its upper parts are broken at once or if one piece of each is broken. So because he has two bones: one below which is cartilaginous and cannot be broken, and another above which can cause damage to him through injury and tortuosity and simitas (not sure what this last term means).
If one of its two pieces is broken, then you must insert your finger into the nostril and with that finger tap on it to break up the bone as much as possible so it fits over her own natural shape. And do this gently with art So you don't cause any more harm through your operation on him with pain.
If it is broken in the upper part of the nose and cannot be reached with your finger: then you must extend the fingers as far apart as possible to where there is a small amount of swelling.
If both pieces are broken too and the restoration process should be done within a day after the fracture if possible. And if not then on the seventh or tenth day at a peaceful location you will have to do so with warm towels
After placing it into the nostril with a linen cloth if one piece is broken or two pieces are broken and there should be as much swelling of that size which fits through the nostril.
"Some restorers of old said that a supply of linen should be abundant and changeable every day. "For this I do not understand you; it seems necessary to me that linen be abundant and changeable with egg-white. After removing the linen, the mouth is opened up and the cartilage is released from its bonds.
And sometimes a feather from the breast of an egg is introduced into the nostril's niche; after that, when it is gently placed upon this same soft membrane: and so it is, that in this manner she holds with great force the fracture of the nose, preventing it not to be hindered by inspiration.
And this is not necessary. If you wish so, do that; and if you wish so, do the linen.
If while you are working on a warm instrument the nostrils become blocked by cold, or with fat or with oil, or through a mixture of these three things;
If this does not happen while working on a warm instrument, then it is necessary that you apply the mixture of flour and egg-white, and press upon him with softened cheese. After placing this over his head, do not allow any of these things to come near the nostrils.
If this causes a fracture of the bones or loosening of them, then it is necessary that you cut away from above what remains after these things are broken, and remove him with the instruments which sustain him apart from those things. Then take your scissors, and care for that which is made, and strengthen him with the soft things or ointment.
If this happens between the nostrils, then it is necessary that you care for him with the linen; and administer the ointment from lead until he becomes healed.
On the restoration of the lower jaw when broken off.
When the lower jaw is broken off and its fracture was not with the breaking-off of the nose; if only a portion of it was broken away from him so that he does not fall apart into two pieces, but he should be pressed inward: then knowledge to him becomes easy.
"If there is a fracture in the right side of his mouth," you must insert your left index finger into the opening of the mouth; similarly if the fracture is on the left side of the mandible, then put it by inserting your right hand.
"If the mandible is separated by fracture into two parts," you should administer an extraction with both hands on both sides in accordance with correctness until there is equality of position.
"If the teeth are injured by a movement or breakage," you should pull out those from which they can be removed with a dental floss, or an implement. Then apply a ligature over the fractured mandible. "Then place over it two doubled strips of cloth and one large starched strip; or if you lack them, make the skin of your hand equal to the length of the mandible.
"Then tie it over after preparing the ligature as given to you; and apply its application until it is not destroyed; and give him a spoonful of his medicine in ease.
"If you find that something has changed in the figure or manner," then come quickly and give him to eat a third time. "Then correct what has been altered from it; and pull him out of the meal with a spoon after straining the broth or liquid, using a linen cloth if you have one, otherwise use flour.
"While this is kept over it and not altered by the disposition of his limbs; then remove him to eat until he becomes well or as much as possible. "It must be tied many times in three seven days.
"If it occurs to him a cold foot while he is eating," then give that which we have said many times after his meal until the cold foot departs.
"And if there is a fracture along with vomiting, consider this. The severed limb is either useless or can be of little use; therefore, apply this remedy to it so that you will be able to remove the bone from its joint with a knife as before.
If the artery is very narrow, then stretch it out using the phlebotomist in proportion to your need for this purpose.
Then when you have removed the satage and nothing remains from them, stretch out the artery if it is broad; but if not, place something over it that fits into this opening, so that it may be restored to its proper state.
After the fracture of the phalanges.
Certainly the sixth phalange is often broken off from the anterior part by the arm; and its fracture takes one of three forms.
Or it may be broken off separately from two parts, apart from the cause that is usually found in its joint; and this makes restoration of it easier
Thus if a satage falls on the bone; and this makes restoration more difficult.
Or there may be a fracture with a tear, when some injury to the flesh is inflicted at the same time
And when there is a fracture with no tear present, you should have two surgeons perform the operation; one holds up the phalanges that are broken off and the other extends from below to above part of it.
Then if your fingers are equally broken, until its form is made equal to what it should be; and this should not exceed the extent of its ability, nor diminish its compactness
If the fingers are extended further than this, then you should put a small ball of wool or cloth beneath it; and its size should be according to your need for this purpose; extend and hold the phalanges up with one hand, and use the other hand to stretch and pull back the shoulder part.
If you are unable to pull the phalanges of the hand outward; because it has been forced deep inside; then put something beneath his arm that is medium in size and press down on one of its fingers with your other finger so that he may open his mouth as before; after this rectify the fracture, making it equal to both of yours.
If you hear a saw sound from a cleaver, and it stops; then you should remove the bone attached to it by means of that cleaver, so as to get hold of the bone with ease
If a saw is stuck on the bone; then get it out by making an incision through that saw with one of the saws you prepared for this purpose and once you have grasped the saw from the cleaver [saw], if it's made of wood or iron. And here is how to do it
The cochlea should be filled in a patient who does not have fistula (leak).
Its length is proportional to the depth it reaches through the bones and fullness of its passage. The length of your incision should also be according to what you can reach during surgery.
It has two ends; one end is broad and the other narrow
If you disrupted the bone that you removed by the cleaver; then it is broad and secured with sutures at its narrow end; so make two holes in the bone with a saw, together with a suture.
If it's a small disruption or if you do not need sutures; then make an incision with a saw and open the hole accordingly to the size of the cut.
If you have used a hot oil bath; then pour wine and vinegar on it, and put that above it.
When the narrow end of a bone is without an opening and without being cut; then you should place something above its form that has been made from flour mixed with egg white. And put a linen cloth on it. Then place the sphere under its neck if there is an indentation there. Then take the sickle [blade of a scythe] that the Saracens use which is long and broad; its width will be one palm's breadth or around it. And then place two layers on top of the linen cloth and put a bandage above that. "Then take a small plate and measure its width by measuring with three fingers; its length will be similar. "After that, put the plate on cloth. "After that, place it (the plate) where the falling object had fallen and its location was known. "Then place it over the fracture in such a way as to be removed by the removal of one part and the support provided; then put it on top of his head with both hands, and supporting him with gentle strength from below while supporting him with weakness from above; lower it completely so that nothing is left except for its broken parts. And you will see how when a straight line holds together two straight lines, this should also hold together the fractured part in order to fix it. "So that he may be able every day to support himself as much as possible. "Because the ligment was relaxed and you could remove it; then correct that thing and tie back the ligment.
"Then place him with one hand under his back and put the other hand next to it on his chest; put one arm below his ribs when he is sleeping at night so that you can support him as an assistant. "Therefore, a fractured elbow should be treated through the elevation of the arm.
"Or tie both hands around his neck and do not break loose unless the accident happened by a fall or from another person; for up to 12 days.
"Then remove the plaster if you see that its face is directed towards it. "And add to it when necessary and remove it once healed; until restored and coagulated.
"And the fractured elbow is held together with a ligment for up to 120 days; and sometimes it happens among people.
"Of the restoration of fractures (of bones).
"A rare fracture occurs to the spatula and it happens at its side; except for its margins (edges).
When it is cut from there a cut occurs at the middle of its, and is not known except by touch; then according to which part of its figure the separation is made And move it over the natural figure with all ingenuity, which is possible for you
Then place it on top of the cleaned skin with a sponge and lye, and put it over as if from another cloth. Then place it on top of the prepared surface with a narrow spatula according to its length and the size of the entire spatula, either greater or less than this one.
If the surface below is not suitable for use with this spatula, then you should bring it to an equal size as if using another spatula after spreading some lye on it.
Then spread with the longest and narrowest part of its length, and with the firmness of its spatula until it is not removed from its place.
And consider the ligaments every day. Whenever it weakens, you should tighten it and place the spatula on top of its healthy side if removed from its place; then rest it over its long side as before.
The spatula will be restored within twenty days or within one hundred and twenty days.
When this number is complete, then tie it securely; you are safe. This is from the bones whose community cannot be trusted or solved by them.
If it comes out of a bone and bites under its own flesh then place it on top of itself and remove it. And do what we said about the fracture of a thigh bone from the pain of heated irons if you encounter something while removing it.
Of the restoration of the shoulder bone's fracture.
The breastbone sometimes breaks in its middle and rarely happens to that one. Its extremities are the most likely to break from accidents with them.
"When his middle bone is broken and drops downward towards the inferior position, causing him great pain in his back area; with difficulty in walking upright, and therefore he may lose blood or die from a fractured spine. And if this occurs without consciousness returning, then surgery must be performed to allow him to lie on his back again.
"Then his humerus and collarbones must be straightened out as much as possible towards the two sides or elbows with hands: and by skillful manipulation of them to find a position that is comfortable for him so he may resume normal use again.
"Then he must place a plaster on top of him to cover his wounds and put another plate above the first one so it covers all his wounds: or use bandages soaked with salt water or vinegar as well. "Then the surgeon must wrap her around his broken limb so it does not move at all; and after applying a bandage in a round shape towards the back of his body some distance away from where he was wounded, tie it with a fine cord tightly.
"The surgeon must consider the bandage at all times and every time it is loosened, tie it tighter; if he finds a solution for his case with oil or vinegar to treat what has occurred in that place, then apply this solution immediately: but otherwise remove the plaster and correct where the injury happened with his care.
"If he finds that he can put it back on again after removing the bandage.
"Regarding restoration of fractures.
"Remember that a fracture of the ribs does not occur unless it is in the large areas following the back and from the extremities away from the front part. "And they do not suffer attrition except because of their cartilaginous nature. "Their consciousness is not lost when interrogated with the fingers.
"His restoration should be such that the broken part is fitted together with fingers following an appropriate manner so as to look like the original. "Then the splint and hold the fractured jaw by a star if necessary.
"If the bones of the jaws are broken in pieces towards their inside - then there occurs a great pain and numbness from this, as well as puncturing it with much force if one has many blood vessels; therefore, so that the mouth is painful and difficult to breathe for him, and also he suffers from difficulty in swallowing due to which his face becomes pale because of lack of breath: and these are very difficult to cure.
"Moreover, inventors of devices are also found in there with many fingers: and from these come those who say to place food into the mouth of an inflamed one who generates inflammation and thirst so that it is inflamed inside as well as extended, and forced by the fracture towards the outside.
"We are afraid lest there be no cause for coldness when trying to make a hot meal if it is not necessary. "If however the cold occurs then he adds into him.
"And some of them said: 'It should be placed above the place and sucked with force then it is similar reasoning.' "However, however there may be fear that the sucking of too much food into the place due to weakness of the person.
"And some of them said: 'It is necessary to make the place cooperate with wool that has been submerged into hot oil and should be placed between the bones so that it may become loosened, until it is equal to when being pulled out according to roundness.'
"Then the weak person was cured through food and medicine.
"If the weak person becomes too thin and does not tolerate this, then the mouth is painful because of the fracture causing numbness; therefore it should be that we cut above the place and pull out the fractured bone. "We shall place upon it a tool that holds it securely in place; its remembrance precedes this: and we cut with ease.
"We then gather the two upper lips together if it is large enough to be stitched; and we remove with plasters what has been cut off.
"And if the lukewarm instrument comes temporarily; now we put it into a container of oil and warm water to make it ready; after which we remove what has been sewn up.
"Also, if anything falls off the upper lip while asleep, then we put it back in place until it is healed.
"For repairing a fracture of the spine and neck.
"Collarbones are sometimes fractured and rarely suffer attrition; the same applies to the spine as well. "Thus if it happens to someone who is knowledgeable about this subject and has knowledge of how to treat them; but if not, then we look for a doctor. "And if his hands are already softened and stiffened and dead; and he cannot move them nor stretch or tie them with your finger; but when you try to press on them gently with your thumb then it is not felt by him and they do not feel any pain, because of their death: at that point you know that nothing can be done for them, in fact the situation is fatal.
"If he moves them and feels their tightness with your finger tips; you know that a certain treatment is available for him.
"If the neck behaves like a hand that is soft and stiffened; you know that it can be treated as well. "No need for his labor.
If he had not injured him with anything from that, it would have been less harmful.
His care which caused the injury is such that you should administer a soothing ointment with warm oil; if someone else does this for you, please do so instead.
Place the ointment over that part of his body with several applications each day until he is completely soothed; if someone else does this for you, please do so instead. Do not let him rest on the part where he suffered pain until he is healed.
If it was caused by a breaking away of the bones or tendons; if something separate was caused from that source, then you should wash over his wound and bring him this. Then, with two stitches on both lips, if it is a large one. Then care for him with another person using an ointment until he is healed.
If the hind limb bones are broken away and the end of the tail has come; then you should insert your left hand's index finger into his anus, and break both ears with another hand, as much as possible, and second by second until he is healed.
Then place over him and bring it; and care for the wound with what precedes, until he is healed.
From the restoration of Anchae
The 11th head.
Rare are the bones of Anchae's broken. If the bones of Anchae's are broken but not by comminution; and they are split longitudinally, and they fall towards the inside; there is pain inflicted from that spot, a wound, and the limbs which were cut off.
And its restoration to him is as follows: you place your hand over it until it becomes healed in the same way that figure of his was.
When there is only one fragment of bone to be worked on, then restore that fracture according to the method with which you were shown how it was done for yourself from the equation provided.
If there is a fracture that extends into the bone's length, or it has already bent towards its inner part, then proceed to apply pressure against your hand, until you are able to restore the fractured part for yourself. After you have restored the bone to its proper shape by applying pressure against your hand, then place a plaster over that part of it which has been fractured and secured with pins or sutures; after that, put an arrow made from wood or thread above the fracture as well, so that you may not disturb the alignment of the bone until it is healed.
And after you have restored it to its proper condition by applying pressure with your hand, until the fracture has healed according to equality; and apply an ointment on that part of the bone so that the person who is treating the fracture rests their head on their back or shoulder as appropriate.
If the arrow is heated up (which I assume means if it gets too hot), then stop applying pressure to that part of the bone and restoring it until you have cooled down the arrow; after that, place back over it what supported it before, according to how it was placed originally, so that its restoration continues. And apply a bandage around it as needed.
If the arrow went through bone or cartilage instead, then remove and dispose of it.
Information on restoring a fracture by an assistant
An assistant is that which is between the elbow and the head of a spatula.
If it breaks then the restoration of this part follows one of two methods.
One method is to use a flat medium length piece of wood according to that shape which follows.
And two ligaments are tied at both ends of it.
Then it is suspended from the place where it was removed and the person treating the fracture rests on a bed or table. As soon as the arm was broken and laid upon a stick, it would gently move towards its tip
Once you suspend it above something heavy, so that it extends downwards The physician would attend to the broken arm simultaneously with both hands, until the fracture is healed according to what should happen
Another method was that the patient would be lifted over their own bed and suspended from above by the hand of one of them holding it at the back with a cord. Two persons would help lift the patient over their own bed and hold onto them above the broken arm each with both hands; one of the two to hold at the bottom of him and extend downwards towards his other side
If needed to increase the stretch then hold under the arm with a cord and above it with another, and have one of them extend towards each side respectively.
If the fracture is near to one of the ends of the arm then it would be necessary for one person to place a cord under its tip and another under the broken elbow.
If it is near to the elbow then one person should place a cord above its location and another over the elbow.
When the fracture is equally facilitated and without much effort until the fracture has been equalized according to what should happen then bind it securely with a good application if it does not slip from cold hands.
If by chance the hands slip away at the seventh day let the binding be released until then. Place above it a strong cord soaked with vinegar and oil, until the hands have become still; then bind securely onto it; and the mode of binding is to place a bandage over the fracture.
Then apply a fresh bandage on top of it. Finally suspend the arm over an assistant and place your hand open onto its own shoulder.
"Place a cloth on your shoulder and extend it over the broken arm so that the injured limb remains in its place; if something is not permitted to be placed above you by this, do not let anything fall upon you from bone.
"If something is permitted to be placed above you from the broken bone, then use a stronger arrow to do so; otherwise, place an arrow on top of it that has been damaged and is weaker than others. "And place an arrow between all the arrows in length of your hand; let the length of the arrows be according to their fracture and with an additional three fingers from every part.
"Finally, extend the stretch above the arrows as I described at the beginning of this chapter.
"And let your stretch be stronger over the place where the fracture is more restricted. "The longer the fracture, the smaller the stretch should be.
"If you want the stretch and length as described at the time when you restore the member quickly, then do this; if a cold arrow is used, loosen up the stretch and arrows until tomorrow, exactly like we said.
"After that, consider the ligament for three days so it doesn't cause itching or inflation to your body as you move towards the member; due to excess of fluid in stretch. "Therefore, do this entirely according to what we said.
"If you are above the faith so nothing is allowed from it; then only loosen up the ligament, not after three days or more.
"And let there be a pillow above his back and his hand over his stomach; put it below the support with full wool evenly.
"Consider at all times of night or day so that nothing loosens up the fractured member or softens the ligament. "Therefore do this entirely with your own skill.
"And put food to the infirmary according to what we've described so that his body is first soft and then he begins eating; at this time you must let him eat more.
In accordance with the custom of a barber and an assistant for cutting hair is that it should be shaved every forty days; therefore, at this time it must be shaved off, and medicated with some ointment to soothe it
If a fracture has occurred, apply this as soon as possible; shave off the hair and tie it up with threads until after 50 days have passed, or two months.
Of the restoration of the arm bone (shoulder).
The shoulder is composed of two bones called the clavicle and the scapula.
Of one of which (the clavicle) it is narrow; and that follows with the hand. The other one being broad, and following beneath by a lesser part from below.
Therefore if the larger clavicle is broken alone or narrow; and if both are broken together.
When therefore the upper clavicle breaks, then its restoration is easy, and healing easier still.
And when it breaks beneath, the fracture to him is bad, and the healing more difficult.
It's worse then if both bones are broken together.
Therefore when it breaks the clavicle above alone, then he should come to a doctor for its restoration, so that he might place upon it a narrow strap with ease and relaxation until equality is reached.
If the upper clavicle has broken this one; then he should do that it might be put on a stronger strap.
And it is necessary to place the form of the hand for his restoration and lengthening over the thumb. And the hand of the fingers to the superior shall be higher than all other fingers; and the articular inferior to all others or the rest, and seated square upon himself, and the thumb before him, or on his side directly, at height in order that he may not fall into a weaker position.
Afterwards extends the arm of the forearm downward, either with his hand, or using a cord. Another surgeon extended himself out from above in a similar manner
Then the physician takes his mouth and reduces it to its best form possible.
If a bone has broken, then you should reduce every fragment back into its original place with the help of your skill.
If you see a separation of the flesh and it becomes inflamed; then there is no hope for his restoration: turn him over onto himself and restore him to his original position as before.
If a fracture has occurred with a wound, then I made this specific finger-like splint for him so that you can take care of him from there.
If you are beginning to make a restoration of the flesh and it is too cold then turn the bandage around with some olive oil, and white cloth; so that there will be an even medium between smoothness and subtlety: and tie the bandage over onto him tightly as before until his restoration has ended. Then remove the bandage from around him and put on a prepared plaster made of flour mixed with water to restore it completely. Afterwards he puts them there; so that the star which is placed over the fracture itself is larger and stronger than before.
You know that there are six stars on the arm usually; either if a fracture occurs at one place among them or two places simultaneously.
Afterwards he puts your bandage over the fracture and tighter than before; as well as much stronger with a tight bandage above the fracture or below it: also put on a looser bandage to replace what has gone from his previous bandage's memory at the beginning of this chapter.
And there are bandages that you can put over the fracture; soft ones, moistened with water; and they should not be rough or hard. The thread is made from linen properly, in between the fine and coarse parts as described before.
After a day or two. If something whose repair is necessary occurs, like the itch that occurred to a member: then you should wet the body part with heated water and wait until the itching stops; when you remove the bandage do not tighten it too much as before so that it can stop on its own after being removed from around.
"If the narrowing has already been softened and the nose is now remote, similar cases should be corrected in the same way; consider each one.
"If feeding is prohibited to enter the member due to excess narrowing, then it should be corrected by first softening what surrounds it more and releasing it after a certain number of days; until its nourishment arrives, hold off on binding it.
"If nothing has been weakened among those things that we have spoken of, then it should not be corrected by a solution until after twenty days, or in a different manner.
"...and hold off the hand while the weakness is with him [i.e., bound to his neck]. "And let its neck be equalized and be held by your virtue against any movement. "...and let him lie on his back [i.e., supine].
"And you know that this fracture is to be corrected within thirty days, or within thirty and two days; possibly within one hundred days. "...it's all done according to the dispositions of the complexion and virtue.
"On restoration of fractures
"You know that the fingers often suffer from a fracture in the hand. "...and it does not happen to him unless there is much weariness.
"If the plants fracture happens due to fatigue or weariness; then it should be corrected by letting him lie flat and having his seat adjusted according to equality. "...then put the hand upon that extending object.
"...and extends the broken bones of the minister and equalizes them; until they are united by a good connection.
"Then it is appropriate that he put on an emollient ointment if there isn't a warm one available. "...then place the bandage upon his back according to the quantity of the place; and you already have placed it on him [i.e., into a linen bandage].
If a bone has been broken in such a way that it extends towards the center of the plant, then fashion something like a ball out of linen and apply it to the affected part with some sort of bandage; bind tightly so as to support the fractured limb securely while also supporting its own branch or limb.
And there is an asterisk on which the length of ease can be applied to the body of the plant; and bind it so that it may stretch out according to need.
If a bone has been broken towards the outside, then it is necessary to place an asterisk on top of it and another one at its base on the plant; open your hand completely straight. After placing the strap tightly as before, extend between the fingers with a bandage.
If the bone is broken in any of the finger joints, then it should be bent according to need if there are no other injuries. After binding as before with the plant and if you wish, place a right-angled asterisk on its head and one flat one at its base; so that it may be held in place securely without moving around.
If the bone is broken in any of the other fingers (middle, ring finger or little finger), then bend it as before and bind with a healthy digit following it; or bind them all according to their connection together so that they are all good. Or place the flat one over its head just like we said for the thumb.
And consider during your restoration and after placing the others with warm fingers; and place it as needed when something happens to him according to his description in its narrative.
Of bone fracture of the wrist
The shoulder joint is often broken and it's declared to be so because the head turned towards inside and outside parts.
Its restoration is done thus: you bind the ligament above the break with another one below the break. And if it's weakened, he extends his face upwards.
"Therefore he stretches out every ligament towards his own limb proportionally
"If a fracture is near the elbow joint (Coxae), then he stretches out the ligament towards the chest side to enable extension upwards; and another ligament underneath the fracture.
"And similarly if a fracture is near the knee joint (genu), then he stretches out the nearest ligament towards the lower part to enable extension downwards; and another ligament underneath the fracture.
"Therefore the surgeon extends his own hands towards each other proportionally to match their natural shape; and joins them with a good union.
"Then he must place splints and dressings if the limb is not restored perfectly. "If it should fail to heal after a certain period of time (days), then he releases him until the limb becomes warm; and thereafter returns him for your care.
"His dressings shall be thus: "He places a hard band over the fracture itself, namely to prevent the separation of the bones; and binds two or more tightly on either side for support; and any excess shall be removed. "Afterwards he adjusts his fingers until the heel touches the root of the foot [nerves].
"Then he places a long cord between the elbow and the leg near the knee to extend upwards; and the fingers of both hands on either side. "Thereafter they are adjusted over the wrist and elbow, until whatever is left from above fits underneath.
"Then he places a star on top of each shoulder where there was a fracture; and one star below the mouth (cranium).
"He adjusts his fingers between the legs and elbow with the help of bandages to ensure an even tightness.
"Then he begins with four or more bindings on either side over the place where there were three fractures; and then adds another to even it out. "And as you add more of them towards the place of fracture, your own tightness becomes less tight and softer; and gentler.
"Having opened up the two extremities, you cut between the thigh and calf. Therefore tie three stars which are above it. Then close with the two extremities to the lower part, until you reach the foot of the calf. And tie also the three stars on one side, so that the bond is not removed from its own place
Then remove the band above this [point], while keeping it in place, so that no member cutting, or pulling back, or inflation occurs there, nor anything of a similar nature So if something is removed from there. Therefore, after removing the solution and correcting what was cut off at that point as we said many times before.
If you chop bone on to bone when it hits [i.e., if the knife cuts into a bone], then it is necessary for you that this [point] be adjusted so that if it's possible for you. And if not, find above the solution and remove it; and care with him who preceded in remembrance so that he may be healed.
And when this is tied with a broken thigh bone, apart from adding the stars as we said earlier, so that it may be healed and braced in both assistance and support
However, if he is restored by this means broken, there was no weakness of the leg And if it is restored only by adding to him the other thigh, then necessity arises so that he who had it always will be unable [to walk].
You know that the thigh can be tied for 50 days or added to a limited extent; sometimes it is lessened also in an equal manner; all of this depends on the variety and state of what remains after subtracting the other member.
Of the restoration of the broken thighbone.
You know that the thigh bone is rarely broken, but it often suffers from atrophy.
If a bone is broken then it must be either fractured or through an opening (in this case a hole). It is accompanied by pain and without injury/damage From the top of that goes the whole with sense (or feeling).
The restoration of that is such as to make equal what was broken from the parts (of his body) by using hands until he gathers it and binds it according to what can be done through a balance and easily, with making/fabrication.
Then put a plaster on the forearm from ground meal or of powder made with eggs and put over it a round star if you are not able to reach high then bind/tie it tightly above in order that it may be applied there.
Then consider all the dispositions which we mentioned in other fractures as a hot iron and similar things to him: so that you may oppose against every injury with what he was able, until he is healed.
Of the restoration of a broken leg
It should be noted that the legs have two bones of which one is large and called by its name Cruris and the other is subtle and called Feclis.
And both were broken by the same kind of fracture in two parts of the arms and because of this there was the restoration/treatment of that limb as the treatment of the arm is one operation.
If both bones break at once then they are turned towards all parts.
And if the subtle bone is broken it is turned/bent towards the front part.
If the large bone breaks then they are downwards from that.
Then administer an extension (of treatment), and balance/equilibrium, and tying of stars according to it equally.
However if the fracture of Cruris is a broken limb you have to use many bands/straps so that it may be an extension less than and quieter your hands are used for it.
"There is something to be found in the operation over the arm; and it happens when you equally balance on both sides, and all take your own operation, then take two stakes from wood which are used for making tables [boards], as they are placed under boards: and they will become palm leaves. And choose one of those with a small thickness, so that none may be by the size; and it is length to them according to the length of the arm up to the lower part of the elbow.
"Then apply two of your own solutions around a single piece of cloth, according to its length. "Put one part on the elbow, and another on the other side; and it will go from the elbow down to the foot.
"Then tie two stakes around at each end of your cloth, between them. "Since the stretch is forbidden to be done in one direction only, it falls down towards the right and left; and at a fixed place stands firm.
"And indeed, the cincture of wood is done according to the length of the arm, and it will be placed on him who needs it; so that he may hold onto it by force.
"And furthermore, if you need to make a split when the wound is already open properly.
"Then consider your cincture every day; and with it practice last until you become familiar with all its uses, whether by burning or other ways. "If something falls to that cincture then hold it as long as you can until you are able to heal if God wills.
"About the fracture of the foot and fingers.
"The heel is not broken by a crack in it.
"In the foot and fingers there can be a fracture; and of the fingers also a fracture happens but seldom; and it does not happen to them unless attrition through many circumstances.
"If there is a fracture in the foot, and you wish to raise it up by yourself; then he takes his sickly foot placed ready on the ground like a stretcher.
"At that point you should place your foot on the other which is lifted by those bones; afterward smear it with oil and apply evenly.
"Afterward place your foot on top of that [bone], then put a cloth under the toes which have two flat pieces.
"Then draw it with a gentle [motion] of the foot, after you use it with the cloth and those others who need.
"When three or four days have passed then remove the bandage. "You will make it level if they are fractured, dislocated or not properly positioned [i.e., not aligned]. "Therefore the operation is done as you understand.
"If any of your fingers are broken then restore them and arrange them according to what I showed you in the restoration of the fingers. "Afterward place your finger into its own little ring according to the length of your fingers and make it a bit smaller on that side; then put under the foot the cloth as I showed you.
"If it is broken due to the bones being two or three or more then put a ring on every finger of its quantity and bind it with linen; then place it under one of the toes so that there may be good retention.
"And you will remember to avoid bending it so that all of what I said to you regarding the fractures from accidents which we mentioned, and confront every accident with [the treatment for] that.
"Of a fracture of the upper arm bone, or humerus, or the bones in the chest and forearms.
When a fracture of a woman's arm occurs then place her on a square rest. Afterward incline it towards the back of that shoulder and let it hang backwards.
Afterward insert a support into the woman's armpit so that she is held securely; and let it be as if from her like a sphere.
After the woman has been sewn up and her back is bandaged Then this tool is brought out, so that it may be placed before the vulva as a ball, and the mouth is opened
And then a small piece of silk is put on his back Once the tool has been lubricated and brought forward quickly, it is withdrawn with ease; then you apply some more lubrication and reduce it to its original size as much as possible, so that when inserted first time, it goes in easily: thereafter return it to its own opening.
This will be done over a period of seven days or by way of another route, until the mouth is restored back to normal.
And if so you wish, take a sheath made of sheep's skin and fasten it over the opening of his urethra with cordage made from rushes, then introduce the entire sheath into your vagina. Then breathe slowly and smoothly through it until the sheath is stretched inside the vagina to its full length, after which you can break off any excess part.
And afterwards with this tool it will last for a certain number of days as we have agreed upon until the pain is relieved.
And when the mouth of the man or woman has been broken, then you administer restoration to him and his equivalent as we have agreed upon by way of Anchae.
And not the anus should be hidden from him after his injury is treated so that he can recover as much as possible.
And you should learn my book well because the very word 'fracture' means different things to me and also to many people depending on their situation or use; therefore understand this.
And for the man when he has been broken you take a rooster's beak and introduce it into him. Then a cloth is put on his solution and he is inflated as much as possible; afterwards it will last for three days or by way of another route until he is cured if God wills it.
And from the restoration of bones that have been broken when they are with a wound.
The twelfth head was fractured with a sharp blow to the skull, especially if it is large; similarly as in the case of the cheekbones or the nose, so that you must quickly apply ligatures and tourniquets and remove the blood immediately: if conditions for phlebotomy are established according to our instructions.
If the wound is bleeding excessively at that time you should immediately apply ligatures to stop the bleeding and remove it as quickly as possible; unless something else needs to be done right away.
Then begin to repair the fracture on that very same day, and do not defer it unless another injury has occurred.
If a cold injury occurs after the fracture, then postpone repair until one day later, unless it settles down spontaneously. And do not apply to him on the third or fourth day, as you will cause further harm to him.
If the nose is fractured and protruding through an opening in the skin, then you should immediately reduce it to its normal position while gently pressing and stretching it with your hands.
If no extension is available for him, nor his adjustment by hand, then reduce to its normal position using that instrument. And the instrument is one made from iron with seven or eight fingers in length and its width corresponds to that of your finger, except for the thumb which has a smaller width than all other fingers. And because of this it is necessary for a physician to receive three or four treatments depending on the size as required by the condition of fracture in all its types.
And it should be rounded to prevent it from being pushed aside under the force of compression during surgery and it must have a sharp edge to cut through flesh with an open hand for cutting wounds on its sides or corners. And above all, make sure you apply the instrument from the middle of it up to its bottom end so that no other part gets in the way during surgery.
This is its shape.
Let him be operated on such that an acute curved edge is placed over his extremity by the prominent fingers of one hand; and with this hand he will press down upon it gently until he has released the lips and equalized them with some fluid
So that the fractured extremities may be aligned
If his extremities are fractured and he cannot accept the tool by grasping it properly then let him strike at them with his fingers until he has control over it.
If you cannot reduce them with him as we have described above then strike him in whatever manner is possible for you to do.
After that let the remaining part of bone be rubbed gently and carefully with a coarse emery stone.
And if after the reduction he is still in great pain then you know that his lips did not return to their proper place.
Do this therefore And if you are now complete in restoring the restoration that you have done to his limbs.
After this let him throw off the bandage with a black cloth. And if it is still summer Nor should you place over the wound any ointment or thing that contains oil so as not to cause irritation on it and prevent any corruption or decay from occurring.
After this administer these things at the appropriate time of your restoration. And cut away the wound as you strike with your fingers through a hole that is made to allow blood circulation according to the amount of wounds.
With all caution do not tie up the wound if it has been broken. Therefore many of these remedies have been devised by doctors and they did harm either to the patients themselves or their death or decay or putrefaction, that is, to no avail. And make your stitches soft, gentle and diverse from those of fractured parts.
"If a wound is bad or great, there are other wounds that come upon us and cause pain; therefore, it should not be applied until later. "And apply a solution from hard cloths to the wound itself.
"When one or two days have passed since the wound was inflicted and it is beginning to generate pus; then wash off what you applied over it with vinegar. "After that, we apply a remedy and ointments which are by our custom applied to wounds; such as the tetrapharmakon ointment and similar ones.
"And make sure you have enough bandage for it. "Consider the wound daily and often, until it heals completely and is healed.
"It's necessary to carefully remove the limb so that the pus flows downwards more easily.
"If many days pass and it doesn't heal or get better; then you know that the bandage is now too tight. "Therefore, be careful to examine the wound as soon as possible. "Remove any remaining rags and get rid of them separately. "If anything from those rags remain stuck to the limb and cause pain; pull it out of there gently and remove as much pus as possible.
"If the limb is infected or rotten; that is, infested with worms, or some other corruption and putrefaction; then it's necessary to have someone who has used what he applied remove from there as much pus as possible.
"And from that you have to make sure my speech stays strong and I'll give it the present thought when your mouth opens up; like the coxae and assistant, as well as similar ones in the big organs of the body, so that you won't let him go free unless he is very important. After all, many times he has caused death from there because of his actions.
One hundred and one days
If you require medical care within a day of injury or within thirty days (30), otherwise remove it.
In case of fracture healing the wound should be treated: either on the first day, or within thirty days (30). Otherwise, clean the wound.
This fracture healing has caused multiple wounds It's a matter of the greatest importance (most important), which is in connection with these wounds: and it leads to swelling of the body part And if this limb is being operated on by itself,
So that if the treatment is within a day of injury or within thirty days (30), then administer medicines which have astringency in them: as aloe, and hyssop, and myrrh, and colocynth, and acacia, and similar ones to those
So that you may apply these ones or all of them: and mix with a wine bandage, or a white bandage, or vinegar; and put the bundle on the treatment place, and bind it tightly to good stitches (suture).
And remove the suture after many days have passed. After that, remove one of them and repeat with another until the treatment is done (the healing has taken place).
Or tie it tightly to the bandage from above downward. Therefore, water is a property of all things that are bound out (removed) by the body parts.
If the treatment has already been done on a hard surface and is tight and needs to be loosened because of the necessity for doing it (healing), then find from above his part, and cut off the excess moisture that is prominent; or tie it with some other material until it's done (until healing takes place).
When the cure has been restored and the limb is after that delicate, not according to its own nature.
When healing of the bones is restored and the limb after that delicate, weak; then it cannot happen (heal) except by many causes "One solution is available for a ligature and ligation of its own kind, either by restricting it due to an excess of ligament tightening or preventing the movement of nourishment to the member when necessary, but not allowing any nourishment to be taken from outside: or because of excessive lubrication in non-time, or because of the scarcity of blood within the body's weakness.
The care for him is feeding him and keeping his body firm until there are many times as much blood within him. And applying a poultice "And introducing joy and gladness over him.
Then, place a wick above the member so that it may draw much nourishment to itself. And he diligently applies warm water with lubrication until it draws the nourishment and returns to its natural figure.
"When the care of broken bones will be restored, then.
"When the member has been restored after treatment of its own kind and there is stiffness in the bone due to fracture and prominence, or perhaps a knot forms - then it should be torn out using that form so that the member cannot be hindered from its own operation: at this time you will not need to give him a speech.
"And there have been many physicians and restorers who did it in our land.
And this operation is very fearful to do, leading either to death or great sorrow, as it leads to the fact that it is called a death.
"But if the weakness and knot have just happened: then it is necessary to lubricate with warm water, which are boiled soothing herbs like those of alder trees or bitter ones, root included. "And let the bandage be made with a soft, lubricated paste as if it had been made from hemp fiber.
"Or, ground alder bark can be used, or chicken fat and honey as a paste mixed with it.
The bones are cut off, and with wax they are prepared to be applied over a heated iron, so that the medicines may decrease in strength due to their heat.
At times, it is permitted for breathing with a constant friction and warmth, ancient, and gentle, which occurs while the fingers of the hand are in use. The movements of all members shall be applied to each part equally from above everywhere.
However, if the tortuousness has preceded and was strong and conversed with a stone, and provoked necessity to its cure by iron, then it is necessary that his superior be cleared off of excessive swelling with bones, and to continue the continuation by them, and to strike what remains from the nodation or the bone with subtle razors: and the administration shall take place in him with solicitude and diligence.
About the dislocation of the knee.
Dislocation is the breaking off from its usual place by one or both of the joints. Because it is forbidden to move that member itself and it becomes a figure of the limb. And causes the superior pain and wounds very much.
When then dislocation occurs to an extremity, it is necessary that it be treated at once for its restoration, and not delay any of the others.
If delayed, he must lose his place, or may have with him a reduction in dislocation.
Therefore it is not necessary for that member to move so that its extension does not occur at the time of the separation from him. Because often he causes an attack on spasms and pain the more.
Indeed when that occurs then it is necessary to apply as quickly as possible to phlebotomy. Then he must wait until the separation is finished and quiet.
Then his member shall be treated with hot water and oil. Then it will decrease very quickly.
And all the members, except that one which is forgotten at its place shall be treated with him.
I have already made an incision for dislocation and also according to what came before it on fracture, up to the inferior part of his body.
Treatment for dislocated lower jaw
The two jaws are rarely dislocated.
When both jaws are dislocated, they heal in one of two ways. Or, they may move back to their original position and heal by themselves. Or they may be dislocated completely and heal to their original position, so that the lower jaw can move and close normally again, but cannot hold it open or allow it to fall, while its tongue is moving up with a sound.
When the dislocation happens frequently, then he returns from several positions by himself slowly.
If the dislocation is complete and whole, then it should be corrected quickly either by reduction or traction; he must maintain his position to prevent loss of tongue movement: and it is necessary for him to have the physician apply a finger in one hand into the root of the jaw's dislocation through the mouth if there is one. Or he may introduce two fingers at once if the dislocation happens to both sides. And his other hand must hold them steady as they are applied.
He should instruct the patient to relax both jaws and allow them to move naturally back towards their original position. And the physician holds the jaws steady until they return to their normal position.
If the correction is difficult or both jaws are dislocated at once, then he should administer a reduction with hot oil and water until it becomes easy to correct them together; and not prolong either of their corrections separately as we said before.
When they have returned and are steady, the physician should press gently on them with a pad soaked in oil; he should also apply heated oil if there is any doubt whether it was made from wax or not.
With ease when ligatures are softened
Sleep is placed upon the back of his head; and its chin lies between two veins, so that it does not move to either side; lest he be moved by force or compelled to eat; a little fluid (phlegm) must be swallowed with ease: until the pains subside, and then shall it be applied.
It should not rest upon the mouth of his own body during eating or drinking, lest he fall asleep; until the mandible is set, and he is restored.
If the reduction of both mandibles is difficult, when they are dislocated in a certain hour; then they cannot be restored to their places; often thereafter fevers arise, and excessive heat follows: and perhaps, he may vomit pure bile (choleric) phlegm.
So you know this; for if it is lost (the mandible), many people lose their life after being struck by it within ten days.
Of the reduction of dislocations in the lower arm and shoulder blades.
Indeed, the furcula (collarbone) is not dislocated from its own side by a slip of flesh alone. It can be dislocated occasionally on the outside; and it is declared to him who sees it.
And its restoration is that he may rest his body upon it and extend his arms Then with your arm as a support; for she shall be restored.
Then he will place the bandage upon it and the wounds and tighten her up.
The extremities of his body which follow from his arm; they shall continue with him, unless dislocated very rarely. If it is dislocated on any day; then you must reduce and equalize as we have said and what was prepared for you.
Then he will place the bandage upon it and the wounds and tighten up the stitches. Until a man is healthy and tranquil, he should not eat.
And when the same treatment reduces the extremity of the arm to such an extent that it separates from its own place.
On the subject of dislocations in the human arm.
It is known that the humerus does not dislocate unless it follows one of three modes.
One of these modes allows for dislocation at the tip to become detached from below. The second mode causes dislocation in the shoulder area. And possibly it dislocates to a higher degree of the arm, which is rare.
It does not dislocate at the back because of the shoulder blade. And it doesn't dislocate forward due to nerves.
It is possible for the dislocation to occur at the tip and become detached from below, especially among those whose arms are weak. Because it can follow both outward and inward movements simultaneously or one after another.
It is uncommon for this to occur in those with many weak muscles.
And sometimes it happens to some people by accident or injury, and the arm becomes dislocated in a heated manner from its opposite side, which is due to this because he has already been dislocated once.
Therefore you should observe it and proceed with its treatment until certain of the certainty is given to him.
It can be distinguished from a dislocated arm and a healthy one when dislocation occurs at the tip. You must note the difference between them and look for any movement at the shoulder area, even if it only moves like a dislocated arm when it touches the head of the arm: and cannot an infirm person reduce his hand to touch her own ear with all movements.
If dislocation occurs on the chest or up, you must note any movement and cannot hide it.
A reduction of dislocations is easy when a man is young and robust
A reduction of his own body to the superior part Then you should place his limbs under a hook of iron and lift it to its upper part, then join the limb with force and courage to the back; and from there you will stretch out the limb towards itself: and at that point you will minister the hand as far upwards as possible. Then he pulls it downwards or lifts it quickly.
If he doesn't lift it as we have said and many dislocations occur at the beginning of this day: then let a warm bath be given to him who is suffering from pain or discomfort; and a soothing ointment should be applied which soothes and relieves the pain just like if one were to apply cold compresses to the head, feet, hands, and face.
Then he is placed on his back; and a hook of iron is placed under him and wool which is equally equal between the relief from pain and restriction is applied.
Then a doctor places his foot above the hook; he ministers the arm of the patient towards the lower part of his body.
And if it is easier to reduce him as we have said; then you should make an effort so that the limb of the patient who is longer and weaker will be brought down to one side where he can rest on his back: also place both of his arms under the hook of iron, and lift them towards the upper part until he has been supported by air. And another minister holds down the hand of the patient to support it in front of him; he himself then lifts up quickly. If the patient is weak or too tired to carry on with this reduction; then he should be supported by something else so that he can continue until a dislocation occurs quickly.
And the reduction is done according to another way; and it is like placing a long stick with a round head which fits into the hand of death; but not too large or thin Afterwards, after they have been placed on the head with a linen cloth and are removed from under it when they become heavy (because of their weight), the patient lies on the length of the staff.
Afterwards, his hand is extended towards the lower part while the other arm extends his body from another side with forcefulness; for this union brings him to his place of motion.
If his reduction is difficult by all that we have mentioned so far, then use this method of care; and it will be like lifting up a staff whose length equals the sum of two arms, its width equals four fingers, and its thickness equals twice the thickness of two fingers: if its head is round in order to prevent its entry into deep crevices by means of this shape.
Afterwards, linen cloth is placed over the rounded head so that it does not drag down the staff while moving.
Afterwards, they are placed under the staff and its hand is extended or upper arm is stretched up to it until below; then a cord is tied around the staff and both hands and arms.
Afterwards, upper arm is stretched to above until below; then the hand is extended downwards and the remaining body suspended from another side is released. The union brings about its movement immediately.
Afterwards, the entry of him is completed in any manner possible; then it is necessary to place under a sphere of linen equal quantities from wool. Afterwards, put on the prepared plaster made by mixing flour with water and olive oil; then place it all over his body as before was done.
Afterwards the binding of the linen plaster is done with a decent tie; then the band above the plaster is tied on as before was done; and his hand is attached to its collar so that it does not move for seven days.
And it should be necessary that the food of him who is ill is placed after he is comfortable; because its place is for his healing to happen.
After seven days at most, or five; and it is removed with motion If after that time there was no improvement, he has recovered.
If the joint is dislocated excessively due to moisture that happened to him or some other cause, then it must be treated with a cautery containing three holes; according to what was mentioned earlier in the chapter on cauteries.
If all this is done and the joint does not heal within seven days, it may be loosened or reduced with forceps; however if it will not loosen or reduce, then it dies off, and cannot be restored to its proper place: you know that the nerves of the arm are cut and can either be made straight again, stretched out, or relaxed.
The dislocation that happens due to the chest or nipple, or a reduction towards the back is treated with force and extension using the hands; until it is restored, then use the remaining restraint and care for its recovery.
If a gouty pain after the recovery occurs in any member and stiffness in its motion is treated with a strong bath many times until it relaxes and returns to normal; until then use restraint and care for its recovery
Of the treatment of dislocations cubitis (upper limbs).
You know that the joint of the upper limb may be dislocated with difficulty; and similarly it can be reduced with difficulty as well, in fact even more so; and this same joint is easily dislocated towards all parts, especially towards anterior or posterior.
And its dislocation will not be hidden to you because it is easily seen from below and from the touch, as dislocated in whatever form. When you bring a dislocated upper limb together with one that is healthy, it will be clear to you The joint cannot be tightened up and cannot grasp or touch the lower arm with it.
The patient should be positioned and immobilized immediately before the application of cold compresses
If a hot poultice is applied to him first, his reduction becomes difficult; and perhaps he will not recover completely unless the poultice is immediately followed by cold compresses on the back The removal of dislocations generally worsens with pain; and many times it has descended along with this death.
The restoration of him when it is possible to reduce him will be as follows: his hand should be extended with two other hands; and the physician's arm should be stretched above the cubit (about a person's height) and below, so that he may push himself back by pulling on both sides simultaneously, or by using the palm of his hand, until he reaches his place.
Alternatively the dislocation may be reversed in this way: first he doubles his hand with his own, until he strikes on both sides simultaneously by using the palm of his hand which is dislocated; or alternatively it can be done by reversing its position so that it becomes an anterior dislocation when the palm is pressed against the dislocated cubit.
If the dislocation cannot be reduced then administer a strong and intense extension; it is as follows: two physicians should extend his arm with all their strength, so that they may not remove him while he extends himself.
Afterwards the arm should be returned to its whole length after it has been doubled over by means of a strap or a ligature.
When the physician strikes with his hand he also uses oil; so that this which is done with ease and lubrication may come into play as a remedy. He then pulls himself back by pushing with great force until he reaches his place.
After the reduction of him is done he should be placed on a flat surface where there is stiffness; and with a warm bath and oil he should be warmed up until the tension is released and he can move freely without any restriction. The arm is suspended at the level of the sickbed for several days.
After that, he should be released. "If a suture is firmly placed at its proper site, then immediately remove that ligature and let go.
"If you are not able to firmly place the suture, then try again with a different ligature and remove that one later after some days or until it becomes firm. "And afterwards let go of her.
"If something goes wrong with the suture after reduction of the ligature and positioning has been made: then administer humectation in warm water, and also friction (rubbing), subtle friction (rubbing) gently, compression, until the line is taut or the ligature is tightened from above. Or you can place a small bird on top of the ligature. "Then tighten it up and let go after one day and one night. "And afterwards remove her from there and put him back into the bath. "When she is done bathing, then apply friction to the ligature gently with warmed water. "Then repeat three times over her and into warm water until she becomes slack or relaxed.
"And if you are able to place a heated iron on top of her with oil and tension it up.
"Do this several times until she becomes slack or relaxed. "Her line is loosened and she returns to her normal state of being.
"From the removal of a ligature by Almahassem.
"Almahassem makes the hand loose by removing a ligature between the arm and the body.
"The reduction of his dislocation is easy. "In the case of failed ligatures. "However it is necessary that the loosening of his dislocation should happen before he becomes loosened up completely or at a place where something hot can be put to reduce it.
"And the reduction of his dislocation is in him as he puts a weak hand over a table and extends the assisting hand to him. And the physician places her own hand above it on top of the ligature and pulls it until she is done.
"However, one should keep in mind that when the hand has reached its end and begins to return towards the thumb: then place it on the inferior part of the hand with the palm upwards; and if there is dislocation which proceeds to the back of the hand, then put it (the dislocated hand) naturally into position over the table itself as an interior part placed above the table - so that the surgeon's hand may cover its own prominence by union.
If then it immediately returns to the correct position, that is good; but if not, then grasp it with the other hand holding a bandage and release it without repeating this error again.
If it cannot be tolerated or grasped after a day's use (after 24 hours), then the healing process continues according to its tortuosities; and nothing is harmed unless the hand softens up, and nothing can be grasped - you know that the thumb has been lost.
It therefore is no use to grasp it with eagerness towards its injury. And perhaps not even this thing may happen.
When it does not immediately return to the correct position (when the hand is completely paralyzed), then place a plaster on top of its plaster as we did. After that it should be grasped and released after 5 days; thereafter the hand is to be treated with a lotion and then released, and exercise done for its recovery.
If the movement of his hand becomes feeble and he falls ill from it: then gently grasp him with warm water and friction for a time until he is loosened.
Of the treatment of dislocations in the fingers
When a finger is dislocated from the back of its palm or towards it (i.e., thumb-side), then extend the finger and press down on the dislocation with your other fingers until it becomes right again.
After that, support its head and suspend it towards the dislocated part and release him after two days.
"Then hold him down and straighten him out so he is straight on his day.
"When it was night, hold him according to the same pattern; do not let him rest on his day; and exercise him with movement; and hold him at night.
"Do this for days until he becomes straight.
"And do the same with him if his arm is dislocated; and hold him at this side; and perform your first operation on him until he recovers.
"Do the same with him when his arm is dislocated to other parts as well.
"About the treatment of dislocations in the shoulder blade.
"When the shoulder blade is dislocated completely or has been moved out of place by many parts; then there's no treatment for it because death comes to him weakened.
"His sign is that ejection by weakness will not occur unless there's resistance; he cannot hold it, and many parts of him are falling out to some extent; or two bones from him, two arms from him, one bone from them, or the shoulder blade moves back into its place.
"Many parts become dislocated because many parts are pulled away to four parts.
"And the one that becomes dislocated at the back is called gibbosity.
"Treatment of him is to consider when gibbosity comes from childhood; then there's no treatment for it at all.
"But the one that is dislocated from childhood or by force with many others; as they have said in long speech of treatments for them. "It doesn't return to its place when it has been moved much.
"I am now going to release him from that with a bit of effort and care because he has been moved much by my proximity; I will bring out the instrument for this purpose in a different way than they did it before.
Therefore I say that what strikes off the front part is not an injury, nor healing from it
And similarly to that which happens at two sides as well.
And not healed from these, unless the one that happens at the back in its own way, as I say: and it is, so extended becomes a weak over the face of his to the bottom equally, front and side: and extends under it the humid rope, so not hurt the breast of theirs.
Afterwards a straight piece of wood is fixed firmly into the foot on the ground at the extremity of the thigh, around its head; and another piece round its feet at the other extremity of the thigh: and it holds the wood, so that it is not fastened to the foot. And hold the second one.
Afterwards stretches above the head of a weak one and under its ear ligaments, tight: and extends to the bone which is near the head of him; and binds it on it.
Afterwards strings a different ligament above its ankles, above its knees, at the elbows of theirs. Afterwards gathers all ligaments and binds them to another wood which is near his feet.
Afterwards extends all ministers to the head of a wood ligament, and two pieces are not removed from where they are fastened as we said.
And the physician puts his palms on the spine with force until he expires or puts a tablet above it. Afterwards takes both feet onto the tablet until he expires.
If however it does not expire by this treatment, then take a tablet of whose length is around three arms. And the place at which we said that it is near to weakness, into where the edge of the tablet will go. Afterwards puts an average sized tablet above the spine. And the physician takes both feet of his onto another edge. "It is firmly held fast in place securely until the vertebrae are ready to be released.
"Then, if you're ready to operate with the aid of your other hand; and it is as though you are holding a staff that has two branches, one on each side of its head, at an angle equal to the length of one arm: and in his neck there will be two staffs.
"And the length of each staff is one palm's breadth; and it has been made at every place through which the arrow runs, so that a branch of wood may be laid down upon the ground everywhere.
"And there is a rounded arrow, from which the ligament has been removed through two of its holes.
"And at the end thereof is a hole into which a staff will be firmly fixed; its length being equal to that with which it was used.
"Then, after you have loosened the ligature that was on his neck with your other hand (which is at his head), loosen the ligatures from both of his legs through his thigh.
"Then he will administer the arrow that is bent with your hand and the ligature through which it was shot; and the physician will treat the vertebra as we have said.
"This is the shape of the arrow that follows.
"After you have treated the vertebra and made it equal to its place, then prepare an excitant with alum. "Then end. "After that, place a star above the excitant made of alum with its length equal to three fingers or extending from them. "Its length will be such as to cover the space between the vertebrae and above the healthy vertebra without injury.
"Then he will tie with it the ligature that we have mentioned. "And feed him with a subtle nourishment until he recovers.
"When a wound has healed in its proper place:" then it is necessary that the medical remedies which have calmed down and relaxed be given out. And when they are administered on top of the soaked linen,
When a dislocation occurs at the end of the spine:" then it is necessary to perform the displacement and use the remedy that has already worked Therefore, it is not necessary for a treatment of this type to be applied when there is an attempt at self-preservation because such a treatment might cause death.
Of the dislocation of the Ankh bones
Note that the dislocation of the Ankh bones and the dislocation of the arm did not occur unless there was a displacement only, and they also didn't happen to those who experienced other dislocations far away from them or in conjunction with it.
The dislocation of the Ankh bones happens according to four parts. This is because it is dislocated towards front and towards back
Furthermore, it happens the most that it is dislocated towards the inside: and least of all towards the front and towards the back.
When the dislocation is towards the inside, then its care is as follows:" when you join together a sick body with an unwell one, it will be longer; and the leg of him who has had it will rise more than that which is healthy, and he cannot make his foot come back to its place in front because it was dislocated near the hip: and there is a location following behind the other's head, hot, therefore, so as soon as the coxae's head reached there.
The mark of him who was dislocated towards the outside is that his accidents were contrary to these accidents.
The mark of him who was dislocated towards the front is that his leg expanded when it came into contact with a healthy body and did not have two legs without pain in its knee; if he comes to walk, then he cannot come back to the place in front because it was dislocated near the hip: there will be urine held onto him, and his head turned backwards towards the other's head, and at walking he is held down on the heel.
The dislocation of his finger happened to the posterior side, so that it cannot expand (open out), nor can he double-joint (touch) it before it is doubled by itself; and his thumb is short as well: and his little finger is also shorter than the other one; and his little finger has been made soft, and there is a small protrusion of his thigh at that place.
The reduction or restoration of the dislocated finger is as follows: if it is a fresh dislocation and has not yet healed with its possessor, then it must be reduced by someone else; but if already healed when possessed, no one may reduce or touch it except in its own place where it was dislocated. Therefore if you administer the reduction to him and it remains according to his disposition, then at that time there is no one's care for it. Therefore, he should not be granted favor with a whip.
In that case where there is one dislocation and four fingers are dislocated, then the reduction should be applied to him in this way: you will close his joint (the finger), stretch it towards the interior and exterior; move his thumb and little finger from both sides; if he has reduced them himself, no other care must be taken for them.
If not done in this way then you must prepare a strong instrument and stretch his thigh from the lower part; either by using your hands or with some ligature that is tied above his thigh so as to reach under him, when he comes down upon him (the injured limb).  Another man extends his hand over him so it reaches under its own weight. Then with the help of a ligature gently stretched from above his hip-bone, and holds onto the extremity of the other man's ligature.
And this extension is either towards the front of his thigh to the back of the pelvis or vice versa towards the back of the thigh to the front of the trunk.
And this extension will continue until he becomes weak in his own body and stops from falling (after reducing).
Therefore the above mentioned are the specifications of the reduction or restoration of each finger separately, which is common to all four fingers.
"If then you have separated it as we said, this is good; but if not, then of course that thing which I speak about the maintenance of one's own body must be done.
"Therefore, when his own part is separated for the inside (of a body), it is necessary that he be fed with what is healthy on both sides. "Then the ligament is put over the root of the thigh bone, in that which lies between the top and bottom of it [the thigh], and the place that is beneath the buttocks. "Then extend the ligament upwards from one side to the upper part of the body towards the higher part of the trunk, and towards the waist.
"Then takes a stronger hand for him [the patient], and places a thick mass of the thigh muscle below it, extending it outwards with a downward push. "But I am returned to my place.
"And this is the simplest of all the others [methods], how we reduce this member.
"But if it is lowered down upon you and will not go with you to the entrance as this [method] says, then it is necessary that two feet of the patient be held together simultaneously with a ligament of strength, gently, over both calcaneus bones, and above both knees; and its length should be proportional in quantity to four fingers of each hand: and the foot of the patient extended more than by double digits.
"Then is it held aloft over the head on a stick, which lies in the house; and its length should be proportional to two arms from below.
"Then is the strong youth given to support the head of the thigh bone; and it is held aloft with one other patient, and urged on by another [youth], helping him to rise as he forcefully supports his side with strength.
"But when it is separated for the outside [of a body], then it is necessary that he be held by one who has great weight. The ligature is placed above his foot and below his chest.
Then two stakes are inserted: one under the feet of him and another under the top of his head. Then a third stake is added to the middle of his foot and firmly inserted there so that it supports any wet clothing he may wear; also a fourth stake is placed between his thighs so that it does not draw him towards the lower part when extended.
After this, all the surgeons turn to attend on their own parts; and then the physician applies his hand for reducing them manually.
If he recovers from the injury mentioned above, it will be a good thing.
And if not, place two stakes on his back and at both sides of him as we said for the other case equally. However, it is necessary that he lies flat upon his sound leg.
When the dislocation is to the front part of him then it is necessary that his leg be extended either by force or at once, and according to this same story above the foot; and the physician places on the right hand a palm of his own onto the injured shin. Then he is held together by both hands with the other one holding him extended towards the lower end of his leg.
If the dislocation is to the back part of him then it is not necessary that he be extended towards the lower end; and if placed on the ground may have his hands held above a hard thing as we said for holding him over two stakes, so that both arms are stretched out with his face turned upwards, also any dislocation at an angle from outside in must be treated according to what we said about how to hold him over two stakes.
It is necessary that a compression be administered with the stakes and also at whatever place the injury may occur; and the reduction must be done according to what we said before.
The sign of the reduction should not be hidden from you; and it is necessary that you stretch both his legs, as he does himself, and when they are equal to each other, if he holds tight his foot and extends him without moving out of place: then you know that the member has been restored according to what we said before. Then embrace two thighs with a bandage tightly, and tie it so strongly that there is no chance for any part to move from above downwards; and hold him quietly on three or four days depending upon how he goes over his leg after this.
In that case, you would need to compare the leg with its opposite (the left one compared to the right one), and then align them so they are level; after which, if you see that they are equal in this state of alignment, then you know that dislocation has already occurred: thus, it is now a firm position. Therefore, the affected limb will not be able to walk any more.
If you see any softening or loosening of the ligament or joint, then compare it with its opposite (the left one compared to the right one), and then align them according to your first rule of thumb; and release that limb for three days as well.
In that case, after it has been aligned according to your first rule of thumb, make sure the affected limb is delayed from walking for three days; and only then will it get better.
On dislocations of the knee.
The knee joint can dislocate in three different ways. It can dislocate outward, inward, and downward; or towards the back.
And it cannot dislocate toward the front.
Its mark of a dislocation is that his foot will be pulled towards its opposite knee. If the foot does not hold with the other knee (the right one compared to the left one), then you know that the knee joint has dislocated.
The restoration of all the ways a dislocation can occur is to make sure that you support both knees equally; if possible, allow it to extend its leg towards what would be its back in order for them to meet and place your foot between their feet.
After that, support the affected knee with both of your hands; and then bring them across in front of each other between your fingers over the dislocated knee. Then hold it down with two palms on both sides of its joint, firmly. Another person will then extend the foot towards his knee; until he gets back into position.
The mark of restoration is that you support both knees equally without struggling too hard.
Then hold it down and align the affected limb with its opposite knee. "On days following injury, or four. "After [the] injury.
"But not until after some days has he begun to walk again
"If you reject the reduction of his limb, then administer a strong stretch with ligatures as described above until he is cured.
"Of ankle dislocation cure.
"The ankle is sometimes pulled away [in a sprain], and sometimes dislocated by the second part of its bone. "And the dislocation of his foot may occur internally or externally.
"The sign [or characteristic] of this dislocation is that you see the foot inflated as it comes towards the part which is dislocated.
"The cure of its removal [sprain] is easy to the restoration: and it is that you stretch with facility while holding hands, until he recovers.
"When dislocation occurs by the second part of its bone [ankle sprain], you must stretch him as if his leg is bent: and hold firmly on to it with the strong hand behind while holding onto the other hand at its posterior end.
"After that you hold his foot with your right hand to the top of it and with your left hand at its bottom part.
"Then you pull him towards you with your right hand. "After that, while holding onto his foot with both hands.
"Then stretch it from the left side and pull upwards [with your right hand], without any effort to lift it up by yourself.
"Do that twice as we did before.
"Then pull his leg up to the top of it with a third stroke and you hold onto the hand holding the foot.
"If he has recovered from one stroke or two strokes as described [above], you have seen that the foot is cured and it was good; but if not, then make another application over him to see whether this will help.
"If you are prohibited from reducing it as described above," he [the patient] shall lie on his back with the head down to earth and fix a pillow on firm ground beneath him so that he may die between his legs.
"Then the physician shall receive it and after that he [the patient] shall lie on his side with one hand elevated or with a support above his knee using either of them as a bandage. "Then the physician shall extend all the ministers to counteract his [the patient's] natural flexion and fix a pillow between both legs so that his body is not pulled towards the lower side by flexion.
"Then he [the physician] shall equalize the motion of his hands and fix another minister on the healthy leg at its lowest point. "A dislocation has been caused by a rupture.
"When a dislocation has occurred and declared to you the restoration of health then fix the splint and bandage it tightly with ligaments and tie the leg with a bandage tied to its knee.
"It is necessary that you fix the other foot as far back as possible on top of your heels so that there is no bandaging above them and they are allowed to lie down.
"Then let him lie at rest for two or three days. "If the ligament becomes loose then fix it again and let him lie at rest for three or four days to prevent him from moving about for forty days. "If he is unable to walk before this time has passed and the ligament becomes loose or is torn apart then let there be security that it does not occur again after this dislocation and is corrupted so that it does not receive care afterwards.
"If an illness of a cold hand occurs then you should administer to him the remedy that preceded our narration and anointing until it is removed.
"Of the treatment for the dislocation of the foot.
"It is fitting that which moves from them with slight extension and little effort; this indeed is easy.
If the dislocation occurs on some of the fingers of the hand or foot, then it is necessary to support that limb in its natural resting position, either on the ground (earth) or on a table; and it remains standing just like an ambulating person.
Then you place your own foot upon that which moves from those bindings. After placing the foot on it with strength and endurance until it is released; after that its upper part will become equal to you (the patient) already and not protrude out of place.
After placing both feet on the table which supports the whole foot with two hands together. After tying it tightly in a straight and decent manner for three days. Then you loosen it, so that he may remain quiet from movement many days, until it is tied and secured by reduction.
"In the case of dislocations or fractures.
When anything happens to that, and the care of its restoration is undertaken by him who has been accustomed to long-use art of medicine, being merciful, slow, prudent in all his doings; he alone may sit upon the bed on which it rests, excepting one who is not prudent or patient. Unless you are being led away by despair and grief with the burden of sorrow, and in which some relief appears from that distress. So the care of its restoration is undertaken immediately at the beginning of things, before it happens to be cold [i.e., dead].
If it is restored to health again in accordance with our wish then administer the remedy so as to cause it to stay on that which had agreed to become dry from ointment application.
If the dislocation is with fracture and separation of the bones occur then care for its elimination and make it so that which we have said in simple remedies from him who preceded them in those places
As for you, by your virtue and on account of your protection against entering a fearful path, I shall guide you according to my teaching that has preceded this one.
That which is better for you before your Creator and more constant to your glory, and also a more lasting benefit for your body among those who are with you at that time.
