Having finished explaining this book to you, my sons, and having come to the end of it after considering its contents along with all its explanations, I have decided that I will now read aloud to you the part about surgery itself—that is, the art of performing operations or surgeries using your hands.
Because the art of performing operations has been covered by hand in our region and time period as well, I will now explain to you its rules regarding surgical instruments—that is, the specific tools used for performing surgeries with their own explanations.
However, in our current time period and given the length of medical training required for an artifex to become proficient at surgery, I must explain that the surgeon needs to study anatomy first—that is, Galen's explanation of it before studying how each member of the body functions with its own explanations.
And according to Hippocrates, the name is closely related to the work performed and should be more about the performance than the theory behind it.
Now I have already explained this book's introduction to you.
Since the one who did not know what I said about anatomy cannot correct himself by merely reading it without knowing it or experimenting with it, just like many others before him who were training in this field and were ignorant of its theory but had no experience to speak of.
It is because I saw a woman with a stiff neck as if she were a horse and it pierced arteries on her neck—causing blood to flow out of the women until death took hold of his hands.
A physician amputated another, who surpassed him in extracting a stone from urine, and who had also processed it in his old age - the stone was great Therefore he turned to him (the other physician) and extracted him with the help of a bladder. Because he died on the third day
And I too had already turned to him for extraction - and because of the greatness of the stones, and from the infirmity of an attendant, it seemed that he would die.
Another physician was at the time of a man who possessed his own land and practiced medicine - he fell upon him suddenly with a blow that fractured in his thigh near his ankle: and the attendant physician treated him unaware, tied up the fracture on top of a mule with ropes and stakes, and set about with strong iron bars to strengthen it so as not to release his breath.
So he let go of him according to his wish. Afterwards he released him in several days and told him not to let go of the strap - and remained so until his leg was healed completely, and its weight, and led towards death.
I therefore turned to him - and helped him to undo the strap. And tranquility returned, and he was relieved from his pain.
However, corruption had already been confirmed in the leg - I could not prevent it any longer.
Therefore, the corruption stopped from spreading to another part of his body and died.
And I too had a physician who cut through the cancerous abscess - an ulceration occurred after several days until his malice with its master was great.
Which is because when the cancer is pure from melancholy humor then it must not be treated with iron everywhere unless there is a member that can tolerate it so that all of it may be cut off.
And because of this, O sons of healing, it is necessary for you to know that the treatment must be done with two divisions - namely by associating the health and the division from which there was danger in many ways.
I have read through this entire book from beginning to end, where it contains an operation that is described with both fear and trembling
For you need to read it carefully so that you understand it clearly and distinguish its parts; otherwise there will be a risk of misinterpreting the meaning or confusing yourself while reading it aloud.
So then, with great care and respect for the text, and assistance to the weak from both inside and outside of them, you will obtain a more effective path towards grace and good health which leads to salvation and a praiseworthy succession; and let go of terrible terrors that are difficult to endure. And may you release the burden of fear on yourself so that it falls off by itself into faith and comfort for yourselves.
But then remaining as a glory to you (personified) on this earth more so than before, and finally becoming higher among all things; and after that towards the extent of your own possessions.
Galen has already spoken about certain matters with advice. Do not treat your burden as a disease, but rather call yourself the doctor of your own self.
And I have divided this Treatise according to three chapters
The first chapter.
The first chapter is about caution when using fire and sharp medicines; the second one is about acute medicine of cautery with instruments up to the feet, forms as well as tools for cautery; including all that is necessary in operations.
The second chapter.
The second chapter is about incision and perforation; bleeding and vomiting; ulcers; extraction of arrows and others like them; all that pertains to it; the forms of instruments ordered up to their heads.
The third chapter.
The third chapter is about restoration and dislocation; the correction of twists and bends, and others like them; all that pertains to it; the forms of instruments ordered up to their feet, and as well as the tools themselves.
And before the beginning of an operation with him, it is necessary to mention the quality of the cuts he made and how to dress wounds, showing this through his complexion.
Therefore I will speak about the quality of a dressing for wounds and how to dress them, because this is a complex matter with many nuances and subtleties that only someone who understands it can explain properly.
And having spoken of this matter many times before with the knowledge and understanding that is needed to do so, people have disagreed among themselves; however for me, I am content with only a few things from their words because of my fear of going on too long.
Therefore I will speak about the universal type of dressing that is used for all wounds, regardless of whether there is a wound or no wound; excepting only two types: one where the dressings are cold and without any materials to use them with, and another one where they are dry and without any materials.
However for the dressing in a hot or dry complexion that disagreed among themselves. Some people said that this type of dressing is appropriate in such cases. Others said the opposite of this and that this dressing is not suitable for burns which are a result of heat or dryness; because the nature of fire is to be hot, therefore when one's body is burned by both heat and dryness he cannot recover with cold dressings as well as dry ones but only with heated and dried.
And he who said the opposite of this said that by using this dressing for all cases where it was caused by heat and dryness which affect people's bodies; because when you compare a person's body to its humidity and look at its complexion as if it were fire, the result would be cold.
And I say through his words because of my own experiences in this matter.
"However, it is not advisable to enter into this matter unless you have already been trained and practiced the final course of surgery mentioned above, and have acquired knowledge about men's complexions, disposition towards wealth, causes of their accidents, and intervals of time.
"There is no fear on the part of other complexions except those with regard to coldness and humidity. "All physicians have come together regarding these matters, but they did not agree on the subject of Cautery being applied to them.
"The son of a physician understands from the secret care using Cautery with fire and its application over Cautery while burning medicine. Because fire is simple in action, whose effect only occurs to cauterize the part you want: but it does not hurt another member when it's applied together unless there's more pain.
"The action of physicians towards cauterizing is directed at this part which extends from the body and perhaps makes it difficult to heal wounds within that member and perhaps cuts off.
"Fire due to its subtlety and excellence of substance does not do this unless it's excessive.
"We did not understand this through experimentation due to the length of utility and study with art, and post at the top position above the virtue of things; and for that reason, he was excused from giving a long speech.
"But if it were not for this book of mine, I would reveal to you the secret and hidden things about fire, which could remove the disposition towards coldness through speech by demonstrating with philosophy.
"The son of a physician understands that they disagree on the time when Cautery should be performed and suggest better times for you.
"And I tell you that Cautery should be performed at all times; because the injury which occurred due to time being submerged is washed away when applied with Cautery. "When cautery is used to relieve pain caused by necessary pains, with strength and in the presence of festivity; avoiding tardiness because one fears greater harm than that which comes from a delay.
"Do not let it enter your mind o sons of men; for unless you understand and remember that a cautery is only given by physicians and their apprentices when the pain being treated has been caused through heat: because once cautery has been used to heal, it cannot be undone always. And after having given it they should proceed and see if indeed it works as expected, otherwise do not expect too much from it.
"However, it is also necessary for the cautery to be used together with medicine and its strength, and that of its application; as well as the authority of the master himself: so that there may come a time when its power will be restored after some period according to the condition of the apprentice, or his location, and his own strength. And it is also possible for what has been prepared in him from excess of fluids, which have come into being within him; as well as for what came to him through them, and others like them from their cause - unless its power comes from it.
"The small pain of the many fluids and humors is like the cautery on teeth for relieving pain; it's possible then that he does not suffer from this same pain. "However, this happens only rarely.
"Another speech is to be made after a cautery has been applied for the last time; this one should follow and clarify that which they intended in him: because they believe it was not a treatment that accompanied medicine nor another done afterwards by a cautery.
"However it is contrary to that which they intended and the idea of a cautery being after last medicine: unless when we administer in the ways of treatment some of its own healing power; then later on, after the cautery has been given for all, there comes an end with it.
"The ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron; they did not say this because of the equality in price or the splendor of their material; but they said it was a better place for cautery. However, this is not absolutely true because I have tried it and found that it does not work on certain bodies without working on others.
Cautery with him was better than with iron, as they said. However, when you apply the cauterization with fire to gold, it is not attributed to you, when applying according to quantity than iron because of the brilliance of gold; and when applied on him frostbite, if added above ignition, it will be extinguished by fire, and burned in a mat.
Therefore the practitioner was occupied with this for work; and because of it fit cautery with iron near to us or closer place due to rectitude towards the operation.
I myself had ordered this chapter on cautery according to the chapters; and ordered them from the head up to the feet so that those who want it could get what they want out of it.
The second chapter is about cauterizing the head from the coronal suture downward.
This cautery affects the control of moisture and coldness above the brain; which two are the causes, and the flow of humor from head to parts of eyes and ears, and sleep, and pain in teeth, and in throat: and universally all kinds of weakness caused by coldness, such as paralysis, sodae, epilepsy, apoplexy, and others similar.
The mode of cauterization is such that you should first apply it with an effective solution to the head for three nights or four depending on how much strength and youthfulness and his custom requires.
"Then apply a bandage around his head with a turban. Then place him on your lap while you support his body between your hands in the same manner as before when he placed his hand over his chest.
"Then place his head on top of one arm with its elbow supported by the other. "As a result of this he will be able to use both hands for signing gestures.
Then apply the olive oil cautery which has that shape.
"Then place him on a marked spot with his right hand free to descend and be gently pulled up by your hand. "Then lift or lower the body according to need while grasping the spot.
"If you now wish him to remove his head from the elbow or to lower it onto your forearm. "Otherwise use a stick for support or another implement as needed until the bones are loosened.
"Then apply something from a vessel and wash him with water; after that drink his own vomit to avoid the risk of poisoning or death.
"Then place a bandage soaked in olive oil over him and remove it from above when the charcoal is consumed. "In that case use unguent with four philters to heal him.
They say it is better and more effective for the pus to escape if there's a larger opening because pus needs space.
"Some said that cautery should be applied to the skin up to the nose and it held in place with a cautery until the flesh was seared.
"After this application you will treat him as before.
"Others say that it is necessary to cauterize with a caustic substance until the impression of the wound is made in his nose and then he falls or dies as if by a knife: or use an instrument shaped like an alphabet that women carry, which they apply to the affected part, so that the blood escapes from this place in great quantities.
In order for it to be cured, until it is consolidated
I do not recognize the two species of Cautery except among certain people according to their fear
It is better for me with this [Cautery] when they are healthy.
The head becomes weak due to the continuous solution of its natural state. Similarly, we have tested it on other members and especially when the head is naturally weak; therefore, Cautery species are more effective for healing and better than others, and they should be used with caution in order to operate with them in a healthy condition.
Head IV.
When a chronic pain throughout the entire head occurs and it is prolonged by an illness, and you use remedies with care for them [the sick], as well as for your wife or other relatives [who are ill]. And especially if Cautery has already been done with one Cautery species that we have mentioned and nothing else is applied to it at this time, consider If the head is naturally strong and not weak, but it has become cold due to external factors; then Cautery with another Cautery species should be done for it. After Cautery has been done on every hair of the head's Cautery species, it should not penetrate through the skin and expose the quantity as we have mentioned Cautery should be done on one Cautery species at the place that is called "yours" and it is a location where you put your hand in this case; keep your mouth closed (not to expose it). The sick person became ill due to this chronic pain and different from the Cautery of all heads' pains.
And I say that Cautery should be done at this place and it is a Cautery species that should Cautery the hair of the head's Cautery and Cautery lightly its location on the middle of the head.
Section 2
When the head hurts on one side, or extends to the eye and is relieved with medicines moistening it, and further care is administered, as I described in the divisions of medicine, without adding that which was done completely: then cautery is applied according to two ways: either with an acute burning medicine, or with a hot iron.
Cautery with an acute burning medicine is as follows: apply one tooth to each side of it, and ignite both sides by fire, and remove the extremities from its two ends. Then bind the place where the pain is with a ligature on one side only until it makes into that place under the knife, so that the nose may be cut there.
Therefore bind him there under the knife until it is hidden: then tie a knot on top of him with a good cord and let go after twelve hours or three days depending on how much he needs, and take out that which was left over from two or three days. Afterwards, put on top of him a piece submerged in butter until the place becomes pus-like: afterwards care for it with unguent to heal completely.
And if you want this done using some burning medicines as I described them in the twelfth book about medicine for doctors.
Cautery on him with an iron is according to that method. The cautery, whose shape this is
It is called Claudian because its form of the head is like that of a claw, where there is some quality and importance.
Then put him over the place and hold your hand tightly: quickly take iron from one side with haste until you have removed as much as is in the skin according to its thickness as I described earlier. "Take your hand and place it gently upon the artery below which is lower; if there is any flow of blood.
Afterwards, apply the same hand to salt water and place it on the spot where you have applied it before; let it remain there for three days. Then apply your hand with butter again; after that, treat it with unguent until it is completely healed.
And if the eye, burn this artery gently and carefully using the second fire of Cautery. If an incision is made into that artery within this eye, do not use a different kind of cautery.
By the use of Cautery on the other side
When you are treating the eye and have done what we described in the preceding care (and that which we mentioned regarding incisions), and not performed healing: And see if there is no relief due to it; because as a result of Cautery with medicine, or with fire, then let him use Cautery's cautery until all pain signs over the place are gone, whose length is equal to the middle finger, or rather that one. Then remove your hand gently, and keep it until you cut the artery close to the mouth.
However, it is necessary for you to place the hand on the side of the jaw which moves towards chewing so that its length does not extend too far away and may not cause a spasm; or if both move equally, then it must be as before.
This is on the safety and caution regarding the artery that was cut. For to him it is fear and especially if he did not know what was done there and was not diligent or knowledgeable; and let the operation be given with him first.
And I will describe how blood flow occurs from the artery according to its own mode and at that place of this book.
If you see from Cautery that it is not enough to him for this, and if you see the body soft for Cautery on the middle of the head as we described, let healing occur until he is healed.
"If one has a Cauterion (a type of probe used for cautery) and is administering it to extract an artery with two hooks. The cauterization here mentioned is better than the previous kind, as more effective.
By means of cautery for the pain treatment.
When there is pain due to frost and it stops with cold solution, the rest of the treatment as mentioned earlier, no more pain remains, then a fire Cauterion must be applied: this is called Point whose shape is like that one.
Afterwards the point being applied to it after its fire is extinguished all around the ear's whole circumference like before: or at both sides if simultaneously there is pain on both sides. Afterwards you apply the Cauterion deeper at the root of the ear after using the wax: and there are ten points for cautery on all around the ear, almost as many.
Afterwards healing takes place until it is healed.
By means of cautery for torture.
Head seventh
Torture which is treated with cautery, unless it happens due to the types mentioned earlier from phlegm, as per what we said in the divisions of sweat.
With withdrawn cautery, which was caused by a spasm and shivering in the nerve?
When you cure this kind of torture by the ear lobe, and gurgling in the throat, and if your treatment does not succeed: then it is necessary to apply Cauterion with three hooks at once: one at the root of the ear, another just below that, thirdly at the junction of two lobes.
Then apply your Cauterion from the opposite side weakly If no relief is obtained unless it appears healthy
The form of Cautery is as follows: Cauterio should be applied to the upper part of the ear's extreme, under the earlobe, and another one at the time of the ear lobes. Lay your hand gently upon it until it is burned away entirely
This is the shape of cautery and its species derived from an instrument with a raised edge. However, it is not as subtle as you might expect; therefore, there should be excessive caution when applying the cautery to avoid burns on sensitive areas.
Afterwards, apply a cold compress over it until it has cooled off.
The cautery procedure used in ancient Apoplexy
When Apoplexy is about to occur and the cure is applied with what we have spoken of, your treatment shall not come into play; furthermore, if he does not have a fever, then you must cauterize his head at four points on top of it, in the middle of the head as well, just like what was said before, and in the eye socket where necessary. The procedure for cautery should be done according to that which preceded.
Cauterization is done with the Cautery on top of the mouth; this is final.
Afterwards, when it precedes (the cautery).
Head 9
It is recommended that a large hole be made through the top of his head first and then remove the covering from the brain.
Afterwards, remove completely the skull of him with an instrument as described in the treatise on plasterers; place it at his side.
This is the procedure for cautery; do this according to what has been said there before.
If so, it is a good thing. If not, then make three cuts on the back of his head, descending from the top to the bottom of the eye socket; and put between every cautery some excess thickness for the fingers.
Afterwards, apply a cold compress over it until it has cooled off.
If he is a supplicant and afflicted, then make for him an incision halfway through When you are adding (to the treatment), then cauterize him with two incisions
Then cure his affliction: and place a cautery on either side of the incision according to its shape as previously described.
Cauterize him in paralysis, and with appeasement.
Head X
It is permitted that you proceed to the head's defleshing with this ointment and as described earlier.
Then shave his head after cleansing it with this ointment and cautery halfway through the hair, and on each side of the head's corners as well as above and below, and at the points of the collar bone.
If you are adding to the appeasement of his body with many ointments and he is a supplicant and strength has been given him: then cauterize him four times on his back with hot irons, lastly with one cautery so that all of it may be burned off from its entirety. And take hold of your hand. Then cure him: and place the cautery on either side as before
Cauterize with this ointment
He shall not be cautorized who has epilepsy unless he is one whose comes from the phlegm.
It is permitted to proceed with the head's cleansing first and then proceed to the other treatments as described earlier.
If he is a child who does not tolerate medicines then administer the gargarism and the defleshing of his head in advance many days with the good eating.
Then shave his head after cleansing it with this ointment and cautery halfway through the hair and on each side of his head as before and on all the corners of his own head. If he is afflicted and strong and tolerant then cauterize him with the cauteries which I described for paralysis of the body on his back and at his collar bone, and at the points of his spine.
If a child is weak, then apply a subtle cautery in this manner
Method of Cauterization on Melancholy
When melancholy is accompanied by corrupted humors and thick phlegm, then cauterize him with Cauteries which we have mentioned as being helpful for paralysis
If melancholy is accompanied by excessive declivity towards it and the body is weakened by dampness, then give him a potion that would purge his brain; next, rub his head with a decoction of linseed meal mixed with honey, as if using a washcloth; after this, make an ointment from the said mixture more strongly, like a round bandage.
Then apply it to his middle forehead and he will remain sitting up, supported by all parts of his body.
And you should present the ointment now. It is better than ancient butter oil. And heat him over a heated fire with moderate warmth as much as his finger can tolerate when introduced into him. Then present the ointment around his middle forehead and remove it once a tear forms.
Perform this remedy for the infirm one every week as long as he follows his prescribed regimen until he is healed.
If you are weak enough to burn him with a small number of punctures in excess of what your hand can bear while holding the cautery and smelling it, do this.
This is how the cauterization moistens the brain
And apply something sweet or fat from pigeons onto him after this.
Method of Cauterization on the way to the eye (while descending into water).
The thirteenth head
When you are declared to be the source of water entering into your eye by the signs we mentioned in our passage on the eye, then begin and pour some into his mouth as much as he can bear, so that it purges the head of him.
"And protect him from every humidity, and let him recline on a bed of feathers for several days.
Afterwards apply heat to his head until he removes it, then carefully burn away the hair at its roots. Afterwards burn him with two irons, if the descent of water occurs through both eyes simultaneously; either by placing one over his eye if there is an obstruction through one eye; and cut off all the veins and arteries that are beneath the skin, and make cautery in its breadth for a long time; and also apply heat to the flow of blood.
If you see something coming from him, then immediately remove him and apply whatever medicine is available; I am with knowledge which pertains to the extraction of veins, and cutting them off, and caution regarding the flow of blood.
And when there is cautery in the ear, under two bones, using the final pair of irons.
In order to cauterize in the eyes
When the eyes become cold and damp: then burn with that iron which I described for water descending, burning at the roots of his hair, using two irons above his head, under two bones, by two pairs of irons in the ear. If you add fuel to it, then burn him all around his eyes with a smaller iron above the eyebrows, along his forehead with caution.
In order to cauterize the nasal passage.
When you treat him with that which I described for division, and do not give any medicine; then apply immediately, and give three nights of treatment to the throat; afterwards, remove his head and burn it gently with a smaller iron near its nose. Afterwards burn him with two irons from beneath the eyebrows down to below the hair.
"Hold the artery so as not to cut it.
This is a form of Celsus's technique for cutting into an artery.
In order to perform cautery on the artery using the palpebrae technique.
When the palpebrae are moistened by sweat or moisture, one cauterizes them with a single hot lancet while holding it in place;
And if you wish so, cauterize it above the two eyebrow veins with no more than two lancets in all places; and they will lengthen by two times: and there is the length of all cauteries according to the lengths of the eyebrows: and do not use your hand with the lancet, but according to how much you are able to apply the third palpebrae.
When the palpebrae are pierced with sharp, protruding hairs in the eyes: then one cauterizes them using two hot lancets while holding them both tightly together;
Cautery is performed in two ways, either with fire or using a burning medicine.
When performing cautery with fire: prepare the instruments beforehand in order to remove his hairs if they protrude from them; otherwise they will be prolonged and equalized. If the hairs are protruding on his own part of the body: then hold his eyes tightly with a wet cloth so they won't move until they fall off.
Afterwards the head is placed into your hand; then you apply a mixture of wax and pitch to the palpebrae of his eyes according to their shape; and it is done as per the figure of leaves, being the beginning that signifies near the hairs.
Afterwards you apply a mixture of eggs or honey onto his eyes so they can be applied with a sponge;
Afterwards you perform cautery using fire for this purpose.
"Then cauterize over the figure that you have just made a small number of burns on many parts, until the surface of the skin has been completely burned, like the appearance of a leaf that is dead.
"Your medical work's sign is this: if you have already closed the eyelids with a finger, and hairs are plucked from around the eyehole.
Therefore use your hand at that time: throw it away for three days.
"Then put on top of him a knife with butter until the mark is removed. "Then take care of it with oil until it is cured.
"If any hair remains after the time of anointing and softening the eyelid, then repeat cautery on that place as you did before.
"If hairs are found below the eyelid, then cauterize that one as well until it gets to its own place and becomes equal so that no hairs will get in the eye.
"It is that the eyelids become inflamed and stop hairs until they are healed. "Form from paper to leaf shape.
"Then take from soap and water knowledge, and from chalk not touched by any other weight of a single ounce or almost that one: then do with it in the same way as before but gently, until it is not violated. "Then from the palm take what you have formed like leaf shape as before and put it over the eyelid of one or two. "And then throw under the eye a knife soaked in albumin, and your head will become inflamed in its place.
"Then put over it an index finger on medicine and press it hard. "And you will have pressed it as many times as the medical treatment is painful, because its bite was like fire.
"Having cut off that which he himself inflicted injury unto, then does he release the medicine and embraces it with his own hand. "When therefore cessation of the bite occurs, then remove the medicine and wipe away the eye with water.
"And consider then, if you wish to wash the eye with a cloth as it is washed upon combustion or cutting; well done: and if not, then apply from the medicine above the place where she did not act, but do not smear, until finally, your operation is complete, and your eyes contract.
"Then put over this cotton with butter, until the skin burnings are removed. "And then take care of him with a lotion or another, until he is healed.
"You must also pay attention to the last guardian, so that nothing may fall from the medicine into your eye.
"But if the eye becomes swollen after days and you struggle for something to fall into your eye from the hair, then repeat the medicine over that place where she was soothing of the eye itself as in the beginning. "And take care of him until he is healed.
"And here are the shapes of death's leaf.
"You know that the eyes of men vary greatly in size and shape. Therefore you should consider it this way: And do not hide the path of rectitude for him who is intent on these arts.
"On how to cauterize a fistula weeping (teary) eye.
"When you cure a fistula as we explained previously and do not apply your care differently; then it is necessary that you cauterize her in this manner.
"Communicate to the weak so that he may place his head upon your arm and hold it by its hair, just as you would hold him, so that it does not move nor strike with his head.
"Then, you insert a needle with ink or mucilage into his eye, or put it onto the eyelid of that person; then burn an instrument shaped like this.
"Place the cautery on a curved surface like that of an arrowhead or the upper part of one's hand; if it penetrates further and enters another extremity as well.
However, this cautery is better for your work (i.e., surgery).
"Then take the fistula and extract it along with its sheath, or else open that one up as well; if not opened, then make an incision in it and extract from there.
"Then put the cautery on top of that, let it be ignited with fire.
"Hold on to your hand closer to the cautery at its eye level so that it doesn't get burned; and place it onto the eyelid of the patient or wipe it.
"If you reach the cauterization tool up to his mouth, it will be good (i.e., successful). "If not, repeat the cautery once or twice until you get that.
"Then put it with butter and smear it on with oil to heal him.
"If they haven't healed him within thirty days and he doesn't get better; then put something sharp, corrosive medicine on top of it to burn the mouth.
"There is another way for cautery on a fistula that some people mentioned first. "Take aim at the opening of the fistula and find it; then put on a thin, narrow slit like that of a snail. "And if you find it in the same amount as a drachma of liquid gold and keep your hand with good grasp on the snail-like slit, so that he doesn't get burned all over or fall into the eyes.
"It is necessary that you put above the eye an infusion of alum mixed with water, or else.
Lead may be used to cleanse a fistula and heal it marvelously.
If the fistula is healed as described by Cautio and Curatio (Cauteries), then this is beneficial. And if not, then it must be administered into the nose and reduced to follow through the nasal passage as far as is possible within its own place.
Cautery for wounds of the lips.
Many injuries occur on the lips or what are called pimples, and especially among children's lips.
Since you are to cure the wounds as described by Cautio and Curatio (Cauteries), then use a small ember to cauterize them in this manner.
And with the subtlety of your application.
Then place it ablaze on these wounds until you have seared through to their depths.
After which has been seared with the fire, cure that wound.
Cautery for wounds of the mouth.
When a blister appears at the root of the gums or on the palate or in the roots of teeth, then it produces pus and becomes inflamed: afterwards it heals, runs, and forms a fistula; after that cure is applied to it, without conferring treatment upon it elsewhere, it must be seared by a small ember placed into the fistula. After that you place it the small ember into the fistula, holding your hand tight and keeping close to its body until it reaches the very bottom of this, or do as many times as necessary using two hands.
After which has been seared with the fire, cure that wound as described in the manner of curing until completion
And if it is healed and cured, then this is beneficial. "If not, you must then cut open and remove the corrupt part of your nose.
For cauterizing the nostrils, and smoothing over the teeth
When the nostrils are smoothed out due to moisture and teeth removed with care along with cures that apply with medicines, do not forget: at this point you should place your head on a pillow in your own bed.
After the cautery is applied as described above (i.e., a stick was inserted into the nostril and lit on fire), you should then apply it to your tooth: put the heated cautery in, moving slowly so that the flame does not spread; meanwhile keep your hand close by until you feel the heat from the fire spreading up to the roots of the teeth.
Then take hold with your other hand; thereafter apply the heated cautery repeatedly as before.
After this, you should loosen the patient's mouth and hold it open for a moment; then spit out what is in there.
The nostril remains stiff from drying out, so it should be smoothed over again and the moisture that has been corrupted dried up.
For cauterizing the teeth.
When the tooth pain is due to coldness or frostbite within it, or from frostbite on its surface and not cured with medicines: then apply the cautery in two ways: either a cautery with butter, or fire.
The cautery should be applied with butter to smear it onto the tooth surface and rub until frostbite is removed from the ear or nostril. Afterwards take hold of it (the cautery) and press it against the tip of the tooth. Afterwards smear the cautery with butter and apply it to the sore tooth, keeping hold of it until frostbite is removed from both sides; thereafter repeatedly apply it as before while avoiding heat reaching up to the roots of the teeth.
"If you want to plunge the tongue into butter, or put it into cold butter and place it over a tooth that is hurting; then place hot iron on top of this so that heat may be applied deeply to the teeth.
"However, when cautery is done with fire for removing air from a vein or for cutting off a vein. "And it should be inside his body to prevent the heat of the iron from reaching into his mouth through the nostrils.
"Then cautery is done with a heated cautery; and place it on that tooth. And hold your hand tight until the cautery is finished.
"Do this at once or later with time; for if there's pain [it will] be removed right away or the next day.
"And it's necessary to press on that cautery until his mouth is healed by the warmth of the tongue; and hold him tight for an hour.
"And this is the shape of the cautery.
"Cauterize with whatever extremity you have, according to what's possible; and this is the shape of a vein or artery.
"In the manner of cautery for veins in strophules.
"When the strophules are filled with phlegm and by cold humidity; and they don't obey digestion because of stiffness through muscles; then you cautery them on that day or in the next; whose shape is this.
"Having two open extremities to guide away the smoke from one extremity; and place hot iron on top of him right away. And if it doesn't work [on] that hand, then you repeat this until a deep burn occurs in both hands.
"If the cautery is too hot; then place the cautery according to the amount of pain in both hands.
"Then remove it from [the heat] for three days; and place over it cold butter until the pain is gone that was caused by fire.
"In order to cleanse [i.e., clean] the tooth with a scraper, ensure that the scraper is in its proper place.
To cauterize (burn and stop bleeding) using a forceps, you must first restrain or clamp off the blood flow to prevent it from escaping while you perform the procedure.
When the patient sneezes into a tube going to their lungs and especially when that happens during cold weather, then it is necessary for the nurse first to clear the sputum with saline solution before performing any other treatment.
After cleaning the tooth with a scraper and ensuring it is in its proper place, cauterize (burn) the affected area of the throat, making sure to avoid burning or injuring nearby tissues unless absolutely necessary for the procedure.
After cleaning the tooth and ensuring it is properly positioned, you may proceed to cauterize (burn) with a second forceps at the junction of the collar bone towards the end, in order to apply a tourniquet if necessary after this procedure.
After you have done everything before, ensure that it has been successfully completed.
To cauterize (burn and stop bleeding) into the bronchi of the lungs or trachea, make sure to do so as well.
When a patient has coughing and cold air affects the lungs but does not have fever or phlegm, and an ancient constriction is present (i.e., they are experiencing bronchitis), then you must cauterize them using two forceps above the Adam's apple in the throat's depressed areas, gently. And to cauterize another one at the middle of the chest between two breast bones, make sure that you use a tourniquet as well after this procedure is complete.
If your piercing is done using a forceps that has already been used for another procedure called "Piercing," whose form precedes the piercing of the ear's pain, then there are 30 points before it and up to almost as many after it.
After you have done everything before, ensure that it has been successfully completed.
And the tourniquet is having three coils at this point. Cauterization after excision of a vein
Chapter 27
When the head of the attendant is dislocated due to humidity and does not come back to its place during the period when it should have returned, then there must be a sudden movement for reducing the dislocation first. After that he is carried on his back or over both sides. Then you apply a tourniquet with your left hand inside the tourniquet, and if the dislocation occurs towards it.
With two cautery irons. What is its shape?
Then you cauterize the tourniquet until it penetrates all the way to one of the sides and does not have four irons with him.
And when sometimes three irons are used for cautery, then there will be six irons and they should be arranged according to the subtlety of the force applied.
This is the shape for those with three irons.
And sometimes an addition is made over this way one, then there are eight irons.
Then sprinkle some salt on top of the tourniquet with a sponge. Then gently stretch the patient to keep them from moving at any time until they are comfortable.
If a dislocation occurs towards the top and it is rare to find this position, then cautery should be applied over the upper arm with an iron or many irons inserted through it.
The tourniquet is tightened and moisture is removed from it; and so the patient recovers.
Cautery technique for stomach.
When cold and excessive humidity occur in the stomach until it is removed from its own skin; many catapults are added to it, along with other remedies for curing it; do not give up: then you carry him on his back, stretch out his arms and hands. "Then cautery is performed with three different tweezers, the middle one being inserted into the ear canal up to its fingertips and the two others are used on either side of it for forming a triangular figure. "And while they are trying to grip each other's fingers together when performing the cautery.
"The depth of the cautery is proportional to the third one in terms of its size.
"And the shape of the triangular figure formed is without any addition; and if one cautery performs it deeply within the middle part, this form follows; and a cautery whose depth equals that of the first one will have its shape as a circle according to this form.
"A cautery is performed with a point on the other's finger; and it is so that there is a mark above the stomach as far as the amount of encaustry. And if he performs it deeply within this form: after which, with an another cautery point, do the cautery itself, and then cure him with curing, until he recovers.
"In a way of performing cautery, one should be cold.
"When it happens to the Epate with pain, coldness and humidity or a large amount of fatiness until its excess has exited through natural exit; then he cures the sick one by our method, and does not exceed this. Then let him be supported on his own back so that there is an interval between every cautery according to their size; and according to the length from the rectum of the body, and do not grasp too much with a cautery.
"And let his quantity which is being fed from the thickness of skin be proportional to the middle amount and not more; and let him stand on both feet.
"If he is not standing then a supplicant who has already stretched out his limbs and hands should be used.
This is the shape of cautery
Indeed it may be possible for you to use this cautery when performing surgery with caution and skill, for if your dexterity and prudence are present in the art of medicine
Guard yourself so that you do not harm the skin or any other part of your body with this cautery, as its thinness makes it easy to burn through all flesh from top to bottom, causing severe burns and even death unless used carefully: for the skin there is great sensitivity, therefore know this.
Cautery's method
If the cautery is applied to the head or clothing of Ephasthenes and causes a severe pain without heat, it may be that there was some sort of damage in his skin before applying the cautery; if on the other hand, the cautery's pain comes from within the clothing itself.
Therefore let him take the patient to bed with her own pillow. Then apply a figure of the cautery, covered in wax, and wait for the heat from it to be absorbed into the flesh through radiation. This is its shape Once the cautery is applied with him and burns all flesh until it dies, his pain will cease once his whole body has recovered; then he will be cured by treatment of wounds as required.
It is not necessary to use this form of cautery unless his study and expertise in the art of medicine is prolonged; or if it is the hand that has been accustomed for some time to those troubles with its own experimentations, then he should be allowed to practice surgery.
I prefer to let her go away from me.
Cautery's method in Plethon
The ancients used the cautery with the roots of Aristolochia for Plethon to freeze him by placing them in a cold manner on his head. "And you shall receive from the roots of the common arum a long one, one that comes from it, and let its length be as great as your finger. Then immerse her into oil; light her with fire. Then cauterize one of the vessels between the neck and the head with a heated iron tool, and two others close beside each other on both sides to seal off the area below the beard.
And two others as well in the vessel between the fifth and sixth ribs towards the back; another one into the middle of the chest, and another one above to the stomach. And three others towards the back; one into the vessel between two spoons, and two others on both sides of the chest downwards, towards another that is between two spoons.
And it's not necessary for you to squeeze your hand with the iron as if it were a press; just let there be an odor from its touch.
Some others said that there are people who use the iron tool as a press; they burn and put it into the vessel between the sides until it is full to the top of each side, then the oil runs out, just like we described for the oil lamps of Epatis.
However with this perforation there is a risk that either the sick person will die quickly or it may cause an injury to the wound which was not treated properly.
The method of cauterizing the head of Splenius, which is the last.
When you are curing a cold with the method we described from the treatment of fever and chills, and your care is not complete, then cautery should be performed according to three methods which all are correct.
One is to perform three cauteries or four straight ones along the length of the spleen according to the figure of the irons used by Epatis, which comes first in their order.
And let the quantity of every cautery be as great as your finger or less than that.
"Let the mode of cutting be as equal as that of shaving.
Do not compress your hand with the knife; and let it remain raised above its back when healing is complete.
The other mode for cauterization is as follows: If one holding a cautery has two handles, we mentioned in the chapter on dislocation of the arm; and pull out the wound towards the spleen, where the finger had been injured to the left side; and let you let go it according to its length so that both cauteries fall down according to the length of the body.
Then insert two ignited handles into the wound until one of them penetrates to the other side; then remove the cautery and there will be four cauteries.
If you are cauterizing with a different kind of cautery, holding three handles.
After the removal of this cautery emit a large number of cauteries during several days; for it is more effective than any remaining from previous care.
The mode of cauterization in Hydropis.
Cautery does not fall in Hydropis, unless it is one's own.
When you cure Hydropis with the mode of care we mentioned for division and without correction, then it should be that cauteries are placed on the navel fourfold; one above the belly, another over the epa, another over the spleen, two post the back between the shoulders, one into the chest, another into the stomach. And let the depth of the cautery be closely related to the depth of the wound.
Then remove an open cautery so that it emits pus for a long time.
And after the cautery do not treat an injured one with that same care; it should be done so that two intentions are gathered to him: and he will recover with the help of God.
The form of the cautery with which it is cauterized in the belly should be sharp; and according to what precedes its shape for him. And that one with whom it was cauterized on his back should have a large size, according to what preceded its shape for him.
Cauterizing the Feet and Fingers
When the head is immersed in heated water and soaked with red wine vinegar, a cautery should be applied to the soles of the feet, between the ear and nose; use your thumb as a cautery, but do not pull it out until you have tested its effect on both hands: after that test its action again by withdrawing one hand from contact.
The vinegar will soften the cautery in accordance with this shape.
After this, apply two cauteries to each foot and use both thumbs for that purpose; fix a cautery between the knee and the calf, going around it halfway up the leg; above all apply two cauteries in one line on either side of the thigh: remove the open cautery without delay, so that something from water may be applied or tested by it. After that, cure him with what we have said.
Cauterizing the Feet Solution
Head
When the solution is taken from cold and dampness, until the retentive and digestive powers are weakened and exhausted; which are in stomach and intestines: cure him with the method of curing, but do not heal or restore health to him; test his toleration by a generous cautery that excites the powers, then apply the cautery large on his belly according to what preceded in the cauterization of the stomach with a circular cautery, four cauteries in the subtle circumflexes with a small, sharp one: and also use two cauteries above the ears and above the eyebrows with a big one.
If you find excessive dampness and weakness in him, then apply a cautery to his cheek as well; also use two smaller ones above the belly near its top part.
The cure is efficient, without any error.
Cauterizing the Haemorrhoids
The sixty-sixth head
When hemorrhoids occur on an old head (caput), or one, and they arise from excessive heat, coldness, humidity, or corruption of moisture; then they should be treated as described in the previous section, with cautery. Cauterize three times at the inferior angle below the breastbone, using a small flame, like two fingers; and cauterize under the belly button just with two fingers.
And if you think that his stomach is cold and he cannot eat or swallow, then cauterize him with a large flame above the stomach; as before mentioned. Cauterize over his anus also, and one over his spleen, using a small flame for each, after which, release the cautery immediately: thereafter provide treatment, until he recovers
The seventy-second head
When you have made a cut to the head (caput), then apply fire to the cautery Then introduce the ignited cautery into the cut itself; and finally your hand, until the blood flows out through a new opening; either one time, or twice.
If there are many hemorrhoids then cauterize each one with the method that we described. Then provide treatment to them as previously mentioned, until they heal.
If you cauterize him with a large flame over the anus, it is more likely that the last will be through urination.
The method of cauterizing Fistula in the Anore
The eighty-eighth head
When the section and operation that we described were not enough to heal him at his own place, then he should be cauterized with fire.
Because the fistula occurred and became old, there was bleeding from it, and humidity corrupted it. Dignifiedly, what needs to be done is that you attempt gently. Next, determine the depth of penetration required for it.
Afterwards, apply a cautery similar to that used in surgery. Afterwards, introduce yourself into the fistula and measure the depth at which you entered it.
And then repeat with another cautery until all the corrupted bodies are cleared away; once, twice or three times, depending on how deep you entered.
And hold you back from the sharp edge of the knife if there is one; or lead a fistula into contact with a female body part, then into contact with an intestinal body part - at this point, hold you back in these places all around.
Do not do that unless the fistula is located on a body part that can be penetrated; and think carefully because it cannot penetrate.
Afterwards, heal the area as much as possible.
If the place is sealed off and materials are removed from it; then remember that this has taken a long time to heal - at this point you know that he is now completely healed.
And if materials are not removed from it; at this point you know that he is penetrating either into a corrupted part of his mouth or nearly so - the memory will return to its own place.
In order for cautery
When it happens to Renes that pain is caused by frost or great cold and the cause thereof was due to a sick coius; at this point one must cauterize him above the heads of the Renes, with a cautery over all the Renes itself, over each Rene with a similar cautery, whose memory remains.
And perhaps we should cauterize him again at his own request. What follows three lines Therefore, the remainder of this writing is complete.
In order for cautery
When an injury occurs in the bladder area, there is a softening of the scrotum and its moisture, until it does not retain urine; then cauterize it near the top part of the penis (right side) with fire, or if unable to do so using two cauteries on either side.
Mode for Cauterizing the Scrotum
When an injury occurs to the bladder area and moisture is prohibited due to this, and the semen of his penis are corrupted, and delayed ejaculation occurs; it should be cauterized with two fire irons near its belly button, as mentioned in the manner for cauterizing the vesica, but near the lower back, or by using two cauteries.
Mode for Cauterizing the Anches (testicles)
When the moisture of the mucosa of the Anchae occurs and causes death to him at his place; its sign is that it is stretched over one another when they are pressed together: and the site of dislocations is where there was a fire in this case.
Therefore it is recommended that he cauterize the infirm man over the mucosa of the Anchae with a similar circle; after which you should put its sign together with wax near the center of the circle, as mentioned earlier.
If you do not have this cautery present at the time of injury, then cauterize it with three fire irons and a very large one; make its depth proportional to the extent of wounds on his body as a whole.
After that cure him until he is healed
Cautery for sciatica
When the pain occurs due to a cold in the head and there are causes of its chilliness and humidity; then care is needed for this. Therefore, cautery him/it
The mode of cautery is according to two ways: either with medicines or fire.
Cautery with fire is done in many ways.
One method is to cauterize the three cuts on the skull above the eye in this manner. And let them have a good or bad depth. And there is space which is between every cautery and its size in digits; also cautery with oil.
When a cautery occurs in the middle over the head of him/her. There are four cauteries.
If you cautery with a circle whose shape is that of the displacement of the cuts above, one method would be to have it enclose all the anchors together.
And remove the sharpness from all the skin.
This is how to cautery for sciatica when the pain occurs at the anchor and does not extend until it reaches the hip and leg.
If the pain extends until the hip and leg then you cautery on top of the hip above where he/she sat; also a fourth cautery on top of the thigh with four fingers, that way it is done
The depth of cautery depends upon the sharpness of the skin cuts.
If the pain extends until nearly to the fingers of both feet then you should cautery at that place where he sat with a cautery point or three points; if four is needed then you do it with four or more.
"If a pain occurs beneath the knee joint and extends upwards towards the thigh, then cauterize it with one cautery.
For all your cauterizations: so that you do not use a single cautery at the end to burn through veins or arteries and treat any bad swelling or constriction.
I have heard of one and many others who cauterized above the knee joint and at the end of their cautery it swelled up and a tumor came from the foot to the whole body was perforated, and death followed shortly after.
If there is pain in both parts at once, then cauterize each according to this method.
Some wise men said that the method of this cautery was for burning hooks. Make it similar to a hook with the middle of its palm width; and in its own hole place this third one according to the length of its fingers, or smaller if needed; insert it into that hole next to the second one.
And have space between every hook according to the number of fingers; let each one open on both sides as if it is a finger; and make them stronger with a steel hand on top.
It is then burned by fire until it is red and emits flashes; afterwards it was placed on top of a hook that had been made weak to support the healthy limb. Therefore, cauterize him with three round hooks into one cut at once.
Afterwards remove it for three days. After this, smear the wound with butter and remove it after several days. Afterwards care for him with ointment until he is healed.
Albucasis finished; thus are the sons of hookers used for this type of cautery out of fear and because very few were expected to come upon him.
Certainly is from good cuts for him who suffered and found a place with him.
Cauterizing tools when used with medical utensils are beneficial for cutting through an armor and reaching the heart's door, either by air or fire (smoke from burning), length of walls is required (for piercing). Two nodes in height are needed for this action, two knots as well.
And the space between the two amounts of body digits is opened, and it should be below and above as well (the action continues). And they should bind themselves according to this shape.
Then place the cauterizing tool on the anchor of the arrowhead, then gently bring it across a long straight line (the path). And grasp your hand firmly onto the anchor of the arrowhead very much. Then find between two circles from a heated water which is heated with fire and holds the quantity of hours and times: and allows for the infirm's taking away his bite and his burning himself as it does with fire until the biting stops.
Then take your hand with the instrument and remove hot water from its whole around completely with sweet water: then put it aside for two days.
And put on top of that butter until the soot removal is done: then put it aside for days and continue from its flow. This is the ultimate in burning (lit: "last" or "final").
And then cure it with ointments until it heals
If the pain extends to the knee or leg, then fix him into it what you bound with water according to that which you did on the anchor equally.
And this is a method of hot water: and I have written about it in the medical treatise for the correction (lit: "rectification" or "correction"). Take away the alkali and burned parts of both arms one at a time; then put it into two new bowls whose lower part is perforated with one hole (lit: "hole") according to how much you are going to feed him your radius, and place another bowl under the other arm as well. And pour over the alkali and ashes from hot water that submerges each of them separately by hand; after which you compress it tightly with both hands, then put aside the bowls until the sharp water from below descends into the other bowl.
Then collect this water entirely and pour it over another bone; then rinse
That is to say, the heat of cautery (or searing hot water) applied at that time would be useful or beneficial for administering medicine and in the process of closing up wounds/membranes. Because it accomplishes operations with fire itself
And for medicines there are, with which large cauteries can be used and as mentioned before when using them in combination with wine or vinegar along with the salt, so that both may be mixed equally.
And Galenos indeed reported, from whose treatment certain men have obtained relief for the pain of anchalasia and sciatica; he praised him highly because of this. He said so because he did not need another treatment and had become healthy from a single application of the ointment, until it was necessary to bring him back as long as that ointment itself had been applied within.
And it is so that the ointment of seerag may be taken as a remedy; and if this does not work with a remedy, then dry treatment must be applied instead; and it should be rubbed in quantity for three hours or until three times the amount that sedates when exposed to fire. Then pour him into the ointment.
And then he becomes very sick and is brought to a bed or couch. The pain had passed away, and he recovered.
And remember that one must not use fire with these medicines unless after the body has been washed or cleansed.
And Dioscurides said that the goat's head when it was burned with one sciatica brought relief; and it became a remedy of this kind. Wool is applied to him and the ancient oil is poured over a deep place between his fingers and toes; it is very close to fire and can easily catch fire.
Take a thorn from a goat and heat it over fire until it becomes charcoal
Put the heated thorn on a bed (lanum means 'bed' in Latin), then remove it, so that it goes out Repeat this process Don't stop until the sense (of pain) has reached its peak and settled into a bed of peace, at which point it will subside (from pain).
And this mode is called cautery, or the Vaccine Way
Pain from Dorsy.
When pain is caused by multiple causes or accidently, due to blows or from pushing out fluid and air, or through the means of evacuation, it occurs with the same effect as when there's a cold infusion into the body; but cautery itself does not occur unless only in this way, which happens after a cold infusion.
Therefore after evacuating with foetal pills and they are the same way to do so on Dorsy when pain is present, three lines in length following the breadth of the alleviation thereof, after signs have been done by a caustic all around the fifth line of cautery or more than one second according to their amount which was given from the allowance of the infirmity virtue of theirs. And let cauterization be made with cauterie points.
If you're using three cauteries or four with a middle one, then in this way (form).
The mode of cautery to be done when the bleeding stops.
Many times do this trick fail with infants.
The sign of the bleeding is on infants; when it happens above them by a constriction while being carried away and moving; and finally in them at the last spine of Dorsy and their nodes, which have already begun to rise up over the remaining spines.
Now that you know this, and want to do it yourself: at that point cautery is done with a circle around in the same way as before.
"All veins should be cauterized equally and if you are cauterizing the vein of the hand then two lines or three.
After curing it [the patient], until he is cured with what we have said.
And avoid administering the cautery to a trembling vein that may cause a spasm of the nerves.
Cauterize with caution and join the veins while dealing with Podagra.
When the pains from cold and dampness occur to any part of the body causing it, when they strike the feet by custom is called Podagra.
With this cure for cold and damp causes of Podagra with care in the application so that they are no longer felt.
And it is, to cauterize him after the evacuation of veins on both feet with many cauteries and sit on the foot cautery.
And if you are unable to make the points on your face then do with the cautery as the dots. If the pains rise up until the knees or the other veins and it has happened many times then cauterize him on all three of the legs with that cautery or four across all parts using this same cautery of Claudius.
If you need more than one cautery then do so. And not to plunge your hand with the cautery as much as skin is thin.
If they rise up until the knees and the back then administer what we have said by the cautery on his head.
If they are only felt in your hands then you make points on both sides of the veins as two lines do if they come back to two lines again.
If there is remaining from the pains in your digits then make points on both sides of them over all the fingers and above the hand.
If pain rises up after three days and goes to the shoulders, then cauterize both of them from every part
And do not apply any medicine or remedy if you are in good health or have taken a doctor's prescription If the body is well and it is appropriate to follow a treatment program, then purge the phlegm with the help of God using the cautery.
In order for cauterization to work on cuts
When a rupture occurs in the genitals and descends into the intestines or towards the scrotum, it is near to completion: then you must stop feeding your patient for one day. And if by chance the stone has descended within itself (i.e., is in an internal location), it should be loosened with gentle measures.
After that, put it on your chest and urge him to hold onto his desire until he has passed or the stone appears in the intestines.
After that, reduce it with your fingers and apply the cautery over the nostrils using a sign similar to the one used for opening the ears. The sign should be placed so its extremity is towards the top of the body (i.e., towards the head).
After that, apply a hot iron cautery which has this shape until it comes out and burns through to the brain (i.e., towards the front of the head). After that, reduce the intestines or scrotum towards your feet. After that, put your hand on the place and do not let the intestines go out: you have already opened between the fingers of the patient, and placed a pulse beneath him, while another is above his fingers who holds the other hand.
After that, apply the cautery over this sign with your right hand in its proper position (i.e., straight up). And hold onto him until he is accompanied by other signs or liquids which do not come from the cautery itself (i.e., they are unrelated).
"When you observe the exit of the intestine during a cautery procedure, do not touch it; instead, let someone else perform this task on the weak or dying, so as to avoid great harm.
"You should know that when you cannot cooperate with a cautery procedure, do not perform your own operation.
"The cautery for infants should be as delicate as possible, according to the size of their bodies.
"Then care with other ointments until it is healed.
"The weak or dying person should lie on their back for forty days, so that the ulcer will heal.
"You should provide food to him in proportion to the duration of his care, so that he will not vomit during meals or after eating.
"Then wait forty days before administering a ligature to him; and he should be held for another forty days.
"The time of work will decrease, and the fullness of food and drink, as well as the ease of urination and defecation will increase.
"When this treatment is given, so too healing by complete cleansing occurs.
"I will discuss the cure for ruptures when I insert it into its chapter.
"However, when ruptures occur in the rest of the body and are just beginning to be visible, do not add more; then burn the ruptures with a wide ligature as before according to their size; thus that which is burned from now on will be like an additional part for him. "Then care of this type [for ruptures] with what we said earlier: do not add to it.
"Some people suggested that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular ligature, in this shape.
"After signing it [the rupture] with the wax, a line is placed that stretches from the upper side of the rupture to the lower side. "Then place your hand between the ligature and the wound.
The first cautery is easier and better.
For cauterizing due to a wound or shock.
Chapter 80
When it happens to some members due to injury or shock, and persists for a long time causing pain, then medical treatment must be sought; at that point an incision should be made with a sharp instrument
The cautery should be applied to all members in proportion to its power and suitability, and weakness, disability, strength, flexion of the torso, and pain caused by it
If healing occurs through the first cauterization is good. If not, then try another one on top of it.
Since the custom is to change from member to member according to their pain. Therefore, let them be treated with the cautery until they are cured.
For cauterizing in Leprosy
Leprosy sometimes requires maximum effort for cautery. Especially the type of Leprosy that occurs due to the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy; take into account when cautering it.
If Leprosy is incurable and you treated it with him without success, as we mentioned before in the division; then do not descend or remain unchanged: but times upon the infirmity that comprehends the corruption of his entire complexion, then cauterize him on top of five cauteries: one to the middle of the head near by noting, and second below over his forehead at the end of hairs, and two above with two horns, and one behind with a horn on the ear.
And with your hand more strongly when using the cautery until it makes a small impression on the ear; and the membranes are torn from it; so that breathing becomes easier for great exhalations from it; and also cauterize it through its nose as well, according to what has preceded.
In that Lepra has already spread over a limb and is now clearly visible; it should be cautorized using these cautories which we mentioned for the head, and to cautorize both ends of the nose as well as two cautories above the collar bone at both sides, six above the dorsal vertebrae, one above the tailbone itself, on each side over the hip joints, two over the elbows, two over the chest area of the person, and to cautorize him over all connections with the help of your hands and feet.
And cautorize those nerves above the heel so that you do not crush them.
When a cautory is to be applied over the mouth of the nose or the stomach, and another one over the ear.
You know that if there is a greater amount of cautery applied, then it will be more intense and more effective.
You know that the patient did not feel any pain from the cautery as healthy people do; therefore, his body was already numb due to previous injuries or ailments.
It is necessary that the cautery be done in a way that it has power and control over the members and joints according to what came before from the sight of tools.
After application of the cautery with flour and honey paste until it is healed
The way to perform cauterization.
If a limb is stunned and cannot be treated with medicines or oils, then cautorize the member as needed to increase its effectiveness according to how strong it was before.
Your cautery should not penetrate too deeply into the skin. After applying the cautery with ointment until it is healed.
"When cautery was applied to a certain paralysis that affected the hand and foot, it resulted in numbness of both members; upon which point the paralysis would cease.
"It is not to be considered beyond what one understands from an examination of the members and their exits (nerves).
The first letter of "Libri" (books).
"When Albucasis operates and finds nothing of importance in his examination of the cautery: then he makes a deeper incision with a sharp tool as needed, until the numbness is removed and the color returns.
"Afterwards he cures him with flour and herbs, and lathers him with oil and rose water; and washes his face with the columbine flower and hyacinth's blood: in one part is a mixture of all these ingredients; they are applied to the cloth, and held down until he is cured.
"Concerning the cautery used for cancer.
"When the cancer is new or first appearing and you have touched it; then he cautorizes him with a circular cautery within his circle as before.
"The wise men said that cautery should be applied last of all to the middle part.
"But it is not clear to me; for I fear that it will fester, and I have already seen this sometimes.
"It is better then that the cautery be applied within its circle as before; or with many tools (cauteries).
"Concerning the cautery used by Albucasis.
"When someone has adubelates and is delayed by their maturation or over-abundance of semen; or from old age when they are weakened in blood supply; or from time to wait until the maturation process is complete, then cautorizes him within his circle with many points of a cautery. And he dismisses her. She will celebrate with maturity.
If the perforation is made skillfully and carefully, then a cautery iron of this form is applied to close it.
And he places her [the patient] between the hands of Aebulatus; then let him penetrate with a knife until it reaches to the cautery iron which is its form.
After that, take care of him so as to be cured.
Cauterize using a corrosive substance instead.
Caput (head).
The corrosion is not only the corruption of a member that moves, but also he was corrupted; just as fire burns wood without fail.
Therefore, if you want to use a corrosive substance on the place that allows the cautery with fire, then apply many irons of different sizes and shapes at once, in proportion to where the corrosion is occurring.
After that, cauterize him from all sides until you remove the entire corruption without leaving any trace of it.
After that, dismiss him three days and place a substance of sulfur mixed with oil on the cautery points so as to remove all ashes entirely without leaving any trace or corruption.
And take care of him using various ointments.
If that is the case after three days he becomes born with a healthy birth and no corruption exists, it's good news.
And if not so; then apply another cautery on the place from which the corruption still remains.
The corrosion is treated sometimes with a sharp medicine. This will result in a spot of cautery.
But if the cautery is done with fire; and I myself said that it should be done with a sharp medicine, then you must take her there when she becomes ready for it.
Cauterize using Claws and Pricks (scab blisters).
"head L
An abscess formed on the foot's lower parts; it is large, and has a thick discharge that wets the foot.
A cautery was applied to them [the abscess], according to two methods: with fire and also with hot water.
When it was done with fire, the cautery was applied to a depth of about as deep as the thumb nail; and then there is an edge that is very thin.
Then let the flame be placed on top of the cloth. Then let the hand be brought around with the cautery towards the depth of the cloth; and after three days it will reach to the bottom of the cloth, until a discharge begins from its top. Then let [the cautery] be wrapped around with many strings and placed upon him at night. That will remove it from its source (or roots).
Then let a cure be applied to the affected place with unguent and oil; until [the patient is] cured or healed.
If they are not cured and many abscesses occur on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet; then apply cautery with hot water to them; or you can use a needle or pen's tip; and let that be placed upon the cloth as well. Then let the small amount of hot water be applied to it; hold your hand firmly tight and bring your arm around with a compression of your hand, so that the edge of the needle will reach deep into the cloth towards its root; and expect it to begin dripping cold water from its top towards the bottom and the roots. And you should watch closely for how long until an hour has passed before any pain or discomfort comes due to the application of hot water.
Then let it be removed because the cloth is destroyed along with its roots.
Do this to them all one at a time, until you have applied it on everyone who was affected by them.
Afterwards, when they have been removed, it generates flesh from the fat.
Cauterization in trembling
If a tremor occurs due to cold, or fourth fever, or any other cause: then it must be cauterized with four cauteries, or five above the ribs, and across every rib, and on his chest, and above his stomach.
The tremor ceases when cauterized with oil of vitriol, and health is restored due to the cold's chilliness.
Cauterization by Albtahir.
Seventh cranial nerve (trochlear).
When Albtahir's food is expelled from the body, that is, when pus forms on the surfaces of the flesh due to corruption of materials.
Therefore first, when appearing, they should be cautorized over every head with a subtle cautery using the end of a steel wire, which is heated on fire. Or with the root of the long-stemmed Aristolochia. Or with a small cautery.
And when they are being cautorized at the beginning of their expulsion, according to this manner; and no more is added; and fat is removed from them, making them healthy; and they heal through that.
Nevertheless it is necessary after the evacuation with phlebotomy.
Cauterization from flowing blood out of arteries to veins.
Many times due to the flow of blood from the artery that was cut on the vein, causing external damage; or by cutting a vein through an incision in the member, and similar things happen to him, making it very difficult for him to be separated from them.
Therefore when that occurs to him, immediately with your hand put it over the opening of the artery and put your finger on top; and pull him very hard until his blood is underneath your finger, so that nothing escapes from him.
In order to cauterize a vein with olive oil and a large number of them at once; after applying it, the vein should be burned through
After taking one, or a few, or many veins (as required), and placing the ligature over that place where the artery was divided; after you have withdrawn your finger, hold tightly on to the ligature until blood stops flowing.
If you expel the ligature along with your finger from the artery's opening; after removing it, take another one and apply it more quickly to those veins that have already been heated up (preheated).
Do not cease doing this with one ligature after another until blood stops flowing.
And also ensure that you do not crush the small veins nearby and put it over a damaged artery.
And you know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to tear it apart; especially if there is a major artery involved unless with four or more methods. Or using a ligature, as we have said before. Or by extraction, when it is not extracted (removed). When it's extracted, its extremities are crushed and blood stops flowing. Or with a strong ligature (cord). And if placed on it medicines of property are applied to stop the blood flow; and tied with a gentle constriction of the veins (ligature).
Who administers excision with a ligature and constriction using a cloth or other method; and the same for them, except rare cases.
If you are not present to him at the time; then start with placing your finger over the opening of that vein as we have described before and constriction around it until the blood has stopped flowing above the knee and over the artery. And your finger should not be removed super it with a cold water application to the cold forever until frozen and swollen and torn apart.
"In the meantime, take note of what is appropriate either from the surgeon's skill or medical science.
On incision, perforation and phlebotomy on veins (of the same kind).
I am the tenth in my chapter of a hundred, every eagerness with both the cautery and medicine, and their occasions, causes of theirs, and their instruments, and forms of the cauteries.
And I placed them from the wrist to the foot.
And I proceeded by this chapter, so that he could be relieved of his search.
And before I begin that, please note the sons of Adam, what is from terror in this chapter it is from the first chapter on cautery.
And therefore it is necessary to be cautious when performing the operation here, because many times during this chapter the evacuation with blood comes up, and so life perishes from the opening of one vein or incision above the thumb, or the exit wound, or care for veins, or extraction of arrows, or incision over stone, and others: from which all tremble, fear falls into many deaths.
And I remind you so that it does not fall upon you what is the hatred, because sometimes they come to you by this art of men with the modes of weakness. From these is he who is angry with his own eagerness and the death of him follows: because of his eagerness that which entered from his weakness and its length made him miserable. And when the fear which means death comes out,
and he who gives his own sting to you and said with him hoping for health, the eagerness of his is deadly.
Therefore do not let him who came upon you from those whose mode is like that agree to you. "Let your caution be greater than your desire and folly. "Except for something proven by knowledge in that which brought about a praiseworthy result.
"In treating all the sick of yours and yours, prognosis and indication are necessary for that which is better for your health.
"This thing will be a great help to you in acquiring fame and glory as well as reputation and praise.
"God or His sons have inspired you with their intelligence and did not give you direction and inspiration because that was already in your hand.
"I also ordered this chapter by distinguishing it from the chapters of caution until its end at your feet so that you may be relieved of what you sought and know for which purpose.
"About the treatment of water accumulated in chapters of boys.
"Chapter 1.
"It is known that this disease often occurs in boys at birth either when the midwife pulls a boy's head free from his mother's womb without proper care.
"And it also occurs by an obscure cause that is not known.
"I also did not see this affliction as severe in others as it was in boys, and death often resulted from that. Therefore I thought it necessary to remove the operation of that part.
"I also saw from a boy whose head was bound with water and the head became magnificent every day until it could not lie flat on itself because of the size of its head; and moisture increased until he died.
"This also is moisture either under the chin or on top of the nose.
"In that there is moisture between the chin and mouth, the operation must be done to find a wound on the head, so that it makes a split longitudinally across the middle of the head; and its length should be as two knots.
This is a delicate form
If the humidity is greater, and therefore the seal becomes larger, then make two incisions in order to reach this shape
And if the humidity is under bone and its seal, which you wish to open up completely all over, then water will be depressed when you press it with your hand towards the inside, and this cannot be hidden from you: so that three incisions should be made in the middle of the head, as I said earlier.
After making an incision, remove all the humidity. Then tie up the incisions with cloth and wool And then wrap it tightly from above with wine, oil, and olive oil until tomorrow morning.
Then apply a bandage and take care of the wounds with strips and ointment.
And do not tie up your head evenly. And keep it moist with dry food until the member is recovered and healed.
Another method of incision is to determine where the seal becomes large, and then collection of water.
Because sometimes there may be a greater injury on one side or another, so that when there is an incision you should consider if it occurs to the left or right.
Then ascend with the incision where you see the seal and collection of water, until that is done according to what you can do.
And observe not to cut the artery and cause the flow of blood, causing death for the limb with removal of humidity.
Of incision in arteries that are behind the ears.
Head Two
When wounds occur on the eyes or face and become healed, then further care is not given to it, except for one last incision at that point, of the two arteries.
Then you must make an incision in order for the limb to be raised up when needed. Afterwards tie a bandage tightly on place with strips and then show the arteries. While supporting his head with one hand and holding a towel in another After he has supported himself as described above, let him come over here. The two places are the ones that are below the ears of both people and they do not commonly happen unless some men have them.
Then he signs with a cistus over each and strikes both of them with a spatula, causing one to fall into the mouth as far as its height extends upwards from the head; then let this be done along the length of the forehead.
And if there is a vein, he enters with a spatula under it and strikes at its top with an incision.
The length of the incision should be like two joined fingers.
When an incision is made on one, a blood flow escapes from it, which splashes into frequent streams inside.
If the artery is not visible to him, then he should measure off three fingers' widths of space from the ear. Then he signs with a cistus and finds himself up until his mouth.
That which it is necessary to extract from the blood should be done in one inch or more out of him and less than that. Do all this according to the amount which appears to you from the veins of his body, being attentive at the same time to the fullness and looseness of his arteries as well.
After he has supported himself as described above, let him come over here. If anything is left from the cistus in his mouth after he has found it, then he strikes that and does not let it drop on a cold one; then you should support his head with linen strips.
After he signs as described above, care for him with unguent until he becomes better.
Of the extraction of the arteries that are inside the temples
Head Three
When a man has a hemorrhage on the old side of his head or an acute catarrh from acrid and sour fluids due to coldness in the ears, or he is suffering from a hangover with nausea; and also similar cases: then it should be treated as we have taught you before, and not put that there. Then our master taught us how to do the extraction of arteries from the temples and cauterization on the same principle.
To make an incision into the ears, there is a method by which to remove the hairs that are within the borders of it, and then direct this towards the visible artery at its place When you receive from your own pulse, it is rare to be hidden unless only a few people or extreme cold
If that happens (it's rare), then he ties up his head with a cloth and then quickly covers the place with it. Or if there is warmth in the place, then an immediate appearance of a visible thing would appear to you. Then take quickly what I made before And then you will remove the wound with it in a gentle way and direct towards the artery at its place. Then pull gently towards it and remove it from above and then remove the piece of cloth that is below it from every part of it.
If the artery is thin, then gently take it with a hook to it. Then remove the part that you cut from its length as they are extended and contracted, so that no blood would flow out. If not an incision is made or if not a removal of it occurs, then there will be no ascent of the red liquid (blood).
Then remove with water from blood to VI and III.
If the artery is thick, then it should be taken out at two places with a double cord or cord of bone and either from both sides towards its own decomposition before fixing in wounds or there will be blood flow out.
Then remove the excess that is between the two ligatures. Do this at that moment or after a certain time (?).
And if it is necessary to burn the wound with a cautery until it reaches the mouth while holding back the cautery and then the extremities of it are taken out so that it will stay in its own work place.
"The best work is not that which has no feverish weakness in its body, nor one with a heated complexion. Because the cautery is applied to those who are running towards dry heat or dryness Therefore it's best for them
After removal of arteries, let there be applied a clot made from old blood and placed upon it with gentle care the products (ointments) mentioned above.
And after application of a dry solution made from herbs and ointments until it is born [i.e., the meat has been cured], then with liquids (scalpels) until it becomes healthy.
If in the meantime the flow of blood from an artery has been blocked by a cautery or the like, then quickly approach and remove him with the cautery, or until you have opened the vein (with a knife) and removed the blood with your hand [to prevent loss]. If there is nothing of that sort present to you at this moment, then place a finger over the locus and wait until the blood becomes frozen. And cover it with ice-cold water until the heat subsides, then bandage it according to what is needed [i.e., as directed by a doctor].
And from that which is best and easiest to remove an artery with (the use of) this cautery having two irons; the heat of both irons being similar, they are able to apply it easily and quickly [i.e., with little effort]. However, their heat is much less than that of two irons. Because if they are acute (hot), the same as two irons, let them apply alternately with ice; and not cut meat while applying. As a result of that there is much less fat on them and they hold the heat of fire; and the flesh is removed either with ice or by force (cutting); as for this reason it is best in all matters, most efficient, and most easy [i.e., to perform surgery].
This is a form of cautery (burning).
And let there be a space between the two irons of the same size as the thickness of your fingers; after that you apply both irons with wax and each one ignites, until they reach the mouth and are applied to the flesh in two places [i.e., on either side]. So it is stretched out what lies between his extremities. The wound should not be treated with this method/means
The head is now treated with cautery (burning).
For the treatment of tears and burns on the eyes.
When tears are very wet and they are over the top of the skull; and nothing of a medical treatment should be applied to them with medicines; you have become red, you feel it on your forehead like a burn from the eyebrows; and his eyes are made moist, so that the hair has already been burnt by this corrosive solution. And then the eyelashes of him were treated in such a way as prescribed for removing eyebrow hairs, they called what was done to them "curation" (removal).
It is so that you shave the hair on his forehead that are very thick After the forehead is shaved (remove eyebrows), make three incisions equidistant from each other along the length of the face; and the length of one such incision may be about two fingers wide, and one between the nostrils in the middle of the forehead, and another on both sides at a distance farther than the motion of tears. And for the cutting of the arteries that are on both sides: and with your extended hand from the front to back and the side to side as much as three times the length of three fingers combined; or you can take sponges or many wet cloths, while you prevent excessive loss of blood.
After that, insert a small hook into the other two needles and their end is like this (shape). Until the incision that is on the other side of time and with it you cover all the skin that is between the two incisions up to this point (shape). And then do this, as well until the middle incision And then take out this small hook and put it into the first incision again (another needle) from a slack part of that one but not from another part. This is his shape/form
He cuts off the artery with its own force and severs it at once together with veins; he then loosens his mouth-level vein, and pulls him forwards, until he reaches halfway to that which is visible of his belly: when this happens, he must cut through to the bone, removing everything below from head to eyes.
Afterwards make an incision at half the distance towards another groove/cut
After he has pulled him forward with his own strength to halfway through that which is visible of his belly, he loosens up the vein from his mouth level and pulls him further forwards until he reaches half-way towards another groove/cut
Afterwards, with the assistance of a hollow tube (pulliolus) made from a gourd and/or reed, he pours in all cuts up until now, and on top of them, oil or vinegar. He loosens it so that the incision does not get cold/chilly.
On the third day he loosens up the ligature and administers a hot infusion with warm water. Afterwards, he treats it with the ointment of the Basilisk (a type of lizard), and all the other things that are being treated: until it is well/cured.
Head V.
He treats the eyes with tears, and the nose with catarrh from within the head.
When one of the acute catarrh falls upon him (the patient), he is swollen and inflamed in all his parts; his eyes are drawn out with great tension, and it has become visible that they are now weakened: and he has ulcers on his eyelids, and the hairs fall off from them, and there is a very sharp pain in his head too, unbearable, so that he cannot endure/bear this any longer.
The treatment for this situation is as follows. He loosens his throat/choke him so that he may vomit forth the phlegm/catarrh. Afterwards, make an incision in the middle of his face or above it further upwards by distance/length, and make a start at once from the left side towards the right side with the cut made on the left; then make him swallow your hand until you reach to his mouth: when this is done, you will remove all blood along with sponge.
"Cut between the two lips and apply ointment made from linen if it is a fresh tear. After that tie off with cotton wool, then drink the mixture of wine and oil to prevent your mouth from getting cold.
And when it is time for eating, you must know that your mouth will soon be cold; at this point you should spit out the food so that saliva can cover it.
After that care for it with the following regimen so that it makes flesh grow; as if you were eating two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophon: prepare an ointment from these ingredients, and administer this to promote the growth of flesh on these wounds.
The sixth head
"Care for him when he falls into the sea.
Every time someone falls into the sea, there are four species involved: rocks of various kinds like iron and stone; or it could be from plants such as iron, wine, and grain; or any other type of liquid.
When someone falls into the sea from a rock, or any other kind of stone that is not added to it so that it grows on top, remove that particular rock and distill something from olive oil instead. After that administer the extraction to him and apply it with a bandage around his mouth so he can swallow anything from food or cloth, after tying off his head by using hair or wool and extending upwards towards the top of his head.
"For many reasons this kind of care is needed.
If not, then administer the extraction with Signatura (a medical term) using a device of that kind; its shape is like this one.
So if you use Signatura instead, it's good.
And if not that, then administer the extraction with a blind-folded device made of fine threads.
If not through this method (using the blindfolded device), then make a sheath out of air and insert its end into the ear canal with much force; and apply what is in the sheath around it gently with olive oil so that there should only be one path, from which you extract forcefully using your own strong pull.
We have to agree with him about what we will discuss If you don't agree with him this way: take it from the bowl or spoon, prepared as follows, so that what is taken can be seen clearly: then place it at the end of your thumb after you hold on to it firmly and securely with both hands while turning upwards towards her gently but carefully.
If we cannot agree on what to discuss then proceed with the following steps: first make sure it is hot and soft before you take hold of it; if not, try again after a short pause.
And the method for making an incision is to cut through the veins first and then extract the blood according to its measure of virtue and strength. Then firmly grasp the limb of him that you are to treat and turn it towards yourself above; then gently find a proper place in the root of his ear near his fat part; after this sit the incision as a crescent moon shape; and when he is ready, remove him with the thing which can be done by means.
After that you have gently opened up your incision while holding onto it, then care for yourself until it is healed.
If a swelling occurs on the ear from one of the veins which are increasing and becoming inflamed then you should give him an administration for its removal.
If this is not agreeable to you at the end of it then take hold of it gently and subtly according to this shape.
And you administer it with him the cutting out of this part from the veins which fall in the ear and do not make that happen when you think that one of these ear veins is already swollen; after this place it on a plate many times: then remove them gently, or subtly through the use of fingers, or by sucking up, just as we said.
If water runs into the ear then you must let the person who is sick cough with it first and foremost; after that have filled their own ear with some old fat and hold on to them firmly while standing over them so they are above the ear which has the water in it. If I am correct, it is good
If not (i.e., if I am wrong), take many stones, according to the length of your fingers, thin and light, and ignite them with a fire from above so that they may strike him on his head; also throw one over his foot from there, and hit him in the head with another stone near at hand, Then it would not be done until all the water had been consumed by stones and stones.
And I am correct (i.e., I have consumed the water), take one from a pyre and another from a jug; and insert both extremities into his head; and light both with fire until all of them are burnt up. Then take another and repeat this many times until all the water is consumed; and remove her (i.e., extract them) with a cannula according to what was taken from the stone.
In removing animals inserted into her, if it is light of body, as a puppy; and him (i.e., to that one) care for him like I said in the cutting up.
However if it is heavy body which appear to sense; then administer the removal of him with a gesture, and hands; and his remains are easier for all who hold them (i.e., take them) from the head.
In removing the products of generation into her head when you care for him as I said in the cutting up and in the distillation treatment; and not to concern yourself with the care; then it is necessary that you strike his head on the sun. If therefore something appears there from the products of generation, then take away (i.e., remove) that with a gesture or hands.
If however nothing appears there (i.e., if the products of generation do not appear), then take a cannula whose form is narrow below, and wide above; and insert a small extremity into his head according to what he can tolerate from that (i.e., according to how much weakness he has); afterwards suck with these strong suction. "Let every (man) go forth.
If they do not obey you at the time of departure, then surround them with a cord and lead them out as I have shown on stone.
Which, if they do not go out with him as we have shown: then administer the distilled extracts that are already familiar to those who are experienced in treating wounds; and apply this to the passage of the distillate.
And your breath is released through you as oil is poured out and medicines are applied around with this instrument whose form is depicted here. Like the pipe from lead, or from air, narrower at its lower end where there are the pulmonary holes and wider above it.
Therefore let him pushing which is on the tube of the cannula be done from the air by less force. Take the tube from him with a gentle hand; and when you come to that part of his clothing which is next, apply it gently too as I have described for oil; then pour out the oil or take something else suitable, such as he has already mixed into them in the cannula: and this must be applied on top. After that release the tube with a hand compressed in a tempered way so that its force may drive the oil through the cannula to him who needs it; feel him gently when you come near there, and apply it warm at one end of his body; do not let any cold medicine enter into this.
Head VII
The care of hair injuries
When some infants from mothers are separated, the ears may be torn.
And it also happened to some men of old that the hair was plucked out from their ear by force or flesh.
And this plucking sometimes happens deep into the ear canal but does not come out; and sometimes it is done to only a small part of the outside ear hole and comes out as well.
Therefore those that happen deep into the ear canal but cannot be seen are difficult to treat because of their many positions.
In that area where the bleeding occurs one must put on a tourniquet at once and press it firmly into the sun; next, make an incision there; then if you see a visible vein, open it with a delicate yet sharp instrument, whose form is such that it follows what was described above. The extremity of this part should have some slackness to its extent, while another part shall be acute: and remaining parts must gently move in opposite directions so as not to harm the tourniquet
If therefore bleeding has occurred through an ear canal; then tie it with a delicate instrument and make an incision into the ear as quickly as possible.
If bleeding has occurred deep within the ear; then take a delicate instrument and gently heat it with fire until you have cauterized it into the ear canal.
If you encounter bleeding with that which has become weakened through repeated blows to the ear; tie off its opening quickly and cauterize it so as not to damage the nerves of the ear.
Then put on the ear an ointment according to its size and extent of the holes; use it for some days until you are secure from weakening.
Or take an ointment, and pour it into a hot bath; rub away the old one with its mixture of vinegar and honey, and then use this new one
If you see the ear is detached; then take off the ointment and let it remain with another one that has been mixed with olive oil from an earlier application so as to be used for healing.
If a blood flow occurs; then immerse the sponge or towels into cold water and put it over the ear canal; continue using the remaining cure that was used to remove the bleeding from the previous treatment of distillation.
Of the cure for eye-lids.
The eighth head.
These are the eyelid eyelids when they are moist and dry.
"Therefore let you hold them with the fingers (of both hands), or with one hand and strike them with the nails of your other hand. Then place it on the swelling, saying:
If any blood flows from them, then burn them with a fine curved needle
And after the cut is made, it will be better to burn them. For many times they return when something remains from their roots. And if we burn them with fire, the roots are burned and do not return.
The care of cataracts in the eyes.
The ninth part
Many times an injury occurs in the eyes that is similar to what Crandinus does with his great strength and toughness; hence it is called granum (a kind of cataract). The aggregation of large moisture above and below the eyelid is also called a granum.
Therefore there is an operation to be done when you see one of these cataracts starting on the eyelid and spreading to both sides; it will be easy for them to remove all parts of it.
Find then a hole with a width that is large enough Then shave off all the parts around it until it is gone. Then suspend them with one hand and remove them separately.
If the incision is not made by you or someone else, then it will be harmful to that person only after they have penetrated with an incision more deeply.
If the hole is large, then gather up all of it using sutures; and care for them until they are healed.
And if the hole is small, you will not suffer any harm from that. But when it is restored and healed,
If the granum is located on the inside of your ear and the surface of its inner side, then you should remove it from both sides of that incision with one hand; but after removing the incision itself, be sure to remove all parts of it completely.
When an eyelid is stretched due to cutting it does not cause harm
After the incision of a blue eye with salt water, and take care when putting in place to prevent injury.
The treatment of eyelids
It's unclear what this is referring to without more context.
The treatment of eyes (Axirnath) when they are being pulled up towards the forehead by the eyelashes during sleep or in a fit: and this can happen to children who are slapped with their eyelids shut by a hard object on waking, and thus cannot open their eyes to the sun; therefore, because the tears flow into those eyes constantly due to the swelling of the lids, which often make them moist. And the prominence of Axirnath appears in an eye when one approaches it with one's fingers, and one feels Axirnath between those eyes
The method for treating this is to place the patient's head on your lap (in a sitting position).
Then take the bandage and prepare it on his head as if wrapping around him completely from all sides according to the extent of swelling that affects Axirnath. Then put it on top of her and press with both hands all around so that Axirnath is centered within the circle.
Then find a middle between the wetness and the tears with a break due to latitudinal slippage that does not result in larger breaks than those from phlebotomy in the deep (venous punctures).
It may be that you will have to find a complete break so that the tears of Axirnath from multiple sources can accumulate on the white lining of the rupture, as Axirnath tends to come out through small breaks due to the form of the tear's edges being white.
So take it out with a bandage that you applied to the outside of your hands and hold tightly as needed on both sides until the tears disperse; then, do not apply anything into the wound so that no more tears run down onto his eye and remove him from there.
If you cannot see Axirnath at the beginning of the wound incision, then make it as small and as simple as possible while it is still being made; after that, cut into Axirnath After making a small incision like we have taught you to do.
After that pour vinegar and water over the wound, then place them on top of it, and bind it up with bandages.
And there are those who have brought salt to the wound and place it in a damp state within the incision so that what remained from before may be softened by the moisture.
Then take care of it until it is healed
If you make a mistake while making the incision and bandage it with dry bandages to prevent infection; then take care of it until it is healed.
Regarding the application of Ataxmir for treating eye problems: when the eyelid becomes more relaxed and soft from using Ataxmir, it will be as it should be; that is, smooth like a normal eyelid, not dry or irritated
The end.
When eyelashes on the eyelids become longer than normal and grow beyond their course under natural hairs, they then cause discomfort to the eye; they can make it tearful, dry out its lubrication, whiteness of the eyes, until it leads to the destruction of the eye.
Ataxmir is indeed used for treating four ways in the eyes. Or by burning with fire. Or by using a strong medicine that has been mentioned elsewhere on this page about cautery. Or by making an incision and bandage. By using a tube or cannula, as I said earlier.
It is advisable to put your head on the table of the surgeon, where it will be held by the surgeon. After that, you close the eyelid with your left hand.
So if it is done correctly, this is good. If not, insert a thread from the lower part of the eyelid and pull it through with the needle on top, then bind it up near the eyebrows; that is, near the upper edge of the eyelid where eyelashes grow out of, and draw the thread to the other side with your hand along with the bandage.
"Furthermore, find that eyelid is covered with hairs and swollen by dropsy near to tears up to tears, but not below.
"Next remove the eyelid's thread and place a small pad of cotton or cloth beneath it; then apply a mixture of soot (encaustrum) to the upper lid in the shape of a mourning veil.
"However, it is necessary that this image be proportionate to the size and thickness of eyelids; because it varies among humans.
"In such cases, apply only enough to cover the eyelid, as its size is reduced by dropsy.
"Finally, find that eyelid is swollen by dropsy near to tears up to tears, and it has one cut through the natural hairs of upper lid (to prevent infection), as its size is similar to a large radius.
"Finally, remove the thread from the other eyelid's corner. "Then remove this whole structure. "Finally, apply a bandage with two lips and the thread of fine wool; then remove blood, make it to adhere where there is excess from the hairs on top of both eyebrows, or not, don't do anything.
"Finally, remove sutures and thread for three days at least; then care for this.
"If you wish to do so, remove the ulcer without sutures and care for it with its own removal and constriction. "The eyelid is enlarged by ulcers in both of them; but a future improvement may come from this.
"These are the methods used for treating Ataxmir by those before us.
"However, there is great eagerness to improve it; and this can be done with good surgery without fear of danger.
"Another method for treating Ataxmir is as follows; and it is that a mourning veil be applied to the upper lid in the shape of an image on the eyelids like we have shown.
After having separated the vessels, either separately or together, according to this shape which follows, I shall cut away what is excessive with smooth, curved knives, according to this same pattern, cutting equally
If you are unable to hold one vessel separately but it is equal to that, then take another thread in the place where there was one, and insert it into the middle of the figure; afterwards insert another thread closer to the lachrymal (teary) vein more than, and another closer to it less. And arrange your fingers so as to cut equally.
After having separated the vessel with equal treatment of both hands, I will make an incision above what is marked down by my right hand, just as we did before.
Afterwards, tie the two lips with a thread, and carefully sew it up until it is done.
If you happen to encounter any difficulties while making the incision or tie, use this thread gently and carefully as if it were honey.
And sometimes when encountering an eyelid and eyelashes too, we will turn its hair inward.
Therefore, let us proceed to the suturing as before mentioned, except that sewing both is more difficult and requires greater artifice. Of the treatment of the eye with a stick
And it is that you gently separate the eyelid and cut away what remains according to what was said before. Afterwards with art make two threads or two slender hairs of the same length as the eyelid's height and width shorter than it; and you have already made an incision at both ends where your fingers are held apart equally.
Afterwards, tie both firmly to the excess of the eyelid and release them after a certain time; this is how you will complete the suturing. The strict cut must come to an end quickly, and the incision must be degraded over time until it falls off by itself.
If it takes time, then immediately cut through with scissors Then, once healed
Once dried and firm, the eyelid opens up; hair does not itch.
These are the forms of two canals on the face that follow this shape and measurement, length and width
Head 12.
The itching of eyelids with sight
There is an operation here to gently insert a thread from the soft part of your hand through this slit for suturing, do not be rough. Then gather both ends of his thread and knot them in a simple knot; let one end of the thread be short.
Then put another thread through it from below in a quick knot and tie both ends to each other's ends tightly, firmly.
Then place your own head gently into your hand and perform the operation; for this is a subtile or minute operation.
Then insert the thread into the root of your eyelid and make it penetrate more deeply into the eyelid until you have extracted a natural hair from there.
Then draw out the thread until it is above the slit; then insert into the slit of the other end a hair or two hairs or three hairs, but not more hairs.
Then take hold with your hand and draw it out until the natural hair comes through along with the thread from the slit of the eyelid.
If the thread is drawn out but no hair comes through along with it from the slit of the eyelid; then draw the thread down to the lower end where you placed the knot in its beginning and until you come out of the upper opening, tie both ends together firmly on the eye socket. And after three days or so let a hair grow out there by itself and fall upon his face.
If the hair is short then tie another long one onto it from the natural hairs and draw it out with him; or let it be tied down until after a time passes by itself and then extract it.
Chapter Thirteen
When an ulcer appears in the eye, it is called lypophora.
It can be either a natural occurrence or an accidental injury to the eyelid.
If it is accidental, then it could be caused by a blow, cut, burn, or similar injuries.
The method of treatment is as follows: to find the cause (e.g., a cut), and then separate his upper eyelid from that part of it which was injured; next you should put some liniment or ointment on the wound itself, so that if there's any eye inside it, you can save its sight by carefully removing all the membranes from around the eye.
You should not do any more treatment on his other parts that are affected and restricted by the injury, for if you make this mistake, it will worsen what was already injured; instead of using a soothing substance to calm down those parts which are being irritated, like soothing liniment: and smear with water until you have soaked all the membrane from around the eye.
Your treasury of remedies is that they are used carefully and intelligently so as not to become consolidated, according to how it was done at first.
This treatment we mentioned earlier is only a remedy to heal the ulcer, and not anything that would undo the shape of the place where it was located after all.
How to heal an ulcer below the eyelid that is a swelling or contraction of the upper part towards one's right and left side.
Chapter Fourteen.
This is an ulcer that appears below the eyelid, which they call lypophora. It can be either a natural occurrence or an accidental injury to the eyelid.
If it is accidental, then it could be caused by a cut, burn, or similar injuries.
The method of treatment is as follows: to cut through the double fold (filum), and then pull it out from the skin, and make sure it goes up towards the inner corner of the left eye; and then go back down to the outer corner of the right eye, until you have pulled the double fold all the way.
In order to remove flesh from above downwardly with an incision and strike it with a blunt instrument on one side If the figure of the second eyelid is as required, this is good
If not the figure of the second eyelid is as required, take a piece and place it in an incision, and remove it with that eyelid; and find two incisions on one side inside the eyelid, and are the extremities of the two incisions from two angles of the incision, until they coincide and there must be made out of them angle; when they gather up there is to make out of them figure, and there is Greek letter praise.
Afterward remove the flesh by amount, which is the length of his eyelid lower than that one follows; from it follows the eyelid Afterwards collect the separate parts: tie her with a thread of wool.
Afterward take care of them as we have said, by means of medicines and oils until they become well.
And if the eyelids of Alxatrati are injured with an incision and stitching or cauterization; it is necessary that you find a flat incision under the eyelashes, also according to what has come before it. Afterward separate between two lips with oil, as we have said.
And finally of the care of Alxatrati when it is above or below, as it should follow from the operation according to what was prepared by shape of Alxatrati.
This is the multiplicity of shapes: and a wise craftsman prepares the mind with whatever way it can be; until he redirects figure to a natural form or close by her, and him same infirm, according to what was arranged for him from the operation and instruments in many positions.
The fifteenth chapter.
With joining eyelids or cornea.
Whenever this consolidation occurs among many people, so that the upper eyelid is consolidated with the white of the eye and prohibits him from his own operations naturally.
"It is allowed that you move the end of the forearm beneath the eyelid and lift it up; or extend it with a hook; thereafter cut off its attachment with fine tools in order not to cause pain by incising the palm with such instruments, so as to be bent downwards; after which the eye will be healed securely without causing any discomfort, when released according to its natural form.
"At that time, pour into the eye a saline solution; or distill it from fresh water, so as to dissolve its contents by means of water.
"Afterwards separate the eyelid from the eye by means of a small line; and put over it an infused thread with white wool; after three days use it along with bandages.
"From cutting the forearm and the arm above the elbow [to] the tears of sorrow.
"Head Six
"It is known that the forearm has two methods. "One method is smooth; and the other is like a sickle, sharp-pointed, and fine. "The other method is not smooth; it's like the blade of a frozen white water; when it strikes on iron, or grasps it with a hook, it can cut through and does not remain stuck within.
"Both of them do not start until they have met with tears that are greater; and after a while (the time varies) when they meet the eye, they close it off from seeing or moving.
"The mode of operation in cutting this is to put your head into its embrace [i.e., strangle you]. "Afterwards open his eyes and lift the eyelid with your hand. "Then grip the forearm using a hook of double teeth, and extend it upwards [to strangle him]. "Then take the hook from the horse's hair and bristles; bind it with a cord; or fasten it in any other way: make it strong enough so that its double points bend [the forearm] upwards, and tie them at the middle of the forearm to prevent slipping away and to enter into him by means of an acute point. And when you have entered, bind him tight with the string from the horse's hair; extend his arm up towards above; and cut off any hairs that follow after the pupil, unless you grasp it [the arm] until its very end.
In such cases, cut off the excess of the lacrimal ridge with a fine needle and spit out the natural meat of the eye, so that it does not run down from the incision like tears in the course of its habitual activity
And sometimes with a thorn or with a thread as we have said before. After that it is scraped off using the fine needle mentioned above, this is its shape.
And let it not break through to the skin around the eye and tear out the pupil.
After making the incision: In the eye apply a small amount of something salty or from a bandage soaked with it and let it come out by itself until another day. Then take care of that which is necessary to be healed.
If the thorn is not pointed and cannot be put into it without causing damage to the eye or by tearing out its flesh, then you should apply various medicines with the help of a needle as described before for healing such kinds of wounds.
If you are to make an incision in it then open the eye with a fine needle and take out what is pointed and thin, mild and of low sharpness according to its shape. And wipe off the thorn after the incision using a fine needle. If you find that the thorn is being removed and it has been cut or pierced into the eye but for this reason of its own shape then let it go out by itself from your eyes in a small amount of salty liquid, wet bandage soaked with it or salt, until another day.
Then repeat the operation above until he is removed completely. Unless there are cold objects inside your eye then you should let that go and take care of the eyelid until it is healed.
Then repeat the operation above until he is removed completely.
However, if the flesh of the eye is being harmed and the damage is significant, you should suspend it with a thorn or thread and make an incision on that part of him; and do not make incisions after this to prevent the course of tears from continuing.
After washing with tear-off liquid, it is necessary for him who wants to succeed
By making an incision through the sphincter muscle and placing the flesh into the eye.
The seventeenth part of the body.
It is necessary when some human flesh has been mixed or placed into the eye, so that it can be opened and moved towards the pupil of the eye, or pressed against it, or even drawn over the eyelids themselves, and in any case it will turn away from the external part of the eyelid.
And this operation is also necessary so that a sick person can place their own head into your arms. After washing with tear-off liquid, you should open their eyes and hold the entire flesh together with the fingers while gently guiding it towards that; or hold onto it with one finger, or by grasping it.
First make an incision into their body and then completely bring all of them together using the tool you have. After this, you should not insert it into the operation unless absolutely necessary; or make a separate incision at your end to bring them together with hooks, which we will apply in that incision above their eyes: or hold onto them with several fingers while they are being brought together by those hooks, so that after all these operations are complete and completed, his head should be removed.
After you have made your incision and removed the entire flesh from their body, then wash off the tear-off liquid as soon as possible; or dissolve it into a warm broth with corrosive medicines to soften its hardness; and place that over their eye so that any frost can be prevented by rubbing on it.
If anything remains from their flesh and you have a warm blood to hand, then let it go; and rub onto the eye with the warmth of another's hands so that any frost can be prevented by rubbing on it.
After this has been done for them, you should continue to perform your work until they are finished.
And do the same thing with any flesh that falls into the eye by this method.
Although it is necessary to restore the sight of someone whose eye has become weak from natural causes or accident, by means of iron; and you should not insert your hand into any of their operations, until this thing which is causing the problem with them has been removed
Removal of a cataract
Head 18
The new growths that occur on the eye prevent the patient from performing their own operation; and they weaken the eye as time goes by.
It is therefore necessary for you first to check if the cataract in that eye is strong and there are no other causes of weakness apart from it; then remove the cataract itself.
And after this, so as to help them most effectively, you should place your head on your shoulder.
Then hold on to the new growths with one or two fingers according to your judgment; and make sure that both fingers are soft enough so they can fit into the body of each patient separately, or if there are two patients have them both in their bodies at once, depending on how you choose.
Then remove the new growths gently and carefully with very soft fingers; after which you should wait until they are removed from their eyes, at that time your finger tips will be worn down.
And if you perform the surgery during daylight, and hold on firmly to your own hand while performing it; so that you do not strike only them but nothing else.
Then after the eye is dilated and ready for your work or growth to be removed; you will bring out that one or both growths with your own force, so they are destroyed by its sharpness.
If you are unable to remove the entire growth at that moment; then use a separate instrument to hold on to only that part of the eye which causes pain in it; and wait for days until the pain has subsided completely, after which you will try once again according to this manner until it is cured.
This is the shape of scissors.
Reduction from the nose
The head has 19 bones.
A barber who treats with a razor must use it gently to avoid injury, or if an acute remedy is prescribed, the narration should follow that procedure.
If it does not heal itself immediately (i.e., the barbering did not help), then there is no remedy left; unless one finds a remedy outside his body, and purges all the moisture that is in him until he opens his mouth.
As soon as it was opened, one could see within the corruption or blackness (i.e., the infected area), then he treated him with an instrument of that shape.
The barber is called a doctor of the head.
Let him shave the head with a razor such that it is round and smooth as flint, or with a more pointed one for a more precise shave; then place him over the corrupted bone of his forehead.
Then take him between your fingers and press gently with the other hand until you know that the corruption is no longer there; then put it down on an area of its own.
After that, restore the place by rubbing it with stippled sticks (i.e., pumice stone).
If the place is restored and there arises flesh within it, and a discharge from the disease course away; then after forty days it remains, does not grow again, nor falls off on its own, neither does any bad thing happen to him by chance; then you know that he has already been healed.
If not, there is no remedy left within it unless one reduces the razor to the nose hole; as such a shape requires.
If you want to shave him with a blade and find that the second bone is not visible due to his hair; or if he is treated with an acute remedy; or when you know the mouth has been opened; then take the comb of this shape and apply it firmly, its end tapering as shown, to his forehead.
In turn place that over his head; and it should run towards tears; and stretch out your hand from your shoulder as much as possible Then remove your hand from the eyebrow; and let it penetrate into his eye; and feel that with this (hand) he caused him to escape from there when holding his hand over his nose.
So then restore the place while the physicians are attending; just as they have shown you.
With that being born is the flesh, and becomes fixed place; then material which had been towards the external, it returns to the nose; therefore this latter one above him who was ill.
Of reducing importance of the eye
Head xx
When the eye comes out with its entire extent and does not fall into a socket or tear, neither decrease nor diminution; then it is necessary that one should alone attend upon him who was ill; afterwards draw off his blood; later place them in the ear without incision but with a tube.
Afterwards place over the eye ointment which is made from acacia and aloe and oil of myrrh and carmine. Afterwards stretch out the eye above on top of the socket with many a filament.
And the mode of the filaments is this way; that you take the long hairs and make many from them on top of four; thereafter place one atop another in their quantity as it pertains to the eye; afterwards stretch out over them with a hard cloth, and bind tightly.
And repeat this action using only a tube.
Afterwards draw off the tubes and release the eye tightly every day and night.
If however the second filament becomes slackened then it is necessary to stretch out much; afterwards draw off the second filament at day and night as we have said.
If however you see that the eye is well covered then this is a good thing; and if not, then repeat stretching out of filaments as we have said until he becomes healed.
On opening
On opening the skull.
When the disruption of the skull occurs within the vein's tunic, afterwards it emerges and proceeds outward to the eyeballs as a mass of blood does, and it becomes shaped like that of a man due to this; so you should strike at its base from below to above
Afterwards pierce another with two veins next to the eye and lead her into it; and release the first one according to your own arrangement.
Afterwards you strike the two veins' place and tie her around with it; and tighten her much.
Afterwards you draw out of him and place a ligature around his eye; then release him until the vein is entwined with it.
Afterwards treat the eye as such that it be cured from its wound.
And when you tie a linen ring around all of it (the vein) with cordage until the eye's height is greatly increased.
Afterwards you draw it forth gently with a slippery substance so that moisture may enter the eye; then you move it down and bring water to it quickly; afterwards tie him up until he is cured.
On treatment of the eyes
On opening the skull.
The treatment which is called Alcmonatic, unless it be healed, gathers together into the eye like water descending, and itself is not.
The mode of operation with this is that you make a bed for the sick person above or below, as it suits him
Afterwards take his head in your two hands from the two sides and move it until you bring him to the lower part of your eyes. Afterwards it lies there and does not fall down; its light is extinguished; the sick person sees as he saw before: if it did not go downwards, you know that water has gone.
"If one does not prepare a descent of veins with that which we have said, then let him proceed to sit on your hands. Next take the delicate sponge and find it above the skin's surface at a place where you have joined its end to the tunic of the cornea on top of the eyebrows, until it reaches the veins.
Then proceed to pour the warm water into the eye where you have previously applied it with honey or wine: first apply it separately and then mix together with the rest of the treatment until healing occurs.
For the cure of the water that has descended into the eye, or cataract.
Head 23
We have previously mentioned the species of water for cutting and perforation; now take it in accordance with health.
Then it is necessary for you to proceed so that the sick person sits on your hands squared and opposite the sun, near the top; secure his eye with your right hand if the left eye has water, or with your left hand if the right eye does: then draw him gently towards his face, release heave-ho, repeat this until both eyes are healed.
Afterwards take with your right hand the balm if it is on the left eye, or with your left hand if it is on the right; gently draw towards his face and release.
Afterwards place the thumb on the top of the head through the length of your arm; gently draw it towards you with care and respect until it penetrates into the tear duct; and then you will realize that the balm has already reached its purpose in healing.
And it is necessary that the measure of the path of the balm reach deeply; and the distance from pupil to end of the black part of the eye up to its border is measured, which is the edge of the eyelid. For both then apply it to the pupil itself on account of clearing the tunic of the cornea.
Afterwards place the balm up until the place where there is water. Therefore place it beneath another piece
If it descends from water immediately, then that part of the body receives a swift blow and is struck down by its own hand immediately thereafter, and blood is seen to come out of his eye
Therefore, let the arrow rest If it descends from water, then let that second piece be set aside, except for what might come forth with a thrust.
When it comes to pass and does not rise up: then remove that piece along with its companion quickly and you will make haste with your own hand.
Therefore dissolve it in water, so as to extract a clear stone from within; then remove its eye after it has been extracted. Therefore place the entire shield upon the eye, or tie a loop of fresh oil around it; and put honey on its edge as well; then bind with it a band for the eye to be restored.
And we, who are of our times, place upon him a fillet of thin linen with honey on it.
If the arrow is not removed from your eye because of its sharpness, although it has come forth by a human hand, whose eye is harsh and hard; then let you take this thing called Alerid, which has that form.
Therefore bind it with the same knot as tightly as you can, and do not use your hand to thrust it out; only let it be so that you make a way leading to its place cleverly.
Therefore insert the arrow according to what we said earlier.
And at the completion of your work there will be an infirm bed placed with care in that dark house where he lies lying on his back; and it is forbidden to move by all ways, and not so either: and place for him food as nature has made necessary for him: and let his head remain fixed straight neither right nor left.
And have the bandage placed according to your own disposition, from one day until another.
Therefore place it in that dark house and make him see the face of a man. "Then cut back the tendon up to seven days.
"Do not let it be done during the period of care or immediately after incision; but it is necessary that another person do this as soon as possible so that water can rise quickly through a wound made by the cut.
"If the wound becomes cold, then it is necessary that another person open one eye before seven days and correct this with him who holds the knife until he finishes; at that point cut off his head and lay it on top of his mouth so that the eyes are lowered as much as possible under a dark house.
"Then go to the home gradually and become accustomed to your cases.
"You know that a student should not be excused from practicing for a certain amount of time; then he may dare to perform the operation.
"And indeed from someone among those who are of Albucasis it was said that the deed had been done by cutting a hole to let water through.
"Indeed I did not find someone from your own land who had done that; nor could I find it in any of the ancient books and it is possible to make this new.
"These are the species shapes from the magda so that he may stay on top of them who has forgotten about them.
"Be they from the true air and with this same subtleness of triangles as sides and sharp extremity.
"The head is twenty-four.
"Of the care for the newborn child's nose.
"When there are many diverse things added to the nose of a child born; and from this is something that resembles the legs of many scorpions and from this arises a cancerous vein which is made up of flesh colors and from this arises one that is soft but not made of flesh.
"In those therefore which are soft and not deceitful nor cancerous it is necessary that you make them rest in the hand of one against whom you have placed it alone; and open their nostrils to him; then strike off once into these meats, and then draw them out towards the outside; and cut what you comprehended from them with a delicate sharp blow at part.
"If anything remains after its removal whose severance is impossible, then with the help of a subtle instrument that facilitates this may not be removed. "If blood is dominated by you or a cold arrow hits your eye, then apply what's necessary to the arrowhead: either from malicious arrows, cauterize him with fire, until the blood comes out, and all the meat will be removed.
"Then apply vinegar or water (or wine) after making an incision. "If the nose is opened and proceeds to the palate from it until a state of health has been reached.
"If humidity does not penetrate as it should, then you know that the meat was cooked at a higher temperature than usual.
"Then you must put a thread in the nose with some quantity of knots to hold it fast and tie all the other knots tightly together so that there is only one knot left loose: or you can loosen the thread as much as possible until you have reached this same result from before, and then remove your breath.
"Many boys do it similarly at home or school: and for them there is ease gained.
"Then tie one end of the thread to the nose so that it protrudes over the nose and leaves another end still in the nose. "After this, attach a piece of meat with all its knots tied securely. "Do it until you know that the meats are now ready to eat.
"After this, remove the thread and put on your nose what you have rubbed with Egyptian unguent: do it for three days or longer until the unguent has completely coated anything remaining from the meat.
"Finally, tie off the final part of your thread to a nail at the end of three days or more until you are done.
If a patient dies because of neglect in care then she/he should be used (treated).
The head should be washed with olive oil and other medicines introduced into the nose; this must be done gently using a small tube in order to resemble an opening such as that of a snail, open it like this (demonstrating): then exhale forcefully through the mouth.
And if one's nose is blocked, use a small tube just like a straw
The tube should be used for washing the head when it is full; remove your hand from its opening and pull back with a force as you exhale through that olive oil or whatever else is inside, using your other hand to support her/him while holding on to this opening, then exhale forcefully out of them.
Chapter 25
Many a runny nose arises from the extreme heat of the nose and improves with time until its appearance is greatly improved.
And therefore it should be done that he may recover from this as much as possible at the beginning of its appearance and completely remove it all. Then apply a bandage over the area or use something else to treat what is there (i.e., medicine)
If it is delayed in opening him up, until he improves greatly; then consider if there are stones or other objects present and avoid touching them with the iron as that would be cancerous.
Indeed many a man was struck by lightning striking his nose and then fell from above with great harm to him who had held him.
And if the nose is gently touched and not stained with color then you use it to open him up completely until he is treated (in other words, as much as possible) and without fear or hesitation strike at it and treat its location that causes harm and pain until he is healed.
Twenty-six head
Of the repair of the nose, lips, and ears.
When the solution to continuity of cartilage is interrupted on the scalp only in some people
Therefore, when the continuity of cartilage is interrupted in someone else's scalp as well, you should observe whether there is a wound with its own blood and then apply pressure to control bleeding while stitching it up, after which care for him until he recovers.
If the continuity of cartilage is already separated and one healthy portion has been formed, then it's necessary to cover all parts with its own apparent blood until bleeding stops. Then apply pressure to both lips and sew it up while also applying a strip of its own blood from the dragon's veins on top. After this, remove excess blood and trim away any fraying with scissors so that there is no space between; then cover all parts except for one part that has been bound together by other strips; lastly, release him after two or three days if he does not recover himself within these limits. After all this, you give him a different medicine and release him until the stitches come undone on their own. Then care for him with an ointment so that he recovers.
The method of stitching is either to join the continuity of the cartilage or by using a needle as I showed you for sewing through the flesh; whichever way you choose.
Twenty-seven head
From the loosening of hairs.
Many people have hard lumps on the inside of their scalp as well as some smaller and larger ones.
Therefore it is necessary to cover all of the lumps on his scalp with a bandage and bind him up tightly using twine so that no hair can escape from any part of them; afterwards cut away everything except for one lump if he does not recover within these limits.
After the wound has been sewn up, put a bandage in place and bind it tightly to prevent bleeding until it stops on its own.
After this he is treated with vinegar so that the stickiness is dissolved and the wound continues to heal until it stops on its own.
Chapter 28
From the cutting of the upper lip over the gums
There arises a swelling over the gums when meat is added to it, which they call abuluss
It is therefore expedient to hold it with a knife or tongs, to pull it out when burned by fire, to strike off its head at the place where you find its root, and then let blood flow forth freely, either to make it run away, or to cut it into pieces, as you please.
Then place a stone upon the ground and cut off its head quickly with the sword or other sharp tool.
If it returns after being cooked, as often happens, then strike off its head the second time and burn or scald it; but this does not happen afterwards.
Chapter 29
About the reason of teeth with iron
When the teeth are set in the upper and lower surfaces of the gums from their inner to outer parts by their roots, and when they come away or fall out through the gums as thorns or when they are extracted with a tool between the gums, then these will be lost, and so the teeth will fall out because of this corruption towards the gums.
It is therefore expedient to hold them in your hands securely and fasten its head into your mouth, so that you can bite it and the root of it also: until you have torn off their roots as thistles or thorns from the ground similarly; until nothing more comes out of these after this fashion.
If therefore the corruption of these had already happened at first, this is well; and if not, then do another attempt with them on a different day later
You know that the reason for removing teeth varies according to different shapes and figures of many kinds; depending on how you prepare your operation; it is one thing when tearing out a tooth from its lower part, quite another when it is torn between the teeth, in accordance with different forms.
These are the forms of razors that you will find in me.
The head
On the extraction of toothache
The purpose is to treat the pain with all your ingenuity and get rid of it completely. It is not the case that someone relieves him when he has been eradicated; because it's a sublime substance: until there is no excuse for eradication of it, then you need to do it when you realize it is weak and get rid of it completely, so that it may be certified in front of you.
Many times the weak person becomes pain because there is a substance that is in his tooth and gets rid of it; then the pain does not come back until he has been eradicated completely by the weak person.
We have already understood this from the operation of phlebotomists.
After that it is certified by you to the weak toothache person, then it is necessary for sacrifices with spatumili around the teeth so that there will be some virtues, until a cure is given from all parts; and then move him with your digits or with sharp tips first gently, until he is pushed out.
After that you put the powerful sharp fingers in a good way into his head between your thighs and let him go down as far as possible; and then gently pull out the tooth by its root according to its direction so it won't break off.
If this does not work then take something from their instruments and introduce it underneath him with all ease, and move its movement gently as you did at first.
If the tooth has been perforated or burned then you should try to cover it with a cloth and gently pull it out using your fingers which are smooth at the tips so that it won't break off during a contraction of your hand when it is grasped by forceps.
And you should strive to make incisions around the teeth and cut out all parts as much as possible.
And preserve your strength so that it won't break off and the part of it will remain, and the pain which is greater than any other harm to him at first shall be removed from her evil mischief.
"And do not cause that which ignorant phlebotomists perform during their own feebleness and audacity over the removal of it.
Many phlebotomists perform excessive bleeding on the bodies of very sick people whose veins are hardest to reach and their roots remain in place, or some of them pluck it out with the help of a mandibles - as we have tested many times that is how they do it.
After removal of it and then alcohol (ethanol) or vinegar are applied to coagulate the blood.
If excessive bleeding occurs after removal of it then apply something from the vessel and seal it with a hot iron or else cauterize it as soon as possible if not applying anything.
The small arteries will be squeezed when brought into contact with the teeth, and they are of great importance because their removal may lead to excessive bleeding from the larger vessels; therefore it is important that these smaller arteries remain intact as much as possible before sealing them, or else cauterize them immediately if not applying anything.
And sometimes the extremities are like a cork that is tightly closed by force of constriction.
The 31st head
On the removal of teeth and the extraction of fractured mandibular bones.
If a tooth is broken during removal of teeth and it remains in place then apply butter once or twice days to soften the spot, thereafter cut through with scissors or pliers; the extremities will be squeezed out by the cork that is tightly closed by force. This form is for squeezing/cauterizing.
The extremities are made to be squeezed like a thumbtack or pliers.
If you are not able to remove it with those pliers then apply pressure on the root and cut off the entire meat or use a tool like Palanca's [which appears to be a type of scalpel]
The left side of both upper limbs should be equal in size and strength, with no excess on one side that might cause an imbalance or injury
If the left arm is considered to be better than the right one in terms of strength and size, that should be beneficial; however, if not, it will lead to problems as other instruments would need to be used instead with different forms.
The triangular form on the left side of both upper limbs has some excess or extra size.
The smaller triangle shape is seen on the left side of both upper limbs.
And along with other instruments and tools that preceded it based on the reason of teeth.
The necessary tool with this instrument that matches a large hook of its form which is triangular on both upper limbs and causing some extra size to prevent any injury; it should not be consumed
It is known that tools of teeth are many; and similarly other tools will not be taken into account as the craftsman wise has found an appropriate tool himself based on what was done to him and his skills
Because of the differences in species among those instruments that came before it, the craftsperson took note of them so he could choose the right one for his needs.
If the mouth is broken off by the jaw or any other bones of the face, or if it gets decayed: then seek to remove that from its place with what suited him out of the tools and hooks which I described for extracting the root, and use your hands, whose form this one has.
There may be some small extra size in it so that it can be drawn tight or held securely with it the mouth; and not burst nor collapse until it is restored to its place using medicines which are appropriate for this.
If there is some decay or rust on the bone then remove that from its place with its own decay and care until it is cured.
The twelfth head
From the top of teeth to other instruments.
When the teeth project beyond their normal course downward (as seen through a mirror), food gets caught by this form; especially when it happens to women and infants, namely the former.
Therefore you should take note of that fact If a tooth is born after another tooth and does not fit or can be secured with it, then the opening for that tooth should be made; if an extra tooth is attached to another one, then it should be cut off together with the other using this instrument whose form we have mentioned before.
It's like a knife, but sharp on both sides and at its end.
And you should make an incision to release it from days of many teeth, especially because of the hardness of the teeth and so that another tooth does not come out through the teeth.
If a tooth is protruding beyond its cavity (as seen through a mirror), then you should cut it off using this instrument whose form we have mentioned before.
It is all cut off by that instrument; the lesser holes of its hand are widened gently and easily (using this instrument), so as to release it from many days with ease without getting injured or falling down: thereafter you loosen it slightly, in fine cutting away a piece together with certain rasors.
If the tooth is fractured and the opening is narrowed, you should also cut off the tongue in order to release it as well; thereafter it should be softened with the help of this instrument so that its bitterness is lessened: then it must not be left to grow back or be bitter, lest a piece of it gets separated.
The thirteenth head
Of cutting off teeth when falling from an eagle's beak.
When the teeth before it had been struck by an impact and shaken because of that blow and could not be pulled back from what was eaten so as to not fall down; you cured them with stipped remedies (perhaps with a hot iron) but did not care for their cure: then a piece of wire is put in, so they can be drawn out through the eagle's beak.
A thread is a medium through which passes subtlety and force according to its quantity, passing between teeth
The form of the thread is as follows: when you grasp it between two healthy teeths, then you pass it through a second time into another tooth; thereafter you draw out with both hands from one tooth to the next until reaching the other's tooth or returning back to your own. After passing through the middle tooth you continue with a further pass of the thread until you come to the part where you first took hold; thereafter you draw out your hand holding it firmly but carefully using subtlety and wisdom so that the constriction at the roots of the teeth does not slip off.
Afterwards you remove the extra thread ends and gather them together; thereafter with a twist you bring each end around to cross over between the healthy tooth and the moving tooth so that the tongue does not slip off, then after this is done release the pressure gradually until finally released.
If it breaks or gets caught you should tie a new thread on and hold onto this one as tightly as before for the whole time.
And here is the shape of teeth: and the form of the two healthy teeths, and the two moving teeth.
Sometimes when one tooth falls out or two fall together at the same time and in their places they cling to us like a raven and remain there until an expert carpenter is present.
Sometimes when a tooth is pulled out by the roots there occurs just as with the shape of teeths and it is placed in its place where the pain begins and held tightly so that we may remain until finished.
The 44th chapter
When the cutting ligament below the tongue is either natural, with which man is born or accidental, and has already been consolidated (i.e., a cut that has healed over).
The operation is performed so that you open the mouth of him with your hand at his head and draw out his tongue; thereafter cut through the soft ligament according to its length until it can be drawn out by the strength of your tongue.
When there is a knot or twist within the bone and flesh, it can be released by cutting through the tendon which binds them together; then you should cut through the joint in question along its length until you reach the knot or twist, after which you will find it with your fingers and extract it.
And if there is a tear within the deep flesh, cut through the artery at that point, and block off the flow of blood.
Then, apply a hot or cold compress to the wound.
Then place something soft and thin under your tongue that will keep you from getting sick all night; so you won't catch a cold again the next day.
If there is blood flow at the wound site, then apply pressure with a cloth above it. If you bleed from the wound, then apply a heated wire to it as quickly as possible; after that, treat it with remaining care until it's healed.
The 35th chapter.
When the tongue is swollen and restricted by the action of its own natural operations; or even more powerfully, when it swells up to such an extent that it makes breathing difficult.
The operation on you is done so that your mouth may open easily before the sun; and consider the swelling of the tongue.
If therefore you see that color is blotted or darkened so as to be unpleasant and cause discomfort; then do not touch it because it's a tumor.
If there is an abscess that has become white from the moisture it contains, then you should cut through it to release its contents and free it completely from all around it. If you bleed from the wound during your own procedure, then apply pressure above it; wait until the bleeding stops; and afterwards proceed with the rest of the treatment to remove him along with his complement
Then apply it with vinegar and salt; continue treating with what's left until you heal it.
Of the two types of amputations
Concerning the severed head
When a severed head occurs between the tongue and pharynx, that is, the thyroid glands, which are similar to blood vessels, when they occur they die; and two names for them are given: the first one is to be treated with what we previously mentioned in our description of healing wounds, but not to heal, then consider this.
Therefore if the amputation has occurred and is already bad smelling with pus accumulating a few senses; do not touch it with iron.
And if the stump is red and its root is large; do not touch it either with iron or any other object of that sort, lest you cause a bloody flow, and then the limb dies. Therefore at this point if you accidentally cut through it, or if it cuts itself off;
And if the stump is white and round with a thin root; then it should be burned to death.
And the operation itself is that you consider before your operation if it occurs to cut off the amputated limb quietly and completely or with a small amount of force; then do this: sit back in front of the sun and have its head placed inside yours; open up his mouth and receive him into your arms, and press upon his lower lip beneath an instrument whose shape is like this.
It should be done with silver or air as light as the breath of life.
After you have taken the tongue with your lips, show him to be amputated and falls upon his face into yours; then take one hand and hold it within the arm pit, and draw her out as much as you can beyond what you grasp from the garment.
Then cut off with that instrument whose shape follows. And if the bleeding comes from the wounds of his ears; then treat them with iron, either by removing blood or by cautery.
But if that is not present now, then cut it off using a blunt object whose shape follows. "Cut away from one side; not cut away from the other side.
After cutting through to the bone in one place, make a second cut on the opposite side of the same incision.
Afterwards after making an incision, he should gargle with cold water or vinegar and water.
If bleeding occurs when cutting into a vessel, he should gargle with water in which the inner bark of trees has been removed (such as tree bark or willow leaves), and other such things that would stop the flow; then after care for him to prevent further loss of blood until the flow is stopped.
And sometimes there are blisters formed on one side of the tongue, but not both sides. Cut then that on which I said to cut evenly through both tonsils.
And I myself once attended to a woman who had been born between the two tonsils, causing a fistula through her throat; she was able to breathe very poorly and had already closed up the fistula: but also she did not allow food or drink anymore, until finally she died within one day, or two days.
And only the fistula rose up to such a height that it extended over both nostrils as well: until then there were openings for two nostrils.
Therefore I fixed him with one of them stopped. Afterwards, I pulled him out, and the part that was taken from him is very large.
Afterwards, I cut off what came out through my nostrils.
Afterwards I made that into him which had come out from the other nostril.
Afterwards I opened his mouth and pressed on the tongue of him; afterwards fixed one of them into him, and cut off from him a part of him, and he did not run out except for very little blood: so it was after that her throat was healed, and she quickly began to drink water again, and then received food.
Therefore I did not cease to cut into him the tonsils for a long time; and each time that he had recovered from one of them, it would happen again after another until at last this happened.
I cauterized a glottis (larynx) between teeth
Then having done that, immediately after walking around to the left part and not knowing what God did with her thereafter.
I cut through the glottis (larynx)
The 37th head
When the catarrh (phlegm) descends to the glottis and becomes blocked, then it is named perpendicular; but if on the lower part it is round, then it is called uvula.
When treating it as we mentioned earlier on division and not curing it; you see that the glottis is warm and soft from this, then you must strike at it.
And what is gathered round and not its length, it is bloody or coloured black or dark; but it does not feel the touch of a hand, then you must strike at his incision. In this there lies a fear to the weak.
You should then, when you see it according to what I said earlier from the white and its length that you would make him sit before the sun; and speak with his mouth accompanied by an instrument whose story preceded this one: then strike at once below into the water and drag her downward, and strike her also with one of two instruments which I mentioned in the division of the two amigdala.
And it is necessary that you do not cut from it unless something is added upon a natural termination without any addition.
If you strike at it more, then speech and voice will come forth.
After the cut, use what we mentioned earlier on division of two amigdala; and cure her until she is cured.
If the weak one withdraws from the cut, then it is necessary that you put your mind into his cauterizing without fear or trembling.
And the mode of cautery in this lies not unless with sharp water; and it is necessary that you put your head into your hands (into a basin). And with his instrument as we have mentioned And with his instrument as we have mentioned, he takes from water what I gave you for cauterizing in the chapter on cautery and binds it without burning out completely and without puncturing or pricking, nor too thick nor too thin, but that its fit may be placed here by this instrument's shape.
The end of his instrument is where the medicine is inserted as it were into the middle ear.
And he puts the instrument with medicine upon this very same place and is held by it from falling off to one side so that it runs out of his mouth through its intrinsic medicine lest it does not go down into his throat anything and may it be satisfied.
And hold your hand with the medicine. And you from above that measure of the hour of meeting and until you have taken it in hand and satisfied its satiation with the medicine's biting.
And if you should take it by the other hand and bring him over to his right side with medicine while holding onto its head by its tail until he holds on to it above that place.
Do this many times until the consequence of what you do in cautery be fulfilled. Then release it: she shall then cease and fall after three days or four.
If you should want the medicine more than once, then one of it every time and after cautery from around with its head into butter and moistens with him that is within his circle by medicine's and binds with cold water.
And he cured from outside with a bandage and inside with gargling until he was healed.
Therefore, the way of treatment is better for incision and longer in fear.
And sometimes he treats also with that which is more subtle than cautery and incision; for it cures when done with suffocation according to this manner. Sume calamentum, and hyssopum, and origanum, and rutam, and sseah, and chamomillam, and abrotanum, and similia eis ex herbis: et aggrega ea omnia aut quaedam eorum in olla, et submergantur cum aceto, et bulliant. Et olla sit lutata cum luto decenter. Et sit in medio ollae foramen, super quod componatur instrumentum concauum secundum hunc modum
Be filled with oil or air: and let the extremity be filled up, where is granatum, into the mouth of a sick person until he ascends to drink from above through a cannula until he drinks much water
Then repeat this many times as long as needed.
And you, do not make this treatment start with the entrance of the apostles. Indeed, if added to apostles: and you should not do that unless you are at a suitable temperature of the apostles' coldness.
If you do not have this instrument present to you then take a cannula and fill it in the extremity of him with a mixture of cold water so that his mouth cannot burn from drinking, because the cortex will prohibit drinking hot liquid, and this is through good treatment as long as he remains healthy.
Of removal of hairs and bones from hunger
The head 48th
Many times the mouth will become dry or bones fish or another thing.
It is necessary therefore that you take what from them it shows above where the man falls, after having spoken to him through the instrument at the sun and is declared to be in his mouth.
And what does not appear to you and are hidden in the mouth it is necessary that you do a meal for the sick person before he digests with the belly in the stomach. Then perhaps there will come attached things through meals.
Either the sick person will not drink enough water one day or root of lettuce, or will swallow bread soaked in milk and eat it; or will take sponges from seawater with a light touch; and tie him up with a rope, then drink him. After cutting through the place where the ribs are, and either the nose or the ear is taken out, then it's pulled back (back into its original position).
If not after that as we mentioned, you take an instrument from the second bone according to this shape
It's larger than the radius and its extremity has a lot of strength compared to what it inserted into its own throat with ease; hence he himself had his head lifted up above
And it holds onto the tip of its tongue so that he does not fall back when pulled by force; and it pushes with him or the spine or inserts itself into his mouth using his own hand.
Indeed it is better when the sick person inserts something that has knowledge of its place to be attached; and he pushes downwards or draws with his own hand using an instrument above him until it reaches there in accordance with the amount prepared for him so that it can reach back where it was taken from.
On removing of the blood sucker.
Head 39.
When the blood sucker is being treated with it what I mentioned in division from the care of medicines and not given, then look into its throat before the sun on its own face, or after the sun has risen above where he was told to take his instrument.
If it falls from your hand on the blood sucker then pull him out with a stronger grasp or using delicate gestures to get rid of it more easily.
If that is not possible with them then take a hollow tube and insert it into the throat of the sick person all the way down to the bottom of their throat; after that, insert another one made of iron heated by fire into the mouth of the same person in their care. Do this many times and let the sick person stay away from water throughout the day.
After that he will take a full glass of cold water and open his mouth into it; and he will put the other's mouth in with it without swallowing anything from it, and spit out the water after an hour using his own hand. With this blood mixing with water it falls.
If the aforementioned (i.e., the blood) is not to be applied with that which we mix or pour it into, then immediately apply a pessuma on the head and with fingers, or if you use an instrument for fumigation after it has been mixed in suffumigation liquid.
As many times as this happens.
The mode of operation in the suffumigation is that you take a vessel and place the prunules (i.e., smoke) on it with fire. Also, there should be a cover placed over the top to protect the face from the smoke, and the instrument should go into the center where an opening has been made for it.
After this the suffering person should close their mouth and let out a sigh as they do not want to lose the suffumigation until you know that it has already reached to bloodletting. Bloodletting must be done quickly
If this does not fall immediately, repeat the suffumigation many times.
The suffering person should remain quiet and eat salt, drink nothing but water, in order to maintain their health during this period of treatment.
It is necessary therefore that the bloodletting must be done with this regimen.
And here is a form of an instrument from which the bloodletting can take place when it falls upon that surface.
They are similar to fingers in this regard unless there is a disease which prevents them from being inserted into the throat. Its extremities are similar to its ears which is called a cicuta, the one with a rough surface; when it comprehends something, it does not let go completely.
The opening of the apophysis and their sectioning or removal is part of this treatment.
Head size L
Species of apophysis are many and various depending on what is remembered about them; for example one species through a hole or sectioned by two ways.
One is extracted from a certain species of seed and that which has comprehended by humidity
The second mode is for places where it happens through the body.
Because the seed falls on the head, it is another by falling from a finger to the anus; and when it falls into the fleshy part of the body, it is another accident caused by falling off the finger joints; every one of them has his own judgment through operation.
And those that are not allowed to be perforated unless after the formation of seed in them, and complete it; and those that should be perforated while they are raw, and not mature according to the complement,
As seeds that are near joints.
Because the seed falls near joints and is prolonged for it; until it becomes rotten what is around its place may become corrupted ligaments or perhaps the injury of his joint; so that cause a superior contraction of those members.
Or the seed is at the main part; because if you delay the perforation of him until he matures, it may be bitten or eaten by it, or through this main member
Or it is near the anus; perforate him therefore immature: and do not let you perforate raw unless what is near the anus lest he does not putrefy deeply, and lasts to the inside of the anus, and there should be a fistula or at the end thereof that which may not heal.
Let you know the time of perforation of seeds that is mature according to the complement; and there is at the onset of pain, recession fever, and reduction in redness, and pulse, and sharpness of head seeds; and other signs.
And let you do the same perforation at the lower place of seeds and more prominent; and it should be perforated extending in length of body if the seeds are in the hand and foot and places of the cat's ear, chords, nerves, arteries, veins and up to all equal locations which is not reflection.
"When reflecting surfaces are exposed, lubricate with perforations in that member.
"When the aperture is in the fleshly place, it's better to remove its perforation and confirm its digestion thereafter.
"If you perforate it before that, the course of its juices will be prolonged by it and is full of filthiness and sourness; moreover, its lips may be broken down by it and its depth.
"And certain perforations are made according to the length of the body for necessity's sake, or according to that member which is necessary.
"And it's recommended to administer small perforations into many with small perforations and large perforations into few with large ones; or cut through many similarly sized perforations.
"And there are from perforations into which it's necessary to cut through the skin; and it should be done when already made as a patch is, or when it has ended its term, that it is dead: like what happened in many instances, so you may say, and with those.
"And from them are the ones that have three angles of section. "And from those is it done like a leaf of mint.
"Like the anus.
"And from those are the ones that have circular and lunar sections; similar to them through their sections.
"That one whose head is not, like the perforations are flat; it's recommended to perforate that member by a superficial perforation, or just barely.
"And it's necessary when the perforation is large and has taken much pain; you should perforate him so that what is not within will be removed from outside of him, at that time; or remove by him a piece from him. "Then the holes in the member are left for another day. "Then he removes something from the pain again.
"Do this repeatedly according to the degree of it, until he becomes exhausted; especially if someone is weak or a woman in labor, a boy small, an old man withered and spirits have been resolved by many discharges from animals: and perhaps death is approaching for him, so you do not see.
Therefore this chapter, great caution
After you have made the hole and when you are about to pierce the aperture, it is necessary that you remove the wound; consider If there is a small incision in the wound, or if there is no incision at all, then apply linen or catgut ligature (thread). If the aperture is large and there are many perforations or fissures, it is necessary that you enter into every opening with ligature; until they penetrate to the end of the thread (i.e., until you have used up all your ligature).
If you have parted the aperture with skin or have encircled it tightly in some other way: then it is necessary that you bind up this skin firmly with catgut (thread) until the third day, either as when making a shroud of linen cloth from wet flax, or by drawing out the skin and hair; unless there is moisture, tie it tight
After this, take good care of that with which you have to do something by squeezing or by applying a compress.
If you have caused a hemorrhage during your operation, then administer cold water and vinegar; after it has been absorbed by the linen cloth, place it over the place of the many bleeding wounds (i.e., cover them).
If the hemorrhage persists after all these measures are taken, then it is necessary to seek out a physician or surgeon for further treatment.
If the aperture is large and there are many wounds nearby (i.e., if it has become infected), then you should mix in wine or oil with water and apply them to those places.
If it is in a place that becomes hard or tough with time, then you should apply the mixture of wine and water to this as well. Until the third day as we have described, then it is necessary that you remove this aperture and apply whatever treatment was prescribed to him until he recovers (i.e., continue applying treatments until his wounds heal).
This is therefore what is necessary from the knowledge of the surgeon's care universally.
From the second half onwards I have already mentioned everything concerning his particular care to be done individually.
Head 41.
Of the sections of the hair which are cut off
Cut off from the head sections of hair are pieces, and they resemble the feathers which are used to cover a bird's head; as if these were plucked by chickens.
And there are many kinds of them.
From these are the feathers which cover moisture like a hair's end; and from them which cover moisture similarly to nets and ropes; and they are similar; and from them are the hard sheets.
And in all sections, and their removal is not fearful, because when the removal of theirs does not produce a contrary state to an artery.
And the operation of their sections is so that you will recognize it when seen with an instrument which has been shaped after this; and until you know what it contains, its name is Incised.
If there should be that which contained moisture, then dry him up by cutting off a section of his length equal to the length of the surface section; in this manner.
And begin with a section from the line B to the line G; and if there is moisture in that place, then remove the hard sheet which contains it, but do not take away anything else from it.
For many things remain after removing what was taken away from it.
Then plunge the body into the Egyptian unguent if there is present; and if not, in water and salt; and wash him with it, until you remove him up to another day. This will be eroded by what remained from the cutting off.
Then plunge the body into the Egyptian unguent for a second time and then a third time; and if there are any leftovers left after that, until you become confident because nothing was removed from it during the cutting off process, at which point you will wash him with the unguent, until he is clean.
If the abscess contains a knot and a pestle is available then dry it with this form; having a cross-shaped incision: remove pus from all parts of it, and put on display your own power through the tunic that contained him
If however, contrary to you, I show an artery for you then follow what I tell you after this.
And similarly do it with the pestle if there is a stone; from the incision and care as we have mentioned previously.
The section over the pestle for stones is easier because it has few blood vessels and moisture. Sometimes there are certain openings of the pestle which exist in the heads of some people who lack moisture.
This is because I have secured the pestle on a woman's head and inserted it as if into a stone; rough, white, unable to bend unless someone strikes him with something hard against it.
On the other hand if there are accidental openings on the head, except for these which occur in the heads of children and at the root of ears; their section is a surface one.
Or always from beneath the head, so that the flow of blood towards the lower part can be relieved.
Then care for it with what was suitable to them from curing.
Of the incision of the windpipe.
The 42nd head.
These openings of the pestle have often occurred on the neck and under the shoulders as well as the chin; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body too.
And above those which occur from them on the neck are one and many; they are generated from discharge and all the windpipe is within its own tunic as it were with the knots of the pestle's head, so that we have mentioned previously.
There are many forms of the windpipe. Stones are these that dry out; they are also those that take away moisture and they are also evil ones that do not obey the treatment regimen
In this vein then [stones] you observe a good disposition towards the touch of whose face is near to red color and is removed from every part of the body, except for the ears. It should be shaved on both sides with a razor blade or a similar instrument until smooth.
And it's important to take extra caution so that no hairs are cut
It should be done smoothly without leaving behind any rough edges so that it doesn't leave a mark on your hand when you cut yourself or upset the sick person and cuts off anything not necessary.
If you cut someone's artery or prevent yourself from continuing the operation then close the wound with a bandage until it stops bleeding and loosen any stitches that are in place to relieve the pain of wounds.
Do not use Redi for operations as blood is expelled from his veins during this process.
Then take a look with your finger at what was left by the stitches and cut them off to be rid of that.
If there is a large stitch in the root then it's important not to cut through that part of the vein or artery and you should do your best with two threads so that when it breaks it doesn't cause any harm.
Then remove excess water from the wound by using an Egyptian ointment. After that apply proper care to it.
If you cut all the way through a vein then you should close both lips over it quickly and tie them right away after that so they don't let out too much blood if there is any left from before.
"If you see that it is due to the size of a Strophe, then you should aim at cutting off its root and removing it as well, and apply the suture we mentioned.
"And if the moisture comes from a Strophe, perforate it with a superficial incision in order to show you where its maturity takes place; and make an opening below it following the same rule as we mentioned.
"Next apply a dressing with ointment after the perforation and similarly for everything else that has remained corrupted; until you see that it is now dead; then cure it immediately using a dressing made of flesh as we mentioned, until it is healed.
Chapter Thirty-Three
"In the event of detachment from the epiglottis towards its opponent within the larynx through an accident.
"The ancients performed this incision into the Epiglottis but I did not see anyone of ours who had done it; and these are their words.
"However, in the presence of a synactium it is necessary to perform an incision into the epiglottis; because otherwise all veins and lungs are weak.
"In those who have a hot tongue or stammering, when there is no roughness in the larynx; it should be with an incision into the epiglottis to escape from what happens because of pre-excision.
"Therefore when we wish to perform this incision, let us cut off the epiglottis under three or four circles of the epiglottis; in that which is between two rings by quantity, where it should be done as an excision without cartilage and instead into flesh. And this place is one who has been separated with flesh, and the veins are far away.
"If the physician is timid then he should stretch out a cutting from the throat using a forceps. "Then finds the cutting and waits until it reaches to the larynx; he then should apply the blood vessels if he sees something from them.
In the meantime we must close off that which is opened up by means of a small incision in order to drain out what has come forth through it; and when this process has been done, with excision of lips
The opening was closed for some time
And when the time comes that you are to make a second incision with two lips and without cartilage
Then proceed to apply medicine which brings forth meat until it is cured.
Good bye Albucasis. In conclusion we must admit that the exposition is not until it is shown that something has been completed in time; and elevated to death, and wish to intercut through the desire of his own: they come to the second incision with Epiglotim so as to allow him to breathe in a place where there are four lips, and salvation from death. And for this reason, they will be removed after opening up, until the malice of the infirmity is finished, and is the malice of that three days, and almost himself: therefore then go ahead and take care of his incision, until it is cured.
And that which I heard through you it is; the one servant was initiated into prayer and sent with his mouth, and struck at it part of the airways
I have been invited to the care of him, and put in place, just like the one is death.
Therefore take off from the incision, and enter with the blood which comes out of it lung I am therefore bound to go away from that one so as not to lead her in the future; and coming out of the incision was removed
I have therefore done the incision of my own, and cared for it until it was cured; and it did not happen to the servant anything except that he went back after a day towards better dispositions of theirs.
And here I say what is not feared in the incision of Epiglotim.
"On the veins in the throat.
The head has 44 veins.
This particular hernia of the throat is called "the great vein," and it is large compared to the body's color; and it occurs frequently in women.
It can occur either naturally or accidentally.
It is not by natural intention.
Accidentally, it can occur in two ways; one of them is similar to a knot tied with fishing line (?). The other way is like an artery knot, caused by a knot that forms from the artery itself. And in this case, there is fear, and it's not allowed to make the swelling (?), unless it's just exposed; and you should try it or examine it with an intromission (?) If you have a similar knot of the veins and it's not blocked with any of the vessels; then remove it, just as knots are removed; if there is one held by the artery, remove that also along with this, if it is in the artery; otherwise, thoroughly examine him (?). After treatment of its location while awaiting recovery.
The head has 45 veins.
"On the veins above the head.
There are many varieties of veins; and I have already mentioned all the kinds to you, so it's important that one distinguishes between the vein here (?), and the artery (?)
Therefore I say that when the artery becomes cold and has fevers and painless pains (?), until the excess heat is gone, and putrefaction is completed; then the fever and heat will cease.
When the vein is not cold and does not have fevers or pains, it contains its own sack (?), which is particular to them (?), and it's similar in color to the body; it has an opening like a purse (?) and makes things happen as a bateche (?) and big and small.
Either it inflates with air pressure (that is, pneumatic injection), or it saturates with moisture The colors of humidity are many
Therefore when you want to perform a circumcision on him, so that you can examine him and ask for his consent first with an instrument called the Intromissum, after which
The mode of inquiry is established and universal to take this instrument so that you can grasp it and insert him into the humid place where you will come in contact with his genitals: And you will slowly withdraw your fingers until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the skin. After that, finally take hold of him with a second hand and measure its length accordingly to what you have just done.
Afterwards remove the instrument and consider it as it was returned from his genitals.
If humidity is flowing at this point, no matter what color it may be: Then dry him with a superficial cut
And if humidity is not flowing in the Intromissum at this point you know that he is circumcised and so on: Dry him with a cross-shaped form having the same shape as what I just showed you: Hold onto his genitals, pull out skin from all sides with ease: And if you are able to hold onto it keep it away while examining him in the presence of Nodi.
If the skin is torn from his genitals during the operation and it is not possible to remove him at that point: Then take him out as soon as you can until nothing remains of this
If only a little or much skin remained from what I just showed you after the operation was done: Then turn to Nodi and ask for him according to the greatest extent that is possible.
If you become tired and only a little skin remains from what I just showed you after the operation is done: Then attach him to your completion by tying them with corrosive or sharp tools: And hold onto the wound above his circumcised area in cold water where it can be easily washed, And take care of any remaining wounds while being careful not to damage anything else, until he becomes healed.
If there is a large vein, then cleanse his two lips and care for him as he was born
If however the pulse is weak or not present at all, then cleanse his nostrils and make him swallow a drop of vinegar every three days until he stops spitting up blood. Then take it back to where it came from through the vein.
Chapter 46
Concerning the use of instruments in sectioning and perforating.
The forms of the introducers are three.
From them comes the large one and the middle-sized one; from them also comes the small one.
It is necessary to cut down at a distance of four fingers on each side so that they may come together in front.
The forms of the instruments are three; one is called a bore, another to perforate and they are perforated; and these are:
From them comes the large one, the middle-sized one, and the small one.
They are connected so that they may be placed together through the apertures and cuts; then take it from where it came out of the bones
And others are rounded, curved, and flexible like the large needle which is made of copper or iron or lead.
The best ones among them are those that are made of copper.
There are also instruments made of lead that connect so that the holes may be dilated through them; and their thickness is such that they reflect with their roughness when they are rubbed against those who want to reflect light onto them.
The third kind is perforated Because of their length, middle size, and small size depending on the amount of breadth and thickness of the holes and their openings.
The shape of the introducers is diverse; there are many forms.
Because they have simple shapes such as the ones you mentioned; there are three forms, great, middle-sized and small ones.
"And these are knives without handles; and there are three species of them.
"And from these come knives with handles; there are three species of them. And from these comes a knife with three handles; there are also three species of them. All of these are necessary in their place.
"These are the forms of the scissors used for cutting and scraping; they also have a blade, three species in all, because from them comes 'the big one', 'the middle-sized one', and 'the small one'.
"The ends which are suitable for cutting have acute edges; the others do not have sharp ones. They should be placed there so that when they come to the first incision of fear, either the knife is used or not at all, except in case where a weak person needs them to relieve their pain and bring peace.
"They run from the air to the ear; they resemble a radio, through which alcohol is produced; at its extreme end there is hidden a small hole called Spatumilis; it runs towards the inner part and the outer when used, just as you would.
"The form of Spatumilis that hide between the fingers near the hole for scraping, they are not felt by the weak ones; and there are three species in all, 'the big one', 'the middle-sized one', and 'the small one'.
"The forms of the vessels from which blood flows out; there are three species in all, 'the big one', 'the middle-sized one', and 'the small one'.
"They run from the air or from the round vessel towards its length more than that of what is seen; and they are suitable for subtlety.
"And it is necessary that the three species of vessels are there for you, big and small; so that when you want to bleed from them with haste near necessity, and then when no medicine is present.
"However, you should not use them for bleeding in all parts of the body; but only where they are necessary: as to the arms and thighs, and the limbs and breasts, and the face, and the belly, and the mouth, and the genitals, and similar places, from the skin.
"When instruments are removed from them, tools similar to the fingers of fists occur, in accordance with their shape; from which blood flows when flowing out of the place of phlebotomy, or into an incision, or into an artery: and sometimes there are removed from them rounded-shaped according to this form.
The last chapter.
"Of the care of human beings who assimilate breasts in women.
"When breasts are inflated around people at the time of waking up (i.e., with the onset of sleep), until they resemble breasts in women; and remain as a result, without food.
Who therefore rejects this, must be considered to conceal the lunar section in a manner resembling its shape from the line, B to the line, C; after that, wipe away completely the reddened area. "After removing a scab from the body of someone who has been born into medicine. "Then join together two lips with sutures and care for him until he is healed.
"If the breast is pulled downwards and becomes softened because of its own size as happened to women; then it must be found in two upper parts with similar figures of the moon, one of which remains with another at the ends for both sides until a larger line contains the smaller one according to this form from the line, B to the line, C. After that, wipe away any cut between the two lips and apply what we mentioned about sutures and fingers, which is necessary for care, until he is healed.
"If you are unable to complete the incision as it should be done, due to discomfort of a nurse or blood flow; then it must be considered that you wipe off the scab with corrosive unguent and release him until he is corroded by what remains after being wiped. "Then care for him until he is healed.
"Of the hole made under Titillico
The Eighth Head
Those which have fallen from the gall bladder are of a tough variety and contain stones; while those which come out in their moisture content indicate that they have been washed down with fluids.
Therefore let them be extracted with a section of the moon's form from B to L along this line; so that all which is within may be drawn out through it when they have passed entirely and have been held in place by their own weight, then release [them] until another day.
Afterwards let a small quantity of ointment be applied to them, so that they may be released.
If the stone had come out of the gall bladder it is to be applied as we have described for removal from above with stones equally.
If however the ulcer is extended to emit pus then apply a cautery [burn] over it as we have described for that which has been removed from above.
The Ninth Head
Of the sections of the stones, caused by artery and vein.
When the artery is broken and the skin above it is healed then a great many are lost from the stones; similarly also veins are involved with stones and inflation
The signs which are known by it that there is stones and inflation from artery and veins are: for when the stone occurs through an artery then they are long lasting and accumulated deep within the body; and when you draw a stone with your finger you feel as if he were choking.
That which is from veins is round in shape and manifestly upon the body.
The section above a stone is an error and particularly from below the scrotum, anus, neck, and many other places within the body: it is very large error. Therefore let his care be taken with a knife and also from them and what is outside the extremities or head it must be dealt with.
"From these veins comes that which is caused by a hole in an artery. Next, make the cut and release it from its sheath after cutting through the artery; then pull it out of clothing until you find it.
Next, insert it under the point and make it penetrate until you reach another side; then tie both ends together with two threads, as shown to you when extracting arteries from time.
Next, make a knot between the two ligaments with a slipknot; until all the blood that is within it flows out and the hole closes.
Next, administer care to generate pus; until the ligaments fall off. After that, apply something with oil and do this repeatedly until it heals.
If the hole is caused by cutting through a vein, then you should hold onto whatever can be pulled out of it with your hand. Next, insert the point under where you held onto your hand with a slipknot; and let it penetrate until you pull it out from another side. Next, tie the point with one of the ligaments; according to what I showed you when tying off veins into two parts and using two threads.
If you pull out a thread after removing the point from where it was cut off near the artery, then insert another one with another thread under the same sheath at the place of the incision; first tie your thread around four times.
Next, dry off the sheath; when it is ready to come out, then remove any excess skin and let go of what is tied to it.
Finally, apply a powder over that which you submerged into oil, and oil. Next, administer care using lotions and oils until it heals.
The head of Albucasis.
"From the sheath that was caused by cutting through the arteries.
As the arrow fell on an artery and vein, similarly it falls on the sciatic nerve; for its fall causes a blow or from excess of effort (strain), as well as many others falling at their destination - the foot, or anywhere where joints are moved together: so is the arrow's fall.
The likeness of its body (the arrow) is seen among many things and without pain; when it is drawn with great force, a similar dizziness occurs within him.
It is not carried to the depth of the body, it lies under the grasp, and is moved to every part; but does not go back to its former place, or before, nor towards its rear.
For what follows from these (the sciatic nerve) must not be drawn with a sword. Indeed the fall of it is a contraction.
In that which follows from these (the sciatic nerve) or to its head, find pain with a bruise. If it is the arrow's fall that is light and does not harm you at the root of the arrow, then hold on to him with hooks, but let go from his roots.
If it is great (the arrow), then hold him down with a sling and shake him off; afterward recover him, and gather together the wounds he has inflicted while struggling; then look after him until he is healed.
Head chapter one.
Of the cutting of arrows, which falls into the belly.
Some men many times have fallen into their clothes and other parts of their bodies called Fungalia due to similarity with fungus (mushroom).
Whose roots are soft, and whose heads are large, and whose lips are full And from these is light; and from them is raised the mighty arrow.
Indeed I had heard of men whose roots were very soft and their heads large; there were two such among them which differed from other things by size but not in kind: the white root was different, and both of these had small roots, and they lost moisture from all sides and fell, and the wetness came out of them always.
"Make an incision through both of them like X and VIII units and on one side like VI unit. And the operation is performed by making a cut into each of them.
"In addition to that, blood is expelled near the incision due to its abundance; therefore if you encounter blood, then cauterize it at once.
"If you see a weak and fearful person after making the cut with a sword, then take out a thread from a plumed arrow in a more deliberate manner; tie it to them as we said before, and let him go free two days later.
"Finally add to the sharpness of the arrow. "Do not stop tying an arrow until it pierces and stops by itself without any effort on your part.
"If the arrowhead is too large for its roots, then at the moment of cutting into it there will be a certain fear and weakness; especially where this happens on both sides.
"However, it may happen that you can make him less violent by making a cut into him. "Finally, cauterize him so that he does not die.
"And then cure the wound with care.
"And be careful not to make an incision into it if its color is dark and has little sense, a faint appearance; for this one is a malignant tumor; and I will come back later with the remembrance of Cancer.
"The second head
"Now cure the wound of Vmbilis.
"The greatness of Vmbilis comes from many causes. "Or by a crack on the upper side; and then comes out of it through the belly, or from the intestines as the case may be depending on what happened with the other ruptures. "Or by a flow of blood out of veins; or through arteries as may have been preferred. With a sharp knife he opened it up
And if it is due to a cut in the sinew, and there is no third part; then its appearance is similar to that of the body, and it causes pain without any pain felt before; so its location becomes visible after a long time. And if it is due to the exit of an intestine, then its location becomes visible after a long time as we have seen in many cases; more diverse and wider than that one which has left us before. And when you take it in your fingers and hide it from sight; then reveal it again with a loud sound, perhaps there is something accompanying it; and many people will gather around the noise made by its fall, and will be greatly surprised as they have never heard such a thing before.
And if it is due to its own moisture and there are no strings or additions to it; then when you take it in your hand it cannot be hidden from view, nor does it become tight nor add anything extra.
If it is due to blood and there are no signs of a knot or other obstruction; then when you hold these signs together it appears as if there was some kind of seal on the neck below which blackness can be seen.
If it is due to a birth defect in meat; then its appearance is similar to that of a seal, fat and rough, and depending on the amount can vary greatly.
If it is due to a cut in the sinew; then its touch is light.
And the operation on this is necessary to be considered at that time if the prominence of the belly is due to blood in the arteries or veins; then you must prevent from its cure by prohibiting what is done with it. This because of the fear and weakness that it has; just as I told you earlier when discussing seals due to an artery or vein in a chapter.
If the prominence of the belly is due to a defect in the bowels or intestines; then you must be certain that it remains firmly held and extended as much as possible until its condition has been cured completely. Then with charcoal all around the belly entirely. "Gently press it down between your hands on his back. After that, with a spatula and burnt fat, surround the navel area where you placed it with wax. Extend "postea" outward using a large hook. After that, with force and thread/cord tie it tightly to the area of the navel using a firm knot.
Release "postea" outward from above the ligament. If you still hold it tied to the ligament with "postea," then loosen and withdraw from inside of him with your finger (or implement), and expel any excess fluid.
But if you encounter a vein or artery instead, surround it with many strands of thread/cord. Then return to your own procedure. And take two hooks and pass them through the two strands tightly; then pass two hooks through the area that you had surrounded with wax in a cruciform manner as you did before.
After that, tie "postea" securely to four stakes above the hooks; and if you are too weak, take out one hook and remove the place until the flesh becomes long and falls by itself, or cut it off when it becomes subtle enough to rot away.
And after that, cure him with whatever is needed from the ointment so he may be healed.
If it was from flesh or moisture on his navel, then you should tie "postea" as we described before. And if you remove the blood/moisture that has been caught by you inside of him, return to your own procedure.
And after that, cure him with whatever is needed from the place so he may be healed.
Head 33.
End of curing procedure.
I have described for you the species of Cancer and how the path to curing him with medicine proceeds; also cautioning against using iron when curing him because it might cause ulcers; moreover, we spoke about generating Cancer in the matrix and guarding against curing his disease.
"Others said that sometimes when cancer is present at a location where it can be removed; just as the cancer found in breasts or in limbs and other places from which it was taken out by pulling them apart, especially when it begins to grow up.
"If a large one occurs before you are aware of it.
"I was unable to heal that person; nor did I see anyone else who had been healed from that before me.
"The operation on it is as we described; but the person who was operated upon sometimes became weaker from black bile. "Then a leech should be applied to him with visible swelling, while he is being operated upon.
"Then prepare the patient for the preparation, where it will take place during the operation.
"Then apply a leech to its wounds while you are operating on him. "Afterwards you should hold him by all four limbs with both hands, according to the prescription; until nothing remains from his roots; and let the blood run out or cut it off quickly and cleanly yourself, as much as possible, using your hand; or if that is not possible there.
"If the flow of the large blood stream becomes contrary to you from cutting off an artery; or by another way; then burn that place with fire until the blood stops flowing. "Then cure him while still being prepared for treatment, until he is healed.
"Of hydrotherapy.
"Chapter 14 "We have finished discussing the types of hydrotherapy and how it works; but we also need to discuss its signs and its treatment with medicines.
"That which is treated by iron can only be the type of asclepias (the cure for poisoning); and not the other types, such as those for tympanitis or hyposarcus.
"When you have been treated with that kind of hydrotherapy; but the treatment has not helped you; then consider this. "Having already been caused by weakness or another infirmity other than Hydropism, if he is in the presence of a metal (i.e., an instrument), either solution from within him must be sought with water; otherwise there will be no remedy at all.
"But if you encounter a man who is overwhelmed by his strength and there is no other weakness (other than Hydropism), then the remedy must be sought within him, as if he were a child; otherwise it will not work at all.
"Then take the phlegmatic humor in this way. "The cold and moist humors are sharp, prolonged, and have a short duration like phlegm. "However, there is some weakness that comes quickly and lasts only a short time, such that it does not pass through him even in the course of surgery to the intestines.
"Then consider. "If the generation of Hydropism is from the intestines, then you should stretch as much as possible with a cut away from the navel and three fingers wide towards his lower abdomen.
"If it is generated by weakness of the liver, then your cut should be from the left side with three fingers.
"And if it is generated by weakness of the spleen, then the cut should be on the right side; and it is not necessary that he cuts to the left above where a weak man leans, so as not to bring additional strength to a weaker place.
"Then perforate him with an instrument when you have made your incision completely. "Then insert it into the incision and take hold of his hand with the phlegmatic humor between the incision; and if you are pulling him out as though you were drawing a sword (i.e., forcefully), then let its amount be that of a finger, or around this part.
"Then perforate the phlegmatic humor until it reaches a vacuum; and there is water. Afterward remove it and insert it into the hole with its form It is similar to the cannula: it can be inserted from an artery or vein, air-tight; at its lower part there are two foramina and three holes with one foramen each on opposite sides of the cannula. The cannula's extremity is incised according to the manner of a clamp incision so that its upper end remains open.
When the cannula is withdrawn from water then immediately it descends over the instrument so that half of its length goes into water at a time.
If you withdraw from water more than half of its length is required then the patient may die due to the loss of vital life force (respiration) or it may collapse suddenly, possibly causing death.
Indeed the withdrawal of water should be according to its length and also based on the nature of its pulse (heart beat). Also based on the goodness of it.
Afterward remove the instrument and hold onto the water.
This is because it must be withdrawn promptly to prevent cutting the hole which holds onto its tip so that you can remove it according to this method.
Afterward repeat the process on another day if you find it difficult to tolerate being without water and withdraw even half of its length from water.
Do this for a few days without any fear or worry until it doesn't remain in water anymore.
If you find it difficult to tolerate being without water and you withdraw a great deal of it from water then be sure to immerse the instrument into hot water (a hot bath) immediately after withdrawal so that he may sweat, cleanse himself with much water and sun, and expectorate over a cloth. Then make certain to apply hot compresses on his stomach before bed and repeat this process until you feel better and you burn off the excess of it by spitting out or sneezing when necessary.
For the care of infants who are born in places that are not perforated with urine holes for them.
The Head (of a person).
When someone takes an infant from their mother and the head of that infant is not perforated or is a narrow opening (foramen), or it's not positioned properly.
Therefore, one should help with a perforation as soon as possible and with the help of delicate instruments while giving birth to prevent complications in this manner.
Then put a thin iron rod into the narrow opening (foramen) and tie it; keep holding it for three or four days.
If urine is excreted from the wound then remove that immediately to prevent infection Then reduce it (the tie).
If a thin iron rod was not put in then urine coming from above the wound cannot get into that wound.
The one whose opening is narrow should be helped with a thin iron rod and held for many days until it expands (is dilated).
Those who have their opening not positioned properly are helped by tying them to the bed or holding them for three or four days (to allow swelling of the wound to bring it back into place). This is because when the infant is born then there's a narrow opening in the top of its head; so it cannot pass through and until it reaches with its hand to above. Neither the generation nor the sperm can pass through a narrow opening (foramen) in this manner; there's also a risk of infection.
The method of helping is as follows: lay him on his back. Then extend the left hand of his head to the rear with a gentle movement and then strike it from its place (the foramen) by using force; as you would hit something hard, or when you pull the skin, so that medium enters into the middle of the skull where it should be, and let's drop (dilate?) the opening in the middle according to what is necessary.
And if you see blood flow towards your surgical operation. It often happens that the head gets damaged or torn off during surgery. "If a wound is treated with its own blood and care, it will heal.
Diseases that occur on the head, face, neck, eyes, nose, and ears
Sixth part of the body
Many diseases occur on this particular part of the body and its fat is prominent (meaning it has a large amount of fat).
And among these are both good and bad ones.
Therefore, it is necessary to suspend with a subtle incision, remove that part of the body entirely. Afterwards, pour over it from above with an Egyptian unguent (ointment). And then care for it with the unguent until it is healed.
If Albaster is bad and has putrefaction as a result of the incision, then it is necessary to administer a cautery after making the incision both on him (the affected area) and also on his roots.
If the Albaster is on the head of someone else and not circumcised (i.e., has no prepuce), then you should remove it first and afterwards cure what was previously mentioned; for if you cure both at the same time, they will never become secure because one may remain outside while the other remains inside.
Diseases also occur on testicles and scrotum, discoloration (nigredo) and corruption. Therefore it is necessary to cut off whatever has already become black or corrupted as well as what will be corrupted and putrefaction.
Afterwards pour over it from above with a mixture of flour, the powder of seeds and herbs as well as dry grasses (used for binding).
And then care for it using what is left of your treatment until it is healed.
If a bleeding occurs from the flow of blood, then administer the lunar cautery in this way.
A cautery is suitable for two purposes at once; namely for bleeding and when a wound becomes corrupted (putrid).
"If a man's head is split open and destroyed during the same hour/moment, then it would be necessary to quickly introduce (put?) an iron bar inside his mouth, that he might bite down on it.
"If a blow strikes the head of a man and this does not lead to death (immediately), but if it is caused by an injury or fall from above, then the result could be: that he should put something sharp into his mouth in order for him to bite down on it.
"If discerning the cause is difficult, then one should insert something sharp from his head and from that which causes it. "This could be because the cause of damage is subtle or cleverly hidden.
"Then you must separate between the blow and the head of the man with a subtle cloth that has already been soaked in cold water so they do not stick together anymore.
"Then he should be treated using an astringent solution until it is consolidated again.
"Head 72.
"Regarding the nourishment of children and correction from their mistakes.
"The circumcision is not a solution to the continuity of life as other wounds are: however if it comes from our operation, desire and use must be theirs, that they may become better and worse for them.
"Therefore I say that the ancients did not write about circumcision in any of their books because they are not used according to their laws and it is only what we acquired through experience.
"This is because I have learned to use a greater part of the artifices and phlebotomists in nourishing children, circumcising with new cloths and with wounds; they are also used when intoxicated, tied up with thread or nails, and when cutting down on horns.
"And I have already tried all these methods, except for using better phlebotomists and tying up with thread.
When the skin is being washed with vinegar, many times it gets peeled off The skin has two tunics when it is peeled off; hence the upper tunic gets incised while the lower one remains intact; as a result of this there will be an incision in both, and future pain And when washing is done with vinegar (or through the use of a nail), that is, finger-nails, incisions do not occur on the fingertips of men; because possibly they get injured at their holes.
However when washing is done with a nail (or possibly due to iron), it can damage your operation; and the skin of children is naturally fragile, so many are born in this way, therefore I have heard that.
Washing with hooks or threads brings about a good experience for me; because the incisions are proportionate to them; so that the pain which is superior corresponds to that of inferior. So when your hand is washed with two hooks that correspond to one incision of the operation at once and there occurs a compression similar figure which contains the skin from all sides without any mistake.
The mode of your operation is specific to what you are doing especially the child if it is from those who understand more than you do not make unless you tie a thread in its hole and release it until another day.
And afterwards enjoy the child's laughter as much as possible from what intelligence has received him. Afterwards keep the child standing between your hands upright not sitting down; and hidden hooks on your hand or under your foot so that he cannot see them all at once nor anything from an instrument.
Afterwards put your hand into his hole and fill the skin until its head goes out. Afterwards wash her with what has been added to this sorrow.
In one groove two fingers are placed The inferior groove is made greater than the second ligament Then place your index finger and thumb in the inferior groove with a good grip on the ligaments below it, and strike between the two ligaments. And then remove the head of the needle above or to one side. Then drain the blood slowly (for it is better), and lay a poult on top of it; and place the poult made from the skin in which the ulcer has been cooked with saffron oil over that part where the poult was applied: And remove him to another day, and take care of him with the same care as before until he recovers.
This is how you make a form suitable for making holes in it.
There are two extremities and incidents of them; so that the end should not be moved in these limbs towards the claw; And the length of the pair of fingers is equal to each other as well as the length of both hands.
A mistake that falls in making holes is this one; because if a part of his skin has been broken away completely or some part of him at the time of cutting.
Therefore you should stretch it out with your finger ahead of when you're making the hole; and cut it according to equality.
If you can't hold on to him with your finger then remove him with a blade and cut off his head.
If after three days the swelling of the finger has not subsided and is still inflamed beneath the claw; then remove it until it subsides from heat or with ease, and cut off his head. It won't be removed for him.
Therefore take care of it with what has cured the ulcer from the poult that we mentioned in our work on the poult; and if you cut off more than the length of his finger above then add to its height as well, do not hurt him further.
"Healing [it], until it is healed.
The eighty-third head
From pressing the Vena cava into a tube
Retention of the urine is made into a tube by pressing it into a tube or by freezing with ice, blood, pus, or fleshly matter; and similarly from these as we have described in our manner of treatment, using an appropriate means to discharge them.
And if the Vena does not yield to being pressed into a tube, or it is due to retention of the flesh in his throat that has become a tube; then let him lie prone on his stomach until he is cured from his illness Then they will place both his feet above his back and stretch out the upper part of his chest towards him, and he will draw in breath as much as is possible for him. He then proceeds to expel the flesh from behind by breathing it out towards his back; and the Vena yields.
If it is not successful with him as we have described and the body lies above the sick person; then let you administer the removal of his flesh by an instrument called a syringe, its shape being like that of a needle for drawing out air from the thumb, long and resembling a palm in half. And there should be a very small one made just for him on top of his head.
The mode of the exit of the Vena is by itself through him, taking hold of a doubled thread and binding it tight with ligature; then you will introduce the end into the lower part of the syringe until he reaches its extremity; and if there should be any superfluity from the lanam or flesh, bring that to the mouth with force like this.
Then you take the syringe and oil or butter it; or if there is nothing else, just cover him with sand and apply a tube to his mouth, and bind up the flesh of his neck from above downwards towards his chest, and fill in the eyes and ears with oil as warm as possible, and then water to warm them.
And then inserting a sheath made of ivory along with its help and facilitating it towards the root of the limb
Then place both ends on either side of the joint.
Then roll the sheath down inside and secure it to the bone by passing a cord through an opening made for that purpose on each end of the sheath: only then can you begin to move the joint towards its natural position or rest, provided your strength is sufficient to maintain this movement until the desired effect has been achieved.
Then extend cord gradually. The vein follows the thread.
Then remove the vein and guide it through a hole made for that purpose on the sheath to be pulled out gently: repeat this until the desired effect is achieved and maintained by strength.
With respect to the quality of the sheath used for phlebotomy with the Clexys system.
The head is 35cm or approximately 12 inches long.
When a cut occurs on the sheath or blood coagulates within it, or if pus accumulates there, and you wish to remove water and medicines from inside it: then use this instrument which is called Clexys and these are its forms.
It is mute. Inside it are three holes: two on one side and one on the other as you would expect.
And the location where it is applied should be proportional to the amount which holds it without addition but only for as long as you hold on to it until something is drawn out from moisture: and when it is being pulled towards a long distance, with that same thing expel all moisture off of it; after this manner performed by the Clexys system.
When you then pull the moisture out of it, insert the extremity of Clexys into the moisture and draw with it what was pulling towards its highest point: for the moisture is drawn from around the sheath of Clexys.
After making an incision in his forearm as described earlier, we proceed with the needle. After moistening him as previously mentioned, and when moisture is brought to his lips so that he feels refreshed at once, in this manner the weakness passes away from him
With a small sponge soaked with water, we apply it to the wound.
Either gold or silver may be used for his head; if its top is similar in size to a small bowl and there is space beneath it for the nasal bone to fit through, then the incision should follow this path.
After moistening the sponge as described earlier and placing it on the wound, we apply pressure with it to cleanse the wound. After tying off both nasal bones with a strong thread, and then applying heat to increase the moisture even more than fire can provide.
After making an incision with the sponge as described earlier, after wrapping your hand tightly around it with a decent grip and applying moisture to that area so he feels refreshed, until he feels weakness has passed and moisture is on his lips already.
If there's no sponge available right now, take a flat dish instead and make it into a circle by folding it in half; then you should scrape off all the excess material from around its edges so that only what remains is smooth on both sides. After inserting a strong thread through those holes as it runs down, similarly. After completing the circle (as previously described), when you place that which is wet from moisture and oil on it...
After tying off the wound as previously mentioned with a strong thread attached to an instrument, you should proceed similarly by applying it as if you were using the sponge and hand from before until moisture is on his lips already.
Size 60.
With removal of the stone (from previous passage).
I said, "We have spoken about the species of the stone and its care with remedies; I also mentioned distinguishing between the generated stone in the urine and the stone itself; signs for both are described; I mentioned that the stone should be placed into which hand and section to follow so it can fit through. And a stone is generated from this place.
"I declare that the stone (lapis) given birth to a well, it injured most of the children.
And it is from signs of him that urine flows out of the well similarly to water's subtleties: and it appears white foam, and shakes your own limb, and struggles with it, and many times falls. Then, they give birth to him with urine of the well among many, when he is angry or annoyed.
The injury of children from him often occurs in 14 years. It is difficult for old people. However, among the young it is middle-aged, but for whom the stone of lapis is greater, care (curation) is easier; and if small, then more economical care for these.
Therefore when we come to the care of purification, it is first necessary, so that we cleanse the sick with a clister (a type of sponge), which has removed all dirt from the stone inside its intestines; and indeed sometimes this stone forbids the movement of Lapis for investigation.
Then the sick is received with his feet, and is rolled up, and moved towards the lower part; so that the Lapis descends to the bottom of the well, or sprays from high places sometimes.
Then put him on his back between your hands, and place his feet under a cross of these, so that the well is completely filled towards the lower part.
Then carry it away, and take it from outside.
If therefore you find the Lapis in space (in storage), then immediately with a division above him/it.
If it does not come under your hand entirely, then you must take the thumb of the left hand with olive oil, if the sick is a child; or the middle finger, if he/it has been filled completely by a young person, and insert him into his own mouth: and carry away from the Lapis until it remains below your finger. And quickly turn him down to the bottom of the well.
"Then place the finger on top of it with your own finger and urge it towards the external part against which section is to be made; then take hold of the minister with the other hand as if you are trying to lift him up, so that his thumb presses downward upon the testicle from below. And when another minister is taken by the left hand, press down upon the testicles with your right hand in order to remove the cut skin beneath them.
"Then introduce a spike which has this form. "Then find where it is between the anus and testicles, but not in the middle; to the left side you perform the incision as shown above on the stone, your finger into the anus should be placed; then make an outward cut so that there is both a wide and narrow cut depending on how much lapides can escape from this. Do not let it out for too long or the patient may suffer.
"If your finger is trapped inside the anus during the incision and cannot be easily removed without difficulty.
"You know that for the lapides there are angles and borders which make it difficult to remove him because of this.
"And from him you have a narrow one similar in shape to the penis but fat; and he can be easily removed by him.
"Therefore add an angle and border into the incision.
"If you cannot remove him easily in that way, then have the fingers above him; or with a tighter grasp and downward gesture towards his extremity as though it were the moon, which holds the lapides tightly and does not let go of them; or use an instrument below him with great delicacy to reach beneath him.
"If you cannot do so from above but want to try something else: then make a larger opening in the meantime. "But if he bleeds or is injured and you let him go with your words...
"And if the lapide is larger than one, then first press it greatly towards the mouth. "Then make an incision above him. After cutting off a vein after that (i.e., at this point), proceed as you would if there were two of them.
If it is large in size, then ignorance occurs when cutting off a major vein above the cut section Because it happened to one of two things that could happen to him - either he would die or the vein would be severed by a strong urine stream - but for this reason, the place where it was cut off is not closed up completely.
Indeed, administration of its expulsion leads to his departure - either through a rupture of its veins with the fingers or through removal from outside forcefully.
After completing your operation then you have the task of removing a thrombus or clot from it and after that you must lubricate its surface with oil (olive oil) or wine to make sure there are no abrasions, even if they're minor ones. And after that you should tie a bandage soaked in olive oil or wine over it to prevent any frostbite.
Then he must lie flat on his back, and not just rest the affected limb - for a period of three days. After you have finished with him then soak up any remaining liquid (oil) from the place using water or olive oil
Then after having treated it with unguents of both types - one made from dragon's blood and another from hyssop (a plant) - until it is healed.
If however it happened to have cold blood added and become burned - just as if frozen blood had been poured into a vessel and urine was forbidden from coming out of that place - then after this knowledge is gained, the fact that it occurred because of the flow of blood with urine should be known. Then you put your finger into its opening and extract his blood. If any urine is left over it causes the vessel to be corrupted or cause decay in him.
Then apply a dressing with vinegar and water to it until everything that could have come from the treatment is done.
And then care should be taken of its care during all hours until two feet and a mattress are placed over the area as part of medical treatment.
If a stone is smooth and fits into the vein, it becomes a thrombus when it stays there, and prevents the veins from death. The care for this is to describe it before removing it from its location I have already tried that procedure after examining it
It is a needle with an iron ferrule, which has this shape: a triangle at the tip and fixed in wood.
Then take a thread and tie it under the stone to prevent slipping off of the vein.
Then insert the needle into your hand with ease and tie it to the stone so that it does not slip off of the vein. Then take the thread you used for this purpose out of the stone very quickly using only one hand: And fix it in its place, until the needle penetrates completely through to another part of itself: And once you have done that, then remove the perforation from your hand and let the needle penetrate into the other part of itself.
The urine is immediately released.
Then use your other hand to remove the thread that remained from the vein on the outside part of it. It breaks off and is released with urine, and heals the injured one.
If you are unable to perform this procedure for some reason, tie the thread under the stone and another one above it. Then dry up over the stone between the two tied threads. Remove it from there Afterwards, remove one of the ligatures and thaw out the frozen blood that flowed into the wound.
It is not necessary to tie the thread under the stone unless you want it to prevent slipping off of the vein: and remove one of the ligatures above it, unless when you have tied a second one after removing it from the stones, it slides back into its place on your skin and ties up the wound. And because of this reason, it is necessary for you to tie that upper thread so that it slides back down towards the other part (of itself), and ties up the wound like we said.
The 10th book of surgery
From extracting the woman's nipple
A wound is formed by the nipple
If a man should accidentally touch them nipples, then it is difficult care for that, and is prohibited due to many reasons
The reason why the woman's nipple is very sensitive to a man's touch.
And secondly, because if you touch a woman who has given herself medical treatment when she is pure or with the help of her husband.
The third reason why a man's touch on a woman is delicate, especially when it comes to surgery with his hand.
The fourth reason for the delicacy of the nipple is because the cutting of deep incision and there is fear in that place.
If a necessity forces you to do this, then it's recommended that you touch the woman with good knowledge of medicine and surgery, otherwise you will only be injured.
If the woman is pregnant at that time, ask for a doctor of medicine who is subtle and has experience with childbirth, or a woman who has studied this subject well: do so therefore, and especially to her, so that she can do everything that may happen as a result of interrogation over the nipple.
The first reason is to ask if there's a man present when touching the woman's nipple; then you must put your finger into her anus and squeeze on it.
If he did that, hold his hand with your left hand over her vagina and ask for the nipple while squeezing it hard.
If he did that to the nipple, it's recommended that you quickly move him away from the vagina opening towards the lower part of his body with all your strength, until he reaches his groin.
Then take him by the hand over to the opposite side of his buttocks towards the groin with all your strength, from where you prepare him and put the nipple on that part; and do not remove his finger from it, holding onto it under it; and the incision is made first of all. "Then the beam was placed upon that cut.
"Then the beam was placed upon that cut. If it felt like a stone, then he added to the second cut according to its size as much as needed from this stone.
And you know that stones vary greatly in size and shape. But this is what a stone can be: short or tall; thin or rough; smooth or jagged; long or round, depending on how it has grown branches.
Therefore you know the kind of stone by its effect upon that which is struck with it, so that from this you can understand what sort of a stone was used in order to strike him.
If it then struck blood into you, immediately apply pressure at the place where it hit you and hold it there until the bleeding stops.
Then return to your surgery, until the stone is removed; and do as I advised you about the extraction of stones from the body, so that you may use them to help with your surgery.
If it then strikes you with a flow of blood and you know that the expulsion is from an artery that has been cut; then place a sponge upon the spot, and firmly tie him tightly around the sponge with something decent to hold it in place: do not let go of the stone itself or remove it. And if you are a woman who is weak. In that case, care for her as would be expected in one who has been hurt by the stone of another person's hand (i.e., a criminal).
After you have become aware that the blood flow has ceased and the spot is rotting (putrefying), then return to your surgery until the stone is removed.
End of the book
"To cut above a hernia.
A ramus is not a ramus without humidity and dryness; for it has become a lump of moisture below the scrotum, which is called a ramus.
Sometimes it is on its own in the scrotum, which nature has prepared for him in a small part; until then he must suffer this, which we have called another ramus and was cut skin between them, but it doesn't happen often.
The generation of this type of penis is by weakness which caused testicles: where it comes to them this matter And sometimes happens from a blow to the testicles.
These become many colors due to moisture. Or its color may be from the decline of veins to a certain color, or it is red with blood, or dirty and black, or it is white and wet, or something else that I've mentioned earlier.
The signs by which the combination of water is known are these ones. If it is at the base white as we said then it is rounded in length so that it resembles a hoop more than anything else, and you do not see the testicles because the moisture surrounds them from all sides.
If the moisture is only at its own base then it is rounded with half of that length and because of this man thinks that it is something else.
If the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and its base then it collapses under the sense.
When you are aware that colors come from moisture, then experience a color of moisture when moistening the penis with intromission as a square whose shape precedes it. Therefore considering what has been mentioned earlier about the act of intromission, remember that there is something between itself and its base.
When we come to the cure then it is necessary that he makes a small cut with iron so that he can drain if possible, and see the body of him full
Then let him hang it over his back over another part slightly while laying on many towels.
Then let him sit on the left side of it and raise his right arm so that he may sit to the other side who extends his hand towards one of the two sides of the scrotum and towards the side of the abdomen.
Then take a narrow strip of dry skin from the middle lengthways through towards the foreskin; and make a cut according to an equal line that has divided the skin of the testicles, until it reaches down to the base which is white: then wipe him off carefully observing or doing what you want with this for drying him completely: be careful in your wiping so as not to damage his part which is held up by more than one finger. And examine and observe closely with a view towards quantity that is possible for you.
Indeed, make a full incision with water and remove all of it
Then, make a section between the two lips with a sickle-like instrument and extend it to the top; do not cut through the testicle that is comprehended. And if you can make an incision anywhere on this part or all at once or in small pieces, as long as it's possible for you, whether completely or partially, but especially carefully observe its subtle length. If you do not thoroughly examine the incision, there will be no safety, and water may come out of it.
However, if you proceed to cut off your own part during the time of your operations; then when you have finished making the incision, reduce it down. Then join the two lips and sew up the testicle with a stitch.
And then care for it as you would for any other part of the body to ensure that it heals properly.
If there is a corruption or damage from other parts of the body that might affect it, then it should be treated with similar means as those used for its support and holding back blood flow.
Then remove the testicle along with the supporting device; thereafter care for it as we have said.
If the water is gathered into two parts then you know there are two roots; therefore dry the other part as carefully as you did for the first one.
If it becomes equal to you so that an operation can be done in one go, then proceed; and afterward stop the flow of blood. Then insert a soaked thread into the sectioned part with olive oil or heated olive oil; and put another soaked piece on which you had placed it in wine and olive oil above both testicles; expand it across two testicles so that its top is above both of them, and put above double folds, they are wrinkled: and sew these up with a thread holding six according to this form.
Then two pieces of cloth are laid out and stretched; they are applied as described above; the extremities from which it was taken or soaked thread is added on to: and all parts are gathered up with a stitch at the lower end of the arms, one extremity reaches over towards the head until its top reaches to the back, and another goes towards the front chest area. And two of them reach below both hips; two others go above both buttocks, and all the pieces are gathered together in total for the lower part of the body.
"And sometimes by artificial means this ram is heated with cautery and the section of the skin with a knife; then it is as if you applied a subtle cautery, and remove with that the testicle's skin; then it burns in such way as we have seen: until when it is opened up there remains a burning cautery.
"Greek letters are to be assimilated
"Then cut it with that and it burns until all the moisture has evaporated.
"Then extend that and with a subtle cautery ignite it; then cut off in the way you can according to what is possible for you until all of its parts are removed.
"And let there be no contact between the eye and fire.
"You know that this operation is better, longer-lasting than blood flow, and better than the operation with cutting.
"If it is contrary to you during the time of cutting or heating up with a hot cautery, blood flow, or something else: then take care that what goes against you from this method with the care which was given to him according to what has been stated.
"If the patient is timid and does not expect this operation because of its horror; then administer a perforation according to what I say that one:" and it is.
"When you learn from this what we have said about the water ram and its function; then it is necessary that you leave the patient in a raised seat.
"Then cut off at the lower part of his body with a thin side; and set a perforation according to the length of his body; it should be an opening wide enough for all water to flow through.
"Then put on the place of the wound; bind it up and let it be so that the remaining water flows through; then take care of him until he is healed.
"If the escape of water is contrary during the time when you perforate it; and not that one alone unless there is a white membrane which prevents the exit of water from its hole, and does not allow the water to leave: then take care that you insert in the wound either a small rod with which the water can be removed through the pores of its form or some device similar.
"Know that water is released after six months, either directly after them. "Therefore, it should be administered then in the same manner as before and on the day following his illness he will pass away.
Chapter 63
"Of the treatment of a sick rabbit.
"Know that the removal of this rabbit from its cage is attended by fear and can lead to death in multiple ways. "And you shall take him away with a dish of food.
"I will remember the surgery performed on it and make a memorial plaque for it.
"Therefore I say that many wounds occur on the bodies of such animals and from which their testicles are composed. And so it happens by multiple causes.
"Or due to an acute or caustic substance that is poured onto them. "Or by a blow.
"The wounds on their bodies are colored like the body and do not feel pain. They are ugly scars.
"And sometimes it is a scar of stone whose color is dark and does not feel to him.
"Or sometimes from a rupture of an artery or a swelling in the ears. Like its memory before it goes away either by an overflow of fluids.
"What is therefore due to them from a rupture of an artery is known through the feeling of their wounds when you compress them with your fingers. "And it should not be so that you touch him again quickly.
"That is due to an overflow of fluids but does not come out when you press it with your fingers.
"And it is possible for the surgeon to make an incision into this specimen and into the rest of their bodies as well. And then it should be cut out the testicles. "Then stretch it out on top and then take him away with a white cloth to the side or wherever you want to free the ropes from and tie them up tightly so that they do not slip off when removing this specimen.
If a bandage is applied over these cut flesh wounds then it should be pulled and pushed
If a siphon is inserted between something or within the urine outlet, then it should be removed entirely with a round incision.
If there is a cut on the flesh next to where the bandage was applied, then it should be removed entirely with a round incision and pulled out as well.
Once your operation is complete, bind a band of wool soaked in fresh goat's milk and honey around the wound to care for it with the remaining treatment until it heals.
64.
The cure for wounds by the ram's horn
The mouth is opened with a similar tool, gently loosening the testicles and making movement difficult for those who are weak or ill, and walking motion can also be performed.
And in the treatment of this injury there is a fear because of what came before it that has been remembered.
It should be done according to how they performed the surgery first.
Therefore I say that it is necessary for you to let a weak person rest on an elevated bed. After this, pull the testicles down towards the lower part of the body After this hold on to the testicles with your fingers and urine nearby, holding it with another hand so that someone else can stretch it out using a stretched cloth
After this cut the testicles downwards and upwards at an acute angle with a sharp blade so that they can be grasped by someone else.
Afterwards clean it thoroughly all over as you have been instructed to do when removing arteries from the body.
Afterwards bind it with a double thread in the parts where there is a cut and bind it again in the last part of those who have made the cut. Afterwards dry it in the middle with a straight cut according to its length and remove what is covered by wet and dirty fluids.
After removing ulcers and caring for wounds that are healing, you should stimulate the glans of the penis so that it rises up, until it reaches its natural position while eating. It is not a bad thing because of this
If all the wounds are cured, then it is necessary to extract the glans from the wound so that no food reaches them because of the incision, and they should be left to heal or ascend, depending on how badly injured they were.
Chapter 65.
Of the cure for rectal ulcers.
The remedy for rectal ulcers is to make a cut that extends across the anus, cutting into both buttocks at one end and then entering through the rectum on the other end.
Because of this, the intestines fall down from it towards one penis. And the cut is either made in the anus or through its extent.
These two types of injuries occur from different causes, such as the impact or the blow, the cut or the shout, the heavy kick or the hard push back down again.
The mark is when it's made through the extent of the anus. It happens quickly when it is long in time and not immediately; the sign was made equally with the depth of the anus but less so than its width, because the anus compressed the intestine.
The mark on its way out is made when it's done through the cut in the anus; because of that immediate pain and severe sorrow happens immediately after making it, but then it differs greatly from appearing under the skin to being pushed outwards towards the outside of the anus.
Sometimes with a hernia and the intestine is called "ramex" or a bladder hernia; sometimes it occurs when there is heaviness in the urine.
Sometimes it runs into a bladder while the intestines are moving; and then it is held there, because of this pain happens especially when it pushes forward or back towards its own size.
"And while dealing with the fear of specialists, it is necessary that there be a cause to act.
The method of surgery consists in making the wound made by one specialist so that he can reduce the intestine with his own hand if it is delivered back. Afterwards, put yourself on top of him and take hold of his legs.
Afterwards extend the wound following the wound towards the upper part and dry all the wounds completely in length. Afterwards place him with two separate cuts on the thighs towards opening the cut together with them and make a cut according to the quantity that is possible so it can be made out of this way
Afterwards remove the parts below the thigh until when it is drawn out of the white phallus, after that put your finger (in) him who follows the thigh, into him who is between the two slits and completely with him towards the rear part.
Afterwards move the hand on the right to the inside of the thigh and with this extended the slit towards the top, with the left hand and take hold of him at the part of the section and close up from the minister, so that it extends to the top: and you solve completely towards the rear solution.
And ask with your fingers not let anything go out of the intestine into the white phallus and hard one. If something comes from it, then pull him towards the lower part.
Afterwards take hold of the thick one in which there are ten hairpieces made by law and put her at the back slit, that is, the tunic which is below the thigh following the section: afterwards cut the extremities from the hairpiece until four pieces are left. Afterwards arrange some of them above others with a figure that is in the shape of the cross and bind him together to those who are mentioned because they are below the thigh ligament, until nothing can be moved from these which feed them into them something: so that it does not become hot from there. Second ligature is placed after first ligature, leaving a gap between them of two fingers' length Then remove the second ligature from its sheath as mentioned earlier, placing it below where you made an incision for removing the testicles; measure its length by touching your fingers together in a way that leaves a space of two finger lengths; and then make a complete cut to release this ligament.
After the skin of the testicles has been cut and blood flows out, you will see it as we described earlier.
Then administer a submerged needle into an olive oil container, then insert this into the incision; and then administer the ligature we previously described. And when you have burned the sheath of that which we mentioned earlier after making an incision into it while fearing the flow of blood That many things happen. Then remove the ligature until it is complete in its own way.
If something delays his situation (i.e., the blood flow stops), then apply a warm compress over him and put on top of it that which we mentioned earlier until he dies.
Then after removing the needle from the wound and the ligature is complete, stop caring for both.
End of Document
Farewell to the rope
I did not see anyone who was removed from caring for him with a fire.
And the first ones said that it happens just like what we described earlier with the rope and the wick. Which is that the flame goes above and comes down quickly after cutting it over them; then stop in the middle to dry out; care for him as we described earlier until he dies; and lastly care for his wounds according to what we mentioned before until they are healed.
End of Document
Of the disruption that occurs in the genitals.
When the rupture occurs in the genitals as we mentioned earlier and it leads to a place where nothing comes out of the intestines; or if it goes down into the testicles but only then is that limited, returning inside every hole: if the time for urine stays too long with her, an incision is made within the sheath until the bowels come out of the sheath.
"It [i.e., a fistula] is caused by an extension of the septum as we have said. "That is because it extends the septum; then it becomes softened and the place opens up and is healed.
"Its care is like that of its narration, as we have said before.
"And sometimes it is treated with a knife according to this manner; and when healed, let the sick one lie on his back between your hands. "Then dry up the place of rupture according to our previous explanation; by making a cut across it at right angles and through its width, with three fingers.
"Then close the septum as we have said before; until when it is revealed and is found to be white under your finger which follows after.
"Then take a needle, and put it into the place of the septum as we have said before; and gently press towards its deepest part in the body.
"Then take two stitches of the septum above the extremity of your finger from it; and bind one of them with another; then cut off the extremity of your finger.
"And do not cut all at once, nor stretch out with force; neither do anything else as we have taught you about the preparation of the intestines.
"Then cure that by our manner of caring for veins. "As we have taught you before when the vein is cut; make it moist and rest the wound until it heals together again.
"The septum as a result of this contraction does not become bigger than its rupture.
"The cautery is better at that place because it is more closely related to health.
The following text does not seem to have a clear meaning. What do you suggest I do with it?
"Of the softening of the skin of the testicles.
"The skin of the testicles becomes softened on certain men due to the softening of the flesh which lies between them; and is changed by it.
Therefore it is necessary for him who is requested to make a vein out of his own flesh and to make an incision through the softened skin on top of the normal one.
Then two lips with a seam are sewn together along with this: if there is an excess of the softened skin in three stitches or four, and firm sutures.
Then make an incision between the seams.
After curing and treating the wounds of others as much as necessary, until they are healed completely, and then the stitches will fall off.
Chapter 69.
Of castration.
However, the castration is excluded from our law and it was permitted for me that I should not remember him in my book, and there is no necessity of remembering him unless by two modes.
Of which one is to know the knowledge of a physician when he inquires about it, and so that its cure can be known for whom it happened?
And the other mode is that we have many times used castration to various animals because of our needs for this purpose as with rams, goats, and cats, and similar ones from animals.
Therefore I say that castration fits according to two modes. Or through weariness. And also through tear and cut.
In the case where castration is done through weariness, which method of operation we have practiced for sedating an animal in a warm water until its testicles soften and relax, and then tie them up so they will not fall off unless held by your hand: after that take them with your own hand until they become loose and do not appear under touch.
In the case of castration through tear and cut, it is necessary to hold an animal tightly with your left hand while you gently remove his testicles using your right hand.
Then tie up the suspensors securely and dry off all over his body by removing one of the cuts completely until they both come to pass: then make an incision where you have removed them, so that nothing is left beyond the delicate cut which extends along the back except on top of it something very thin.
This is a medical technique for castration which is better than by pulling out the testicles. The reason being that pulling of the testicles may result in loss of semen, therefore one wants to castrate an animal
Afterwards take care of the wound until it heals
The 70th mode
Regarding the different modes (methods) for castration in women
Hermaphrodites are castrated by two methods: Hermaphrodites are castrated by two methods: either through the space between their genitals or by cutting off their testicles; which is done inside of them both, with a figure resembling that of a woman, and with hairs sometimes running from it where they have cut off one or both testicles.
In women it is one kind of figure, and that of a woman over the labia in exactly the same way as the testicles of men are parted from each other by one, and two by two testicles.
And regarding the three kinds of castration, two from men and one from women is necessary to do this so that the added flesh may be removed until the impression of their testicles has passed. Afterwards take care of the remaining wounds.
Regarding the second method for men from which urine comes forth, as that of cutting off their testicles, it is not an operation nor a care to them at all.
The 71st mode
Of the incision of the clitoris and the prominent parts (the clitoris) in women.
Excessively (excessively) added to the natural part until it is torn and becomes ugly; and sometimes it is so great as to be a target of some women that it extends like this for men too and has reached its peak.
Therefore it is necessary to hold off the excess of the clitoris with one's hand or a knife and cut it so that no flow of blood occurs.
Afterwards take care of them until they heal.
"And that which is born from the uterine opening remains within it until it's discharged; and oftener may be drawn out through its own likeness to a tail, or more precisely by incision in accordance with the shape of the buttock: and for this reason some people call it Aegritude caudata. Therefore let us cut her as we would a knot (or ligature), and cure her until she is cured
The cure for Alratica is given to women who have not been perforated by the uterus.
This is a number.
Alratica (or "roughness") refers to the state of having an unperforated uterus in women or the presence of a fistula. It can be either natural or accidental
The accident is from the cause of Aegritude Caudae (or rough tail) and either she was born with flesh added to it or with a subtle cut/wound or a spit/spit-cut: and she may also fit into the womb, into her side, into its top or bottom, into a deeper uterus, and prohibit pregnancy, childbirth, and menstruation.
The knowledge of this comes from the appearance (or proximity) of obstetrics if there is an apparent relation (or close relationship).
If not then seek her with your fingers or a tool
If the proximity is from the cause of Aegritude Caudae and she has a close relationship with both sides then go ahead (or proceed) and remove her immediately (or strike off).
And it is that you lay on two vulva lips.
Then place both of your fingers together and the woman lies stretched out with her own arms above her back. Then spread apart two vulva lips until the subtle cause of Aegritude Caudae is removed and there appears knowledge (or appearance).
Then take the woman to bed with you and drink her as a bath (or anointing) in oil and lay her over the place; and for every day she should be present until no other place is left dry.
If a vein is swollen and tender, then it should be cut with a sharp knife along its course
If a swelling from the flesh is spontaneous, then suspend it with hooks and cut off its head: and apply medicine to stop the flow of blood without injury or harm to the flesh, such as with acacia bark and dragon's blood, so that it may coagulate with elder flowers
After administering a large spoonful of wine to prevent the swelling and hold it tightly in place for several days, then administer licorice root powder, which will cure any remaining inflammation through continued care until healing is complete.
And when one is born into a cancerous matrix, then it should be cut off according to this manner so that the contrary of cutting with iron may not occur.
Chapter Seventy Three
Cure for hemorrhoids and bothor ointment on women's vulvas.
Hemorrhoids are the opening of veins in the anus and rectum, causing much blood to flow through them.
When hemorrhoids are alleviated, they disappear and I shall describe their nature, signs, and what to do about them later.
Therefore, I say that hemorrhoids occurring in the matrix opening are not treated with iron.
Those appearing from the matrix opening which fall onto what is below them should be treated.
Therefore it is necessary for a woman to enter into her cold house. Then stretch athehelil with hooks or cloth and cut them off from their roots.
After cutting off the veins and hemorrhoids from their roots without injury or harm to them, apply a poultice with one incision of cuts mixed with acacia bark and dragon's blood so that it may coagulate and stick fast to its own blood.
Then he will stand on the wall for a moment. Place her gently in cold water
If blood flow was interrupted: then place her in a warm bath (decoction), and put on hot towels, and heated combs, and the like
Afterwards take a hot iron rod (farnam hordei), and with a sponge and vinegar, bind her up tightly on his back.
If blood flow is interrupted with him (the person), it's good to do so gently and without any cuts or scars.
Afterwards take a sponge and pour over it (the person) the juice of bitter wine or the like, until they are bound down gently but tightly, so that their limbs may not move around.
After this happens, take care of his body with oil and water, until he is cured (healed).
In the meantime, if you are using red wine, keep it similar to the hands for some time
So let him drink until he is cured (healed).
The head has 72 parts.
From the perforations of the matrix that was injured.
Many perforations of the matrix occurred, like cancer and cold sores, ulcers, abscesses, boils, and boils (aleki) in the matrix, etc.
I also mentioned all the wounds and signs of them (the perforations), their dressings separately: it is necessary to say here how opening her with iron happens when they join together to bind him, so that you may know how he opens up with a knife.
So let you consider Then if the pain from sores is acute with his falling and there's a fire or fever, you apply a cold compress to him (the person). If it falls on top of him, then do not open her until she has healed completely, and take care of her as before so that when her pains subside.
"You should seat the woman on a bench so that she rests her buttocks upon two seats and reclines; if you lower them to her belly, then they should be supported by their feet at the lowest part of her body. Stretch out her thighs, place your arms under hers, and tie each arm with its own cord.
"Then the attendant woman should seat herself on the right side, and administer the instrument by which the opening of her mother will be opened.
"And when you administer this instrument, let her make a deep breath as the woman after giving birth; lest what is drawn out from it be deeper than necessary for the mother, and soothe the exhausted one.
"If the instrument is deeper than necessary for giving birth, then you should put a pad over the deep part of her mother's abdomen; lest the entire opening be drawn into it and cause injury to the mother; so that one may tie off the cord from above the highest side; and until the deepest part of her body is opened.
"And when the forceps are visible and touched by hand, they should be gently pulled out of her belly near to her head with a soft pull.
"And when the baby is extracted and you have pulled them out of her belly near to her head with a soft pull; then put on the subumbrella of dark olive oil or the umbrella of white wine, which has some stickiness; tie it on, and take off the section in the deepest part of her body.
"And put an exterior over the mother's chest and under the nose a veil made from soft wool soaked in water which contains lead.
"Then she would be treated after two days with oil that suited it; until then.
"And when the water and membranes are washed away so that they are treated with water mixed with dill or long pepper; then after being rinsed off with water which contains the root of lily or hyacinth.
"If a vein has separated from its membrane, then you must remove it by cautery [burning with a heated instrument] using the method we discussed for division.
"Head 60 [LXXU]".
"Doctrine of childbirth, as practiced in delivery: not by a natural exit of the body.
It is necessary for an obstetrician to first determine the natural form of delivery.
"Therefore, you should know that when a woman is held down by her lower hand and wants to breathe air above, the thing which is over [her] must be released from her, it being the exit of the child; then you will understand that this birth is according to the natural form. And in death it departs with its head above.
"Therefore, when you see these signs [of childbirth], then it is necessary that his belly be pressed down so the child may drop out more quickly.
"And when he departs from his head above, then it is necessary that the child be released in good form by means of those things which are abundant.
"Whoever is outside this birth is unnatural and admirable.
"Since sometimes the child passes over his feet and before [the head of] him, and drops his hands before his head; or if one hand is missing from him or heavy as a stone: in any case it turns back upon its own neck, and similarly by signs admirable.
"Therefore it is necessary for an obstetrician to be prudent and cautious about these things all around him, avoiding error and deception; I am pointing out everything from them according to their nature, how the child is born through this thing and what its origin is.
"When the child is born by its natural exit from above and in this manner over a woman [who struggles] with great difficulty to bring it forth; then let them hold her down on their hands or feet: but if they are unable to do so because of fatigue, let them prepare it for cooking and frying with the juices of onions.
"Having placed the midwife between her fingers and thumb to grasp it gently, she finds with its aid another finger, seizes that one with hers own, until she has reached what is within her by moisture; then she loosens the woman's hand when the fetus descends.
"If it did not descend, then let her be lubricated with a mixture of oil and unguent to facilitate its descent.
"Having lubricated her after the speculum, let him approach and hold onto her head as tightly as he can; he will then be able to see its mouth. "The fetus will immediately descend.
"If the hands of the woman come together and enclose the fetus first, then let her be gently lowered as soon as possible. "If the woman cannot enter into childbirth first time, then let her stand over the bed and put her feet together; next she must stretch out the legs to touch the ground as much as possible; finally, hold onto her so that she does not fall because of the movement.
"If the hands do not descend and the fetus dies; then drive them away from each other with haste and remove what remains of the fetus; tie down her hand with a cloth until it is removed as well.
"The descent of the fetus comes to an end on its feet. "When it has descended onto the feet, then let her rush towards them; next she must gently pull and straighten the fetus.
"Then she takes one of its legs and stretches it out gently.
"When the hands reach up to her hips, then lubricate and let him approach and hold onto her as tightly as he can; it will descend immediately if God wills.
"And if the descent is not accomplished as desired, then gently lower it down until you have placed it in its usual position. "At that moment, let him quickly go out and descend easily.
"If we wish to prevent the same from happening completely, then take everything that is about to enter and hold it back with a cushion made of high-quality cork or sponge soaked in honey and gum solution. Then strike all parts of the body firmly on the stone (mortarium) until death ensues. Afterward, wash her/him with water. "Afterwards, seat them in warm water and wait for the pain to subside.
"When you have heated him/her sufficiently so that the lower part is relaxed (hypocundria), then anoint them with myrrh and apply a compress. "Once the myrrh has been applied, seat her on top of a bed or couch to relax further. "Afterwards, gently stroke their face and nose with your hand (suflagio), and press the lower part of her mouth with a compress to facilitate breathing. "Thus will it be quickly done.
"The fetus has exited through the legs and hands (genus). "When it exits according to this shape, gently introduce them with your hand slowly. "Afterwards the woman is placed on her back and her feet are bent downwards towards the lower part (infundibulum), while she holds onto a support with both hands. "Then press gently upwards into his mouth slowly. "Afterwards remove what is beneath her feet from the navel downwards until it is pressed up to the lower part (infundibulum). "If the fetus does not exit through the legs, then take her feet and move them back as mentioned earlier. "Afterwards press upwards towards her face gradually until the fetus reaches the upper part (superior). "Then introduce your hand gently and equalize the fetus slowly until you press down on her to stop it from exiting.
"The fetus exits with its head downwards, hanging off of both hands (latitudinaliter). "Introduce it gently while reducing the hand. If you cannot reduce it, then take a woman and make her walk
If she cannot walk, then lay her on the table; support both her legs with a cushion to prevent crushing injuries.
After that, apply a soothing ointment made from mallows.
If she gives birth while lying on it, then lay her gently onto the bed. After supporting with both hands and aligning the fetus as naturally as possible, gently lift up the woman; hold her until she is comfortable enough to move on her own.
The fetus falls from its mother's body and the face of the infant is towards the back of the mother's belly. The obstetrician holds onto the fetus with both hands and gently rolls it back quickly and easily.
Once she is comfortable enough to move on her own, lay her gently onto the table; support both her legs with a cushion to prevent crushing injuries and apply an ointment made from olive oil and mallows.
Then gently lift up the woman so that she can move about slowly. After doing this, lay her gently onto the bed; support both her legs with a cushion to prevent crushing injuries and guide her towards one side. Then gently lift up the woman so that she can move around slowly.
The fetus is gently lifted off of one side, away from any support provided by both hands and legs. When the fetus has descended through a natural opening in the mother's abdomen and is guided by her finger to help it move downward towards its head while keeping an eye on how much fluid should be present as indicated before.
If the fetus is suspended by its face and body then cut it away from the umbilical cord; so that it does not stay there and die (due to lack of air).
After cutting away the umbilical cord then pull the fetus towards the inside; support the woman so that she can move around a little and soon enough it will be born.
Death of twins, or death of many And when twins are born to more than one pair and sometimes four pairs However this is rare
But five of them are not in accordance with nature and do not feel pain but remain bound together by a cord connecting to their navel.
And sometimes they are separated at birth like the other one is born through a natural death and easily, while others die in such a way that it would be difficult to describe them separately
And if it is difficult for some of them at birth and they are carried by what we described as unnatural figures then the cure for them should be such that you do everything possible to help them in a way as natural as possible, gradually and gently, making sure to follow every step as closely as you can to the one prepared with great care to bring about their healing
The remembrance of this which is formed in the womb from the embryos and they are aborted.
When one is formed in the womb and two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, ten, fifteen, and more are formed then I have seen it done that a woman aborted them all, and others were made.
This is the measurement of the glorious wise men.
Therefore, this should be all in obstetrics knowledge. However, if you wish to do the same for her [i.e., the woman]
Chapter seventy six
Of the extraction of a dead fetus.
When you are dealing with a dead fetus as I described it earlier through the use of medicine and not being born, but you carry out your work using operations with hands, then at this point it is important to remember.
If then the woman is of healthy virtue and not with someone through accidents which it is feared that she might lose over her, then at this point it should be made such that a woman sits upon her back, on her chest, so that her head is brought to one below, her legs raised: and care for her must be taken from both sides or tied to the bed so that the body of hers will not be removed through extraction of fetus.
And from veins containing male seed with honey and tallow, and foenugreece, and semen.
And the Obstetrical Surgeon takes hold of his hand with these oils and honey, after which he inserts her into the mother's womb gently. And while she is in that place where she lies in wait for the newborn child, and finds ease to it nearby.
Therefore consider that if the foetus is ready to descend on its head: then look upon it from his eyes or face or mouth or palate or chin or under his beard or fork of hair or beneath the lower edge of his jaw or in front of the fold of his armpit, so that you may see how well he fits into the mother's womb.
But if it has descended from its feet to its chest: then consider also between his ribs and under her breasts.
And it is necessary to hold him with the right hand and place him into that which is between the left hand's fingers: and insert him gently while holding his hand with ease, looking for a space among those places we have described so as to complete his descent.
And while looking for him against the left side of another place or third if possible: so that his descent is neither too tight nor loose but in balance and with ease.
After which he extends with equal force and not by right alone but as much as possible so that the exit from him is made easy; just like when you remove a tooth at his removal, it should happen in this manner too.
And there must be within that which lies between those so that the extension may be softened and not too strong. If part of him is retained from being pulled out: then the Obstetrical Surgeon must take hold with some fingers and olive oil, and insert them by way of that space so as to be able to release his descent while holding on to what is held tight.
If part of the foetus slips away: then shift them to a higher place and do this until the whole fetus is released.
Therefore, I raise my hand over other things and cannot reduce it; this is due to the fact that his arm has become stiff from lack of use; so he must stretch the hand across himself by lifting up a piece of cloth or something similar. Next, when I have completely raised the hand, either cut through or at a joint of the palm (that is, at the interphalangeal joint), or make a slit; and then you should take hold with the other hand as well, using both hands for this purpose.
If the fetus is large or injury to his arm occurs at birth or there was accumulation of water on his head; then he should insert a sharp, pointed object between his fingers and find its way out with his head, and also raise up the water by using something called Almisdac, which shape fits in with the shapes of the remaining instruments in the chapter that is after this.
Similarly if the head of the fetus is large in nature, then you should pull it out using a rope or something similar; or raise it up by grasping it with the other hand as we have described. Next, you take hold of his bones and fingers.
If the head is removed and there was a restriction at the neck; then you should find it until the humidity that is in his chest has been released.
If this does not fit or cannot be brought to an exit; then cut off the head with a swift blow as you are able.
If the lower part of his belly is separated from below or there was water accumulation in him; then you should execute this immediately until he has passed all the humidity out of himself.
If his fetus is above his feet; then grasping him should be easy and leading towards the mouth with the breast or arms of one hand to guide this will make it easier for you.
If there is restriction at the back or chest; then you should pull him out with a cloth that was placed on your hand as we have described and find his lower part until all of it has passed.
If any of the remaining parts are severed and the head is restored, then the left hand obstetrician should perform the procedure If the mouth is opened up to that extent and the head is restored, then the left hand obstetrician should put it into its socket deeply within her womb; she will tie it on with those parts of the head which are tied back there; [she] will sew him up to his fingers reaching all the way back until he reaches the mouth of the womb. Afterwards, the left hand obstetrician should introduce one or two hooks inside of that, and tie them together.
If the mouth of the womb is constricted by adhesions caused from a cold object that had injured her, then it is not necessary to try and extract him out through the mouth; instead she should administer an emulsion of fluids warm, dry, and liquid [?], and place the ligature: and let him sit in those liquids which will soften and moisten.
If the fetus is above its own level, then it is possible that he may be equalized; she should administer what we have already said to him by way of a drink.
If this cannot be done, then the operation will fail and she must extract it out.
And let her not remove anything from inside of his second part at all times.
Once you have finished your procedure, she should administer what we have already said to the obstetrician's hooks which cause damage within the womb;
If an injury occurs to a blood vessel, then it must go down into those vessels, and she should administer what is left for curing.
And I have just heard of a woman whose womb the fetus died within; afterward she was impregnated by way of another penis, and then the other fetus also died. Therefore an injury occurred to him after a long time by way of his umbilical cord, and it was swollen; eventually the opening became open, and he began to emit pus.
I am called now towards curing of his, and I have been treating him for a long time; but the wound is not consolidated.
Therefore, I put upon him with certain strong ligatures of flesh: and he came out from his place through the mouth. Indeed they passed him some days and another mouth exited out of him. I am therefore here now that the mouth is not within me.
I thought because there was a fetus of a dead body from outside my belly.
I therefore removed the wounds and took out many bones of a woman who was present with better dispositions; and he died as long as it lasted.
And I did not hold fast here this externality although there was knowledge of it and aid to do that which the physician administers with his own hand from the care.
Chapter 70 of On Regimen of the Physician.
Of instruments necessary for extracting a fetus.
The form of the vein which is opened up
Here is the form of Strictorius which are equal to books; there are two wounds equally on both sides of two trees. However, this Strictorius should be more subtle than in the vein; or it may be made by the flesh or the wood of the vessel.
And the width of all wood is like two fingers; and its margin to either side is almost as one finger; and length to either side is palm-width, breadth, and half its breadth: in the middle of two trees there are two additions made from that same wood which have already been established on both sides, whose length is palm-width plus a little more: and width for each is like two fingers or less.
And these two additions are inserted into the mouths of the veins that you may open with them when you should desire to draw out both wounds.
Another form similar to that one; more subtle and lighter.
It should be made from the flesh or wood, according to the likeness of the veins. However, these two additions from them are like palms-width; and width for each is like two fingers.
"When you wish to open a vagina with it, then close it on the tongue of a woman, placing her feet around its base, and leave as an opening between its lips. "Then introduce both of these tools together into the vagina, and you hold fast to the lower end with your other hand between her thighs. "Then introduce your hand with the tool as you do when inserting fingers, but in equal measure to the extent that your opening of the vagina has already done.
"The other form is more difficult than what was previously mentioned about stimulating, which refers to the pushing out of the fetus.
"The third form is when you put a large head on it and press with your fingers like you would to open the mouth.
"And when something is inserted in a manner similar to this shape and its fingers, like you would with the mouth, but using teeth like the teeth of a sawblade.
"Those who hold one spine have the ability to turn themselves inside out.
"Those who hold two spines can bend themselves into a curve like a bow.
"Those who have two small arms can bend themselves towards each other at the neck to remove their heads.
"And those with two short legs, they are also called Lators.
"All of these instruments are used and the number of their forms multiplied, and are prepared for use in a skilled artisan, either as part of an operation or for other purposes.
"Therefore do not take away any of these tools from me unless it has been prepared by you beforehand. "The need for them is obvious.
The last head.
"Of the removal of the second [tool].
When the placenta is separated from the birth, then it is necessary that you remove the umbilical cord quickly and gently to keep hold of its desire/life force. After this, cut her loose from the birth canal with a sharp tool; grasp your hand and put it in his mouth, and tie off his nostrils. Therefore, if the cord is severed at that point, it is good/beneficial.
If not, take the cord and pierce through it in a hole; place within its mouth herbs like chamomile, sweet marjoram, rue, and basil; tie this around his body, as tightly as possible, with fire beneath, to keep him warm and from dying until you can provide proper care.
After placing the cord through his mouth and around his body as tightly as possible with fire beneath to keep him warm until you can provide proper care, hold her/the other extremity in the mouth of the birth canal; keep it there until the water reaches the uterus.
After holding her in place as described before, cut off the cord when you are ready to do so. The placenta will be separated with ease.
If the placenta remains after this care and is not separated, then give a sharp tool to an obstetrician so that his hand may be dipped into sesame oil or tallow. After holding her in place as described before, insert the umbilical cord into your mouth and suck on it until you are ready to cut off the cord. When he has sucked her/the placenta loose from its place, then take hold of it and stretch it out as much as possible.
If the placenta becomes entangled deep within the birth canal, then insert your hand as described before until he has sucked it loose from its place and stretches it out fully towards the right side/left side; after that, increase the pressure to stretch it further so that it does not get trapped in the uterus's outlet; this is necessary for complete separation of the placenta. This cord should be separated at that point and delivered to/from another person.
"If the womb is closed up, we cut it open like this: we heal her with a sternutation and from ointments with herbs.
"If the womb does not rupture when all is cut off, then it should be extracted gently, making sure you don't hurt her on your way.
"It is necessary that the womb being opened up to the mother should also be cut off from the woman. Then apply a tetrapharmacopoeia ointment to her. "Otherwise, she will rot and dissolve within days, and come out.
However, if the womb becomes rotten with a bad smell to the head and neck, it will lead her to death. Therefore, appropriate suffugations must be applied to this
Some of the ancients have already become skilled in the art of making such concoctions as will make things soft and moist.
A device used for suffugation at menstruation and the second part of the menstrual cycle
Let the flame be brought near to a lamp or an oven; and let there be placed on one's breast an open hand over fire; the suffugation is thus positioned above the coals of a fire.
The 79th head.
"About Ani no incision made.
Many boys are born; and of those none has had an incision made by Sifac the subtle one. Therefore it is necessary that the midwife should make an incision with Sifac's finger; if she cannot, then with a sharp Spatumilus and gently apply pressure to prevent harm.
Then place on top of it infused oil and wine. Then heal him with remedies until he becomes well.
"If the thing causing it is not removed by tomorrow morning after eating the lead, then put in a sieve one can of lead for many days, until he grows up enough to eat.
"And another fall has occurred due to the weakening of the bones, or from the loosening of joints. Therefore, let it be done in order to reinforce that part, and then treat it after we have provided for its care and plastering as before.
The eighty-eighth chapter.
Of fistulas occurring at the lower parts
Fistulas occurring at the lower parts are fistulae, and fistulas caused by thickening near the anus may lead to a single fistula or multiple fistulas.
Therefore, as age occurs with the fistulae, they open and treat them by removing their white pus, or by removing the subtle pus.
And sometimes fistulas can be penetrating. Therefore, when they are recognized as penetrating fistulas by the thing that has come out from them, and by vomiting, sometimes it is done with vomiting to relieve it; or possibly they are relieved by using medicines.
And fistulas are at the lower parts when there is space for penetration up to the anus and up to the bladder of meat, or to the urethra. And fistulas are at the lower parts when there is space for penetration all the way down to the pubic bone and to its tail end.
The thing that recognizes the penetrating fistulas up to the anus and not penetration is when you point your finger into the anus; and you attempt with a subtle probe of the fistula by air or iron when there is no tortuousness.
If there is tortuousness in it, then you attempt to enter that by means of a subtle plaster or a hair from horsehair until you feel it, or by means of your finger.
If you do not feel the fistula or there is nothing that comes out from vomiting or no pus or no medicines as I have said; then it knows that it is not penetrating and so it should be treated accordingly.
When the fistulas are penetrating all the way up to the bladder or meat of urine; then its meaning is by the exit from them and the prohibition against it in order that they be reinforced with medicines at this place.
If the probe is inserted up to the pubic arch or the os of the coccyx, then its mark should be that which penetrates until it reaches there; if not within tortuosities down to the os, discovery of pain on this side and on the other part, and always in the parts around him. And when it does not penetrate into them (the affected areas), neither is it treated with unguent or consolidated by any means.
In these fistulas all penetrating ones there is no treatment for everyone; and the treatment of them is a work and strength given to him from the physician's experts, through which he forms himself up.
In the one which is not penetrating and ancient hopes for health with a nail; as I told you before, and I already tested it; and there should be weakness between your hands on his back: put out his limbs up to above the buttocks of him, and place them bent towards the middle of him. Then a hollow probe or an air one if it is in a fistula with tortuosities until you know where the attempt reached.
If however he felt that weakness around the finger, then you should put an index finger into his anus
Therefore, if you felt that finger had already reached it by itself, except for what you felt between the finger and him, or meat; then certainly it is penetrating: therefore no labor in this case because its treatment was not given to him as we said.
They then said that the treatment for some people was with flesh, and from a remedy of which it hopes improvement; is so that it makes cauterization subtle according to the breadth of fistulas as it had gone before, and put in the inflamed one into the fistula until he penetrates around the anus. Then again this one or two, until you know because all these fleshly meats added filtered and like the tubes of the penis are already placed.
Then cure it with the use of ointments being inserted into butter until those fleshly meats are gone; then cure it with the help of the ointments which have been added, and are consolidated.
If it works well, it is good
And if not, then without other treatment, never
And if it fails to help you up to your finger which is inside the anus and between him and the thing that pushes out with a stick, then dry the cut skin from the beginning of the fistula, and you will wipe away as you try in the fistula until you succeed in pushing it out by force.
Then rinse off those filtered meats that are used for drinking, so they will not carry anything away from them.
If the blood gets on you and between your hand and your surgery so that you dry those meats: then do it better as much as possible and most quickly by burning them with fire or by a sharp medicine.
After the cautery with fire has added good habits and burning of the flesh and removal of blood and drying of moisture.
Then take care of that with the application of vinegar or with burning cloths until it releases pus and these meats are taken out dry from the pus.
Then take care of that with the application of ointments, firmers and healers, until it becomes medicine where there is stiffness and drying.
Because when they are ready, then it immediately works well, and does not need repetition.
If the fistula has already pushed out completely to the bottom of your anus and continues with excess body fluid: then insert your finger into it as deeply as you can and ask for help from him.
If you feel that the attempt is between you and it, by force or flesh, then there is no operation for him except according to what trust and hope are.
This is because it operates in him one of three ways: or that cauterize it as we said before; or dry it until you get his consent to enter your fingers and do the treatment nearby. Do not cut off more than necessary in order that you do not injure the nerve endings of the finger and strike above the death of the hand, without causing pain. Then proceed with care as we have said so.
However, if it can be prevented: either stretch the finger or move your thumb to the side gently and back until you reach the tip of the finger, just as we have advised, or with another tool that has a sharp point, but not so much force that you cause pain. Then cleanse the filtered meats which are in the incision until you have reached it with a good cleaning.
Then proceed to repair the nerves of all with the incision and above where it is tightened: And leave an open fistula on the inner part of the anus and there will be a lower one over the illness.
And when it suits the fistula in this way and is, if you try to enter into the fistula: and there is on the side of the anus about the surface of the body with a grip and the edge of the anus: then take a perforate extremity that is as sharp as an awl, namely, through holes of the heart, according to this form. And go around it with five strings, and along its way Then enter the thread into the fistula until it is fixed by her.
If it happens that you penetrate from the inside side of the anus on up to the edge, then take out the thread through this hole, so that you put in your finger into the finger and remove the extremity of the thread and bind both together: and you hold one tightly with both hands until you die, or for two days. And if there are wounds among these two extremities and they fall off, then repair the nerves until it is fixed up.
If the fistula does not penetrate through a hole, then prepare for it to enter wherever you like except if it is deeply too much. Do not do this for the finger so that you do not injure him.
"Therefore, as I have taught you before, if it is safe.
The Form of a fistula that causes great pain and the other part is not acute so it should not be inflicted because it's not necessary, just like you have learned.
Chapter 71.
Regarding the curing of hemorrhoids by excision and sealing of their veins; as for treatment.
There are two types of hemorrhoids, And one kind is in the anus itself, like coal or lead; or if they are like small granulations And another is common and large ones too, from where always blood runs out, and it is one of them many. And there are others outside the anus; they can be found near its ends.
However, those that are outside the anus are usually small moist ones; from where the bitter water runs out or with little blood flow continuously.
The cure of those that are inside the anus is as follows; it will be applied so that the pain becomes severe until he defecates and shows them to you. For this reason, or hold with your fingers; or tie them with your finger. Then cut off those near their roots.
If you cannot hold them with your fingers because of their moisture and softening; then bind them up with a cloth or tie them off with a knot from the ear lobe, and remove them with your fingers. Then cut off those, and after removing some of their hot coals put a bandage on to cover the wound so it won't be exposed to cold. Or use cautery as described above. Then cure them with the remaining treatment until they are healed.
If the anus doesn't let go of its own accord when it is ready to come out, then apply a small ligature around that which is inside the anus so it can be used along with him as he is defecating and obeys his action when he has emptied himself.
If a tooth is external to the gum, then its removal is easy; and it is possible for you to remove it either with your finger or by using a nail file, and strike them off Then cure them as we said, until they are healed
And if you use a nail file to remove it, then apply sutures according to this method. Take the thread that has been tied and insert it into its place through the wound. Then remove the tooth towards its top and make it penetrate with a needle through the base of his opposite side; tie both ends tightly, downwards one end and upwards another; and stretch the tooth with strong sutures. After that take out the thread, and remove the wound.
Do this with all the teeth; and let one of them go free, so that it may draw out any superfluous blood from him.
Then place on the top of his head a poultice made of fresh oil or honey, and let it stay there; gently press down so that he may rest. After that, remove it until he is dead.
When the teeth have fallen out, then cure them with ointments and treatments; after that they will be healed.
About the treatment of fractures. Many times accidents occur from excessive heat or constriction by nature.
When this occurs, and it is not possible to treat them with medicine; then use the following methods until they become dry, after which you must remove any upper layer that prevents their consolidation. After that, cure them as needed according to what is necessary.
If they are not consolidated; then try them again with a greater reason than before until much blood is lost and you remove the treatment of those; after that, cure them until they are healed.
About the treatment of bruises and not for wounds, and toothache.
Eighty-two head
It should be known that the swelling (nodus) is due to a rounded swelling resembling the color of the body and similar to the head's appearance; it covers the entire body except for the lower limbs, hands, and digits: and painful injury occurs in these areas when walking or using them.
Therefore, it is advisable to remove what is swollen around the eye and hold on tightly with both hands, or with a comb, and be removed from its root.
Afterwards, take care of it by burning it according to what was mentioned previously in his chapter.
But there is also a type of swelling that is prominent and sharp above the surface of the body, which resembles ash, soot, or soot. And many injuries occur on the hands of children.
The care for it is to burn or scrape off the swelling and let it fall with a comb; or hold it tightly while pulling out some of its hair, until it falls from exhaustion. And if you want to remove it by burning or with a sharp remedy; and they will be burned away immediately, without resorting to the instrument which I mentioned earlier.
But there is also a type of swelling that is prominent and sharp above the surface of the body, which resembles ash or soot; it sinks into the depths as soon as it becomes cold, causing pain similar to biting formica (ant) bites, and affects the entire body: and many injuries occur on their hands.
The care for it is to pick up the quill of an aspen or a strong blackbird; and place the quill over the ant, until the quill keeps the circle closed off on its side. Afterwards place your hand with the quill over it until you have removed what is around the ant's swelling; and put her into a deep hole of the body, and remove the ant from its root.
And if you want to remove it with an air quill or a wire in this shape.
With a superior grasp of instruments, it is brought down to the fingertips from above and applied over [or: held on] his finger, so that its own relief may be felt by touch and the relaxation thereof.
And if you are to cauterize with Formica, as it was explained in the chapter on cautery by Athelstan
Section eighty-three.
Of instruments used for treating wounds and their applications, fluids introduced into them to relieve pain, and ointments
When the clister is used from an egg, or a heated iron, or by fire, or by mallet.
And when it is applied with these instruments, small and large, according to the one on which they are used.
Thus it is applied in the treatment of children with small fingers, light and sensitive.
The large one.
Its upper end where the ligature is made is large and according to this shape it has a distinction so that it may be attached as firmly as with your fingers, and its lower part into which an opening is made on one side only is deaf or without sound, soft, gentle, yielding, sensitive in touch. And there are two foramina at the upper end of his shaft and one foramen at the lower end
And the size of its foramina is according to the length and breadth of its root; broad but small ones and one in which medical remedies are put from animal's skin or paper, which is according to the shape of a sieve, whose root is like one finger
The foramina are opened by multiple methods so that there remains an opening between every foramen and the breadth of a finger. Then the filament is inserted strongly from raw thread through one of the foramina, or by means of that and the other surrounding it so closely as if interwoven. And then put on his upper part a ligature from two firmly attached clamps. "In order to heal with it.
This is a depiction of a circle in two halves here and a hole
The quality of healing with it is as follows: either the cold medicine must be warmed up or heated, according to its quantity and tolerance; so that neither too hot nor too cold a remedy may be taken
The sick person is placed on their back and the extremities are raised towards the head; and a cushion is placed underneath him to prevent his body from falling.
The extremities are wrapped with oil or vinegar or honey or similar substances. This is inserted into the anus gently. The minister receives both his hands simultaneously and extracts it with the same force, until all that is in the tube of the instrument has been extracted from the intestines.
After removing the tube, the sick person's extremities are placed towards the wall.
If the medicine has the effect of drawing him out then it should be held as long as possible. And if he falls asleep with it all night, sleep is more profound and intense.
If the sick person is placed into a solution of urine for cleansing purposes and it causes death then another tube should be inserted until he recovers.
If there are hemorrhoids or fistulae of the anus then a soft and mild tube should be used, gentle but not too soft to prevent any children from using it.
And this is a way that you can use when using a more rigid tube as well.
Eighty-four
I have spoken about the cure of wounds which was a part of my book and here is how it can be done with hand and with medicines according to complementarity
I say therefore that wounds should be treated according to the place in which they occur and how deep it is
"If there are many ulcers, they behave like a stone that is being cut or ground down by blows.
"Ultras that occur in the body's locations are like ulcers that fall on the head, or neck, chest, or belly; and similar things happen to those parts.
"And I am the one who arranges ulcers in a certain order so that they may be reasoned and regulated concerning the rest of them.
"And I begin by laying out simple ulcers on the head, because remembrance is arranged as part of the third chapter.
"Therefore, I speak. "If the simple ulcer on the head was not broken by blows and it has become large enough that its blood is streaming forth warm; when this happens, look to whether he struck with a stone or some other object, or whether another object fell upon him from above: if so, remove the cut immediately. But do not pull out his own blood unless you have agreed beforehand in consultation about phlebotomy. If not allowed by law, only if there is barely enough blood from an ulcer to withdraw it. "And let phlebotomy be performed upon the opposite side of the ulcer.
"And let phlebotomy be performed upon the opposite side of the ulcer. "And after he has been given water to drink and food that is substantial in quantity.
"But if eating something is prohibited by law at this point, then reduce it to food only and do not touch the flesh or urine.
"If an object falls upon a large ulcer and warms it with warm oil or with wine that contains warmth.
"If you are secure from the warm object falling upon it, then place it there if its blood is present and not increased by inhaling air; later on I will tell you how to do it.
"If the ulcer is large or if it was cut out by a blow: and do not let its lips be sewn together with sutures; then sew them together yourself as I will tell you about sewing ulcers, according to what I am going to explain in the book on sewing of ulcers.
If a bone is already detected and hanging from it but there is no retention of it unless it is tied up with string (suspension). Then cut it off. After the bone is detached with medicine and it has been restored to its original place (bone) except for the skin, apply a plaster of cooked meat on that part which was cut off, so as to restore flesh in those parts where there is great swelling; just as heads and ears are eaten by chickens.
If the bone has become putrid and does not remain attached to its socket; then cut it off completely (bone) and treat it immediately. After that, apply medical treatment to it.
If there is a vein (artery) within the bone or through which blood flows; and it does not come out by medicine; then cut into the artery itself. If you do not remove it with a saw (bone); then cut off with scissors or tie it up. If the necessity arises when you do not fulfill what we have said; then burn off with fire or tie it up until blood is released (bone).
If the bone is simple and small; then cutting it off from (bone) will be easy too, just like a feather pulled upwards on that bone when fixed firmly before moving around.
Method of pulling out an arrow wound. Prepare one olive part with two dragon parts of blood and three calcis which are not extincted; mix them all thoroughly and make a ball from it, then apply it to the bone so that it holds firmly against him until it adheres well by itself and is coagulated with blood.
After applying the ball to the bone; then tie it onto a string and remove it unless you want it to remain tied to its socket; in such a way that it is not removed at all times. If medicine does not remove it until it heals.
And sometimes doing it alone when there is no olive oil present and dragon blood; the same operation in many large bones, tying them up while it falls on top of that bone and they are tied with their own blood which did not change its state until now.
"If there is already a change in the vein at that time, especially when summer heat has come, then it should not be on this vein of which we speak: therefore, you should put something over her as a remedy to digest or place above her the plates prepared with flour and water until pus comes out. "Afterwards, treat the remaining wound by keeping it covered until healing is complete.
"If someone falls on a fractured bone and is unconscious, then remove that person with care and I say the remedy for fractures of the skull to come.
"Of the veins in the head.
"If someone falls on the veins of the head and is unconscious at that time there should be no difference between the vein itself and other wounds but only for a simple wound.
"If the vein of the head has already been cut off or an artery: then if it is a vein only treat him as before but not to use any remedy for its cessation until you have consulted and spoken with others who are knowledgeable in this matter. "Since the veins are injured and they try to stop them.
"Do not put anything cold on the vein at all because the substance of veins is cold and their continuation is with the brain which is superior to other organs, so use this remedy from a soft drink mixed with oil or sweet wine until pus comes out as well if it is also mixed with water: and for the remaining stones you should crush them in the same way that you crushed others but using damp unguents.
"If a large vein is injured then apply sutures or put it on with powders of its lips. "Afterwards treat him until he is healed completely.
"If a vein or artery is deep and has already accumulated pus at that location then pierce it with something more penetrating.
If a vein has been cut and its flow of blood is blocked, then it should be separated or dried off with heat (perhaps by fire) to seal the wound closed.
If the tongue has been pierced and saved from death (perhaps by cauterization), then it should be sewn shut with skin sutures over its mandibles, so that no gaps are left between them; tie off both sides of the mouth together, ensuring equal spacing to prevent the tongue from falling out. Finally, after all this has been done and the patient is recovered for a certain period (perhaps days), it should be released as per its natural course of growth. Finally, after all this has been done and the patient is recovered for a certain period (perhaps days), it should be carefully washed with ointments that relieve tightness and itching so that it can heal properly.
If a bone has been broken and it is still intact within the wound, then you should remove it with all possible means if able to do so; otherwise, leave it as it was left before, until it becomes rotten and comes out of its own accord.
If the wound is recently made (perhaps within hours), then wipe off whatever you have previously applied to it with water or a suitable cleaning agent. If there is an open fistula from the wound (perhaps by a mistake), then it should be cured according to its description given in its chapter or section of another book on medical treatment and healing.
These are instructions for dealing with wounds on the palms of the hands, but they can also apply to other parts of the body as well.
If there has been a thrust or stabbing injury to an organ (perhaps the heart), then you should carefully consider its depth and extent of penetration immediately. If therefore the wound has caused a fatal illness from which he is now suffering, then you should know that it was a mortal wound and must treat him accordingly until death or recovery occurs.
If the depth of penetration was not significant and it is recently bleeding from its own blood (perhaps due to a small tear), then do not apply anything to it at first; tie off both sides together gently so that no blood can remain in the wound or penetrate further into the body, causing death. Do this for two days if necessary until either he recovers or dies.
"If your fingernail is not present to you at the time, then put it into the hole of your own finger immediately so that it may bring back what it has seen from its moisture; and let him lie still over the wound until he gathers together whatever is in him.
"If the fingernail is overdue for three days or more and does not cause a spasm of weakness nor trembling of the heart nor constriction of the throat nor any other harm to him in his movements; then you know that there is pus in it. "Therefore care for him and with ointments and all remedies until he recovers.
"If the health of his fingernail is given up to you forever and it never opens again; then you know that a fistula has been made. "Therefore care for this one from its own hole.
"And if the fingernail is from an injury to the skin or a bite of the nail and it is simple on the chest; or on the back; then care for him with what precedes from sewing, that was great; or with wiping, that was small.
"But if it has made an impression on the bone and went out through that; then seek for the fingernail and draw forth what is separated. "If there are not separated ones, then dismiss them until the fingernail decays; for their expulsion has been commanded.
"The judgment of the accidents on the fingernails and the care thereof in other members is given by us.
"Of the finger-nails, and their coming out from the intestines, and their expulsion.
"The disruption that causes entry is great; medium; and small.
"Therefore when it is seen by the great one at times in the intestines or count of the intestines.
"Therefore let their entry be made; and that sewing with greater effort and more difficult.
"The separation is both easy and difficult in another way. Therefore, it is more difficult if you are unable to enter his location immediately through her entrance and she opens up and swells up; this makes the entering in quite difficult for him.
This is because of that reason; therefore, the middle way between disruptions has become easier, since if you cannot make her intestine difficult to enter as easily, it becomes equally difficult in two ways for him.
The sutures on his wounds are according to four methods.
The two common sutures join together to the sutures of the belly and the sutures of the dead bodies; and there are two others that communicate with the other wounds specifically. However, these last ones are more of their own kind than to the belly; and I tell you one at a time with exposure and proclamation.
I tell you because when the bowel is opened and something comes out of it into the intestine, and it becomes difficult to reduce him; then that is for one of two ways. Or because of the abundance of the disruptions as we have mentioned before; or perhaps due to the swelling from cold air that is inside it.
Therefore at this point you should heat him up; either by immersing the sponge into hot water or by wrapping a damp cloth around his body so that he can recover from the cold as quickly as possible. Or if you immerse him into warm water; or with a hot iron, and place the sponge against his stomach while it is inflamed inside; until he can recover from the swelling.
Whenever you put this liquid, which has a stiffening effect on him, into water and immerse him; it is better than immersing him in water alone to resolve the swelling.
Once you have resolved the swelling, then heat up his intestines with hot water or with a hot broth (possibly also called 'altea'). This way it is easy to enter him through her entrance.
However if you are able to remove the sutures after this treatment, then there will be fewer disruptions with the instrument that is used for hemorrhoids.
The first care is better when prepared than sectioning; and there's no cooperation for subsequent healing after necessity or the presence of an instrumentally defective part
The part of his body that is hard and thin, like a wedge, the other not sharp but blunt (as if made from wood), and the tip of this delicate one should be with greater difficulty than sharpness itself
Therefore the swelling and inflammation of the gut should be reduced according to its natural shape (form) at its own place by itself, if possible, because it is better for it
If a wide disruption occurs at the lower part of the belly, then you should arrange to have it supported by its own back and raise its legs higher up toward itself. And if there is a disruption at the upper part of the belly, then you should arrange to have its head placed and lift its chest higher than its lower part.
And similarly if there is a disruption in one of two parts of the belly, you should arrange your attention and care to be always like this so that the part with swelling will have its higher part towards the other part.
And you should arrange it so that there are not too many swellings and not too few, but just enough for each swelling.
But if the swellings in each part are equal to one another, then you should arrange it according to what has been prepared for you.
Then make sure that the present-day person is in your hands so as to hold on to the whole disruption using only one hand; and gather up both its ears. Then you should take away from it, what follows sutures to something else (i.e., remove the sutures); and this is how common a suture procedure is done with one hand.
And it is so that you should take away from each swelling as much as its size allows; this is how the sutures are applied to the swellings. Then you should remove a certain amount of the disruption from both the thumb and index finger separately; that is, the doctor does this; then gather up one thread beyond what goes into it in two parts with cuts on each side below where there was an incision, until you make it penetrate to another part, and have gathered together two portions by this way; and so are four orders completed.
"Then, with two needles of different sizes tied together at their centers, you will gather the lips towards both sides simultaneously.
"Then, remove the excess length from each finger and insert another needle into them both at once: afterwards, bring it back together with thread as you did before. "Therefore, do not continue doing this with the same needle as that which is inserted: until you have completely tightened all of the lips.
"The medium needle is between the excess length and subtlety of it: because the subtle needles penetrate meat more easily than the coarse ones; they are difficult to insert into a wound for that reason.
"It is not advisable to have the needle close enough to both sides of the skin so that it penetrates meat easily; if this happens before consolidation and does not allow for proper closure, do not let the wound be closed.
"Then, cut off the excess of thread at both ends and tie a knot in it to hold the needle securely; remove them when you know that the wound is already closed.
"This kind of suture with a needle as described above is more convenient for sewing on lips than using other needles. "Since one or two needles are enough to sew the lips together, do it either with one needle through them both ways, or with two needles side by side.
"The second kind of suture is common for sewing together four sides; two sides by one needle and the other two sides tied with it.
"Then, when you have penetrated with the needle all four sides and release it from the side to which it was first tied, so that the thread is tight at both ends of the lips: this is a common kind of closure like closing clothes.
"People are familiar with this type of closure.
With this suture I closed the wound that had been inflicted by a knife on its own inside; which was previously cut through with a tool and there had been disruption of the veins greater than one palm's breadth: and there was disruption in the middle of the belly, from both sides
Therefore it remained outside his intestines for 24 hours
Therefore the wound was treated and healed; after that it remained for fifteen days, and he recovered.
The doctors were saying that it would not heal.
It was only by a miracle that I didn't treat the wound with ointment. Since I was not present at the place where it was forbidden to use ointments and nothing from medicines. Therefore I washed over him his own wound twice a day, and diligently gave him a bath with milk; until he was healed.
Two of the specific sutures I mention in accordance to the narrative of the lecture.
And it is that you initiate with a sharp suture; and you go in from the outside towards the inside part.
When the needle went into the cut, and towards its length and breadth it goes through all of the body; release the other end of the thread at the side where you introduced the needle, so that there may enter another from the inside to go out to the outside in one place, and from the outside to come in to the inside in another part.
When you did it penetrate, then do the same thing to penetrate according to this; release the other end of the thread at that place on the side, and make another enter from the inside going out to the outside in one part, and from the outside entering into the inside in another part.
Then begin also from that same place on the side with its extreme which is out of the needle's thread at one end; and take away this one that you have entered into the wound.
"Then remove the lower part of it and cut off its extremity that is on the side, making an incision there with this remaining extremity; then take out what is taken from one side of him and make it into a unit [i.e., form an artificial skin] along with others: and after doing so up to the previous incision, remove all external parts according to the example provided.
"The remaining parts of the surgery should be sewn to the skin that covers them as follows: i.e., join together with one suture what is removed from one side of him and the skin; until all are joined.
"The second type [of surgery] mentioned by Galenus.
"The speech of this one was as follows: i.e., so that the parts are joined together according to a similarity with some medical practitioners in such a way that they all come together according to their own kind by nature; and taking an extremity [of him], it takes another extremity, and joining them the opposite extremity is taken. "And thus do you say what I have heard.
"It is permitted for you to make an incision in the opposite extremity that is near you from the outside part and let it penetrate into him alone; and remove two extremities of the skin. "Then return to the previous step and make an incision from outside into inside on both extremities [of skin], that is each separately.
"Then return to the previous step and make an incision from inside into outside on both extremities [of skin], that is each separately.
"The mode of this surgery is superior to the common one in ease and is superior also to the last type [of surgery].
"This speech is that of Galenus.
"And some said. "The stitches are put on the inside with two needles. "This is so that you insert into them one filament [of skin] each; and begin with the incision of the needle from what is near you, and make it penetrate up to another side according to their stitches which are equal.
"Know that when there is a disruption within the heart's interior, then its repair is more difficult than the repairs of other parts.
The examination of wounds or medicine for wounds is the same as the examination of healthy wounds.
Know that when you are using your blood to cleanse a wound before it becomes dry and then you remove the intestines of that animal, and clean its bowels with them, and make it ready for eating - in other words, when making use of it as food, first wash off its blood.
If the blood of a wound has already been removed but you are still using that animal as food before it is ready to eat then apply some unguents (ointments) which are in your possession on him who will make it ready for eating - in other words, if you use an animal after its blood has been removed and before it is ready for eating, then prepare a concoction or ointment. Afterwards the care of that is just like the care of healthy wounds until it heals (is cured).
But if you do not have any medicines at hand then immediately apply a concoction or ointment to it as soon as possible and let the pus flow out of it - that is, after applying a concoction or ointment to a wound without medicine (immediately), exchange it daily until it heals just like a doctor would treat you.
If there are simple remedies available for multiple wounds then use one of them instead of all the above.
If a wound spreads to the main part of the body into an injury then it is necessary that you immerse the area with warm olive oil or with spiced oil - that is, if the blood from a wound spreads throughout the limb and reaches the surrounding areas around the mouth and under the nails.
If there is pain or a blockage of the intestines then you must strip and anoint it with wine vinegar (or black vinegar) heated on fire until it is hot - that is, if there is putrefaction in the bowels already advanced to the extent of an exit wound penetrating even up to the groin.
Know that what is coming out of a large intestine is easier to heal than what comes from the small intestines - and know that it's harder to heal what comes from the small intestines.
The small intestine known as the jejunum does not gain health through wounds that strike it in every way: and this is because of its multitude from veins, and its size, and the nature of those who have created it; due to its subtlety and its proximity to the sources
However if that which came from a wound is removed by you completely: then reduce it according to your reduction of the intestines equally.
Then if it has gone beyond the wound and is black or dark brown in color (indicating its death), you should tie a knot of silk above the place from which he was struck so that his blood does not flow out In the jejunum there are veins and arteries.
Then cut through the ligament above which is beyond that and hang two ends of the silk from the lower part of your wound over him so as to prevent his falling onto you, and taking him out by force at the moment he falls off, and issuing the blood of his wounds.
The remembrance that struck into the intestine.
When there is disruption into the intestine, and it was small: then it is possible that in some people to restore by means of those who were wounded within their own body with a blow from a lance; because he had a wound on the right side of his stomach, which was old, and there was an exit for the discharge, and bitterness.
I therefore care until he was not cured by me of his illness, nor did I refrain from carefully examining him thoroughly; but until he was cured and healed the place was maintained.
After I knew the place was already healed and strong, I feared a fall that would strike against him from his own side; but he did not incur harm from this source of injury. And remained in better conditions with his eating and drinking, and being active; and he entered the bath, and trained himself in his diets.
"Some of those who practiced surgery said when a wound had occurred in the intestine and it was perforated: then it is necessary to tie it as shown here. It is so that you should accept large heads of bees (beeswax). Next they gathered two lips and placed one bee wax head onto each of the wounds that had opened on top of the two lips. And when it gets over them and he ties his mouth, from the head of him, remaining, so as not to be left behind.
Next they placed one more bee wax head on top of the other and did not cease to do this with the first bee in accordance with the quantity of wounds.
Next he reduced it and tied its wound. That remaining heads attached to the intestine until the food is digested from the intestine, and it will heal and not come from an unfortunate disease of the intestines.
And it is possible that the intestine is tied even with a thread of fine silk; which was taken from an animal and attached as soon as it enters into the opening after.
And so you should take the extremity of this thread from the intestine and remove it much. Next tie at its end with a fine silk thread. And then introduce that thread into the intestine and attach it to him along with his intestines. Next he reduced it in a disruption.
And this method of surgery with bees and the intestine is not only according to faith but also wisdom.
So if it is large and extensive especially when found in a small intestine then there will be no other remedy than subtlety so as not to harm him completely.
About the treatment of wounds and fistulas.
It is known that all wounds whether old or new and have not been healed with a fistula are always open and do not stop emitting pus constantly, so they are called universally wherever the body may be a fistula and we call this one Zuchemen.
"A fistula indeed is a filtered knot, hard and white; without pain but with the touch of fingers causing pleasure. And because of this it has been named by some as 'Risati', meaning ribbon.
"It is moist on certain days when it emits pus. "Perhaps the moisture can be cut off on certain days. "Sometimes it is very moist and has little strength; sometimes it is thick and has a lot of strength; sometimes it is soft and thin.
"I have already spoken of division; when I said 'every sore that is not healed nor born on it flesh', this is due only to one reason.
"The reason is one of several possibilities - either due to a scarcity of blood within the body, or because of its evil nature; or possibly from the hardness of his flesh which prevents the growth of limbs; or perhaps it arises from foul odor and bad qualities of material discharged by it; or maybe it has no healing treatment at all. Or it could be because there is one eye in him and a great number of bones.
"I have already listed the signs and causes of these and their cures along with the treatments using medical division; now it is necessary for you to know about the treatment for fistula and zucker.
"Know that a fistula occurs in every part of the body. "Among these are fistulas that join with veins and arteries; or nerves, sine fibers; or intestines; or urinary bladder; or ears of the back; or those arising from the junction of tendons and muscles in the hands and feet - they cause a connection to the main body part.
"Therefore, from these fistulas is it necessary according to this manner - the treatment of difficult cases and not receiving one; and occupation with it was hard work and ignorance.
"If the depth of any fistula does not extend to these points which I mentioned: take it with tongs or a hook made from iron if it bends according to its correct path and pull it out along with it.
"If the fistula is twisted, then grasp it gently using a fine hook or tool. "Since its own length decreases due to weight loss on its body, and its shape changes because of the twist.
"If a fistula has many openings, it is not possible for you to grasp it with your hand when trying to pull it out. "Therefore remove the openings from its own openings.
"As a result of removing openings from the fistulas and their own openings, moisture penetrates it through other openings and moves out towards them.
"Then inquire as to the method by which you can identify where it is an opening or not: whether it is a small hole and the fistula's concavity is long or close, or if there are many openings around it while it is covering everything completely; ask about its location using your question, use pain relief when pressing with your hand on that spot, and inquire about any other factors causing discomfort.
"Since you are standing over it all, then proceed to its care with confidence and ensure that you understand at this point if a fistula is nearby and visible or just far away from insertion; or whether it is an artery, vein, one of the locations I mentioned, or somewhere else entirely; so secure the fistula according to what was previously described, and extract it based on filtration and corruption by its body, which originates in its opening because of the flesh, or through a tube, as well as all other factors: until you have been cured.
"If the depth of a fistula is extensive and according to its correct path, then it must be pulled out as deep as you are able. Therefore remove the same from all its corrupted parts
Then administer the remedy through a thin tube into the medicines and the wound itself; let it be inserted until it reaches the fistula's opening that you have comprehended with a probe made of iron, making sure to leave some of it until the acute medicine has completely corroded what remains in the fistula after its corruption.
Then restore her with ointments that bring about healing; let it be restored until she is healed.
If not, then burn the fistula according to what we have described earlier.
If the cause of fistula is known to you and it has been certified by you, then inquire about that and cut off its source according to what I described earlier; if this does not allow for anything from another vein or member, as we have described previously.
If a source is found by you and there is some corruption within it; then inquire about that and remove it until the corruption of it has been completely cleared off. Then care for him with what he was born into, let him be cared for until he is healed.
If not, and the discharge proceeds as it did before; then you know that you have not entirely removed the corruption.
Therefore inquire further above this second thing and bring to light its source; and remove him with utmost strength of your own.
Then restore him. If it is healed then this is good; and if not, you know that the corruption has deep roots within his body which are not to be reached by any means. Therefore there is no remedy for you unless you remove this natural course of hers.
If the source is corrupted and it can be brought to light by you with very fine probes which are inserted into that.
If there are many bones; then you will have to investigate the attraction of all of them so as not to remove anything from these with your strength.
"If a vein (artery) causes you harm from moisture, and there is no fear of its cutting or error at the incision site, then cut through those veins and flesh if they are present there, free the bones.
"However if there is no preparation of freeing the bones from your time (death), then take a knife and cut through what has decayed it into flesh - remove it, until that which is within their bones, flesh, and moisture decays.
"And protect the incision so that it does not become consolidated (fused). "The section you made during your surgery will be tightened. "Take a knife and cut through it if you are able to do so; or apply some oil with Egyptian unguent (a mixture of olive oil and frankincense) beneath the flesh.
"When these are putrefying (decaying), and the bones are separated from them; their removal is made, and they are attracted towards each other.
"However if there is a large bone like the bones of the leg (crural), or hips (coxal), and similar ones; and what has been corrupted from it is a part great - then remove it by its last reason, until it has decayed in blackness and corruption. "Then restore the incision.
"However if what is in it has been corrupted (decayed), and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bones - then you must bind (tie together) it; and cut through it to its whole extent until it reaches the place where corruption began: then attend to it, until it becomes consolidated.
"And I shall show you what happened with the knife of yours - so that you may apply it as an example and guide to your surgery.
"He was a youth of about thirty years old who experienced pain in his thigh; the cause that moved within him (the body), namely from the inside, until the material had gone up to the knee, and he was cured by being tied together with great strength: there was no external cause.
Therefore, when there was a time of error for physicians, until they had opened their eyes and encountered many subjects. After that, care was taken of him until his fistula had been closed, and many openings were made into him; for all these things emitted pus and moisture from the body.
Therefore many physicians attended to him for two years, and there was no wisdom in his hands as a physician until he spoke, then heard the sound of his voice, and saw the hole on his arm; and matters that were formerly flowing from them through large channels now stopped: all human bodies had been fed by him, and his body color became blue.
Therefore I inserted a tube into one of the openings on his arm, and it led to his mouth.
Then all the openings were examined; and I inserted tubes into him from every limb of the body, except for his mouth.
Therefore I inserted one of them into him until I reached a part of the bones; and from there on he was corrupted: which had already become corroded, emaciated, rotten, and perforated, until it went right through to the marrow.
I therefore cut off what I had found was corrupted from the bone.
And I removed that which had not been in the bone except for corruption, and cut it off. And I had already removed him from there.
Then I placed restoration with the aid of bound medical substances in a long space. And it was not restored.
Therefore I tried again and reached to the second opening above the first one; and inserted him with bones, continuing corruption until I cut off what had been found by me as corrupted from that.
Therefore I made an attempt at restoration for him. And it was not restored.
Therefore I reached to him again and did not stop putting my fingers into his mouth; but attempted restoration for him; but it was not restored until I cut through the bone near one finger, and removed him with his marrow.
"After having treated him with remedies, I have made his wound to be healed; it was not necessary for this treatment to repeat itself in the course of his operation and sectioning, except on account of his infirmity's disposition or shortage of tolerance towards him due to fear. For he would fall at every moment through the carelessness and lack of foresight resulting from an excess of sudden calamities.
"For his body was whole and the flesh on it was firm; there had been made a proper arrangement of its parts, and he recovered his virtue; but he had become accustomed to his own disposition.
"If the upper jaw is already fractured and lies in that place within his body; then you must support him there according to this way of doing so, which involves taking hold of it with your hand and pulling upwards towards the head: and have someone else who is extending from above grasp the ligature and fix it on top. And another one should take care first to bind a coarse sinew upon that place. "Then bind him securely to the flesh below his bone; and you extend your hand towards it so that you can draw meat from beneath, but do not let this piece slip through.
"Take a stick or a bandage below the bone and bind it securely there; because when you do that, it is not allowed to let any spoiled meat slip through.
"And it is necessary that the ligature above be bound securely to prevent any corruption of the bones and not show through his hand or arm; but you should grasp another ligature for yourself with your other hand.
"If his upper jaw is spoiled and not complete, the part of him must continue with another part; and corruption will be in the middle or a part of it, then take away all the meat from every side. "Then place one below.
"After that, cut away the meat from where there is corruption until the ligature extends to another part; and let the ligature be according to length in order to prevent the corruption.
If there is corruption of an incision (wound), then strike away that corrupted part and proceed to treat it separately from the other parts where it continues on one side only
If there is corruption of both incisions (wounds), then do not treat that part separately; rather strike away the corrupted incision and proceed to treat only one of the two wounds.
If there is corruption (wound) on the hand or foot, then it's difficult to treat that part; proceed with treatment elsewhere if possible. It is desirable for you to inquire into how the corruption appears so that we can properly understand and address your concern. If you strike away that part and it is possible for you in whichever way suits your need to proceed, even with whatever cure or treatment is available at the time; when this does not bring about the desired result (healing), then turn elsewhere as well.
And you should know that there are many bones (elements) in the incision (wound), depending on their arrangement and preparation of them, with respect to the length and thickness, subtlety and power, and variety, and endurance, rarity, hardness, and other properties. And it is desirable for you to bring together every tool necessary for the performance of that procedure or operation.
You should also know that these operations will be apparent on the appearance of the instruments used in performing them, depending on how intently you study them carefully. And the knowledge of how to perform this art will serve as evidence for your own courage; then you can treat that part with everything from those instruments, which have been used to heal all diseases previously mentioned.
And I am concluding the list of instruments needed for this chapter; which ones you will use as examples when treating what you cut through and practicing on others is up to you.
Shape the other incision (wound)
The form or shape of joining the hands. "Place his head in a steady position and make his two arms into stars.
"And let them not be joined together unless they are forced to do so when one of the heads falls off and it is great.
The form or shape of the greater arm.
The form of the left arm.
The form or shape where the elbow is located.
"The underarm form.
The form of the right arm, ending with a curved extremity.
"The forearm form, which is thin and extended.
"This resembles the forearm shape and has an end like a chisel.
The form where the bone was cut out of the arm.
His extremity is triangular and sharp.
"The shape or fit that fits on an Indian. And similarly for all the other shapes mentioned earlier related to arms and fingers.
"Of cutting the extremities and crushing of bones.
"The extremities become putrid either due to an external cause or internal causes.
"When the disease has taken hold of them and they are diseased due to the skill of the physician or their own negligence; then it is necessary that you cut off that member as far as corruption proceeds until infirmity occurs from there.
That which was struck by it is degraded (or dishonored) the member until it becomes heated; either burned or decayed after sunset: until it occurs as a result of that member and it seeps into the whole body
Therefore with the strike of its own, and similarly if it causes injury to the striking one as well (i.e., for example, by a blow from a scorpion in the sea or a blow from an arrow): like that of a scorpion's sting, or poison dart, or something similar.
If the injury is caused by a blow to the very end of one's fingers (i.e., an injury from a sword or other sharp object), then strike that finger immediately and do not allow the spread of the corruption until it reaches all the hand.
And similarly if it happens to the hand, then immediately strike it off with a forceps or some other implement of that sort and do not allow the spread of corruption until it reaches both arms.
If it occurs to him, then immediately strike his arm at its junction with the body.
If that corruption goes on and affects him around the side of the body (i.e., if it is an injury to one side but not both), then death occurs as a result of his weakness. To administer something beyond that by caring for him involves virtue in its quantity.
And similarly when the corruption occurs to one finger, then immediately strike it off at a single joint (i.e., if an injury is caused by a sharp object): and if it affects both feet or legs, then immediately strike all of them. If corruption goes up to the knee (i.e., affecting the leg), then immediately strike its junction with the hip.
If corruption has already gone above the knee (i.e., affecting both legs), then it is no longer there unless dismissed and released to die.
And the method of striking a member is either by striking it or holding down and restraining its lower extremity so that you can strike (it), while holding another ligament above where it is to be struck. And he extends the ministering one limb downward and the other upward so that they can strike (it) from different sides "And you cut through the flesh that is between two tendons with a sickle; then remove the whole limb. "After which, it can be incised or ligatured (tied off).
"And you should apply linen bandages to all the parts of the limb that are not affected by the injury; and do not bind off (ligature) the sound part of the limb, lest a coldness be added to the coldness.
"If the inner flow of blood is lost during work (surgery), then seal it immediately or temporarily; and place something to stop those veins from ejecting blood. "Then proceed with your medications until they are complete.
"After which, tie the damaged limb with a suitable ligature to it; and care for it, so that it may become sound again.
"And I will tell you what happened with the blade on your foot as well; this is what happened to me.
"It is because the blade on my foot became black due to soot from the fire; and the corruption began first with my finger, until it reached the whole foot.
"Therefore the man put himself under fire, after he had felt the corruption begin to affect his limb with its heat; and it caused him pain as well, and soot on him, until it incised itself into a ligature, and became sound.
"And after that he had waited for a very long time, the same corruption began again on his finger of his hand.
"Therefore he came to me and sought to recover the excess with that which I had placed on his hand from post-operative medicines; yet there was no overflow of fluids, and it began to cut into another finger until it reached corruption on his hand.
"Therefore he came to me and sought to incise his hand; yet he did not want that from me after the overflow of fluids; I was also afraid, and even over him at the cutting of his own hand. "Because the art was above a case.
"Afterwards, because of my despair, I returned to the ground and came back towards you; for he had chosen him, and cut off his hand completely; and he was healed.
"And do not tell this story except for the sake of an aide to one who fell by reason of his eagerness; and so that it may be understood as is its meaning.
"Of caring for wounds, and the quality of a plasterer with medicines.
"When an apostle falls into certain parts of the body which are dead and remain stretched out, until he collects them; then it is torn off or perforated and taken away from him what was from his flesh [from the body], so that the place remains empty as if it were a piece of cloth: but the skin over it like a garment that has already been made thin. And it does not come to its final end in corruption, nor does it print into the mouth or nose, nor into the tendons; and it is called Sinus [vein] until he stretches out the space from him; then if the perforation is printed upon something of his members, then it is called Fistula.
"And its care is that he cuts off completely like it was torn; and especially when it is thin and made as a cloth: and because of his faith [that the wound] did not remain with place, on account of his corruption.
"But if the space adheres to the skin and it does not follow from him corruption that last connection; and if a cut is thinness of flesh, then he cares for [the care] with Clister; and it is so that you may consider Ad Sinus.
"Then if it is large and what it is emitted from him is foetid odor; then Clisterize the plaster with medicines such as vinegar, oil, and wine, taken by equal parts, are added to his clothes; they decrease over fire until the medicine burns away: and he goes in thinness of the flesh.
"Then take what is necessary for you from him and dissolve it with water and honey; bind it together with the sinew (or tendon) of a dog's tail, and then insert it into his anus. After that, wash off all the filth by pouring vinegar on it.
"After taking what is necessary for you from him and dissolving it with water and honey, stretch (or extend) it over three days until the anus is cleansed, and then remove all the smell.
"When you have bound the sinew with water and honey and stretched (or extended) it over several days until he no longer has the medicine available to him; take another cord made of wood or reeds, tie it on top of the first one, and pour water over them both. "After that, remove this one as well, and when you have bound it with it, until the anus is clean (or has been cleansed).
"If the tolerance for the Egyptian medicine is not present or if you do not have water and honey to dissolve it with, then bind him up with water and honey until something from a jar has been mixed into it. "Or bind him up with honey and wine mixed together, because of the shortage of honey; cleanse it thoroughly, and then pour vinegar on it to remove the excess filthiness.
"When you have bound him many times and he has already been cleaned out of the anus; then bind him up with what makes birth to meat within him.
"And it is so that you take from the seal of a dog's earwax and dissolve it with oil and vinegar; or bind him up with certain medicines and ointments whose properties I have written down in my treatise on ointments.
"If the anus is constricted so that no cannula can be inserted through it; then stretch him up with stronger iron until...
"And similarly if it is a wide opening, then tie his lips together with stitches; and you remove from him the quantity by which he should be inserted without an additional binder.
"Similarly if the fistula through which it flows is sealed off or obstructed by a tumor, then it must be incised and opened up to its upper part. Afterward, it should be lowered into an inferior position within that same fistula, so as for it to drain out pus from below upwards: because when pus accumulates in great quantity in the sinus (the fistula), it prevents meat from being generated inside.
"If you are unable to drain the fistula from below as mentioned earlier, then you must cut into it and prepare a member of skin for drainage that way. The skin membrane will drain with ease because you prepared it previously. "When making the incision into the fistula, make sure nothing is retained from the pus throughout it entirely; and take remedies that are set down above the incision to help with that. "And extend them (the remedies) over the skin flap. "The skin flap should be of such quantity that it allows for a complete communication with the entire fistula. "Afterwards make an incision into the opening of the fistula itself, making it larger than before. "Then extend another skin flap with the help of your fingers from above and onto the first flap as much as you can; and place it on top of that opening in a long distance so that pus may be drained out through it: but do not use a large flap unless several days have passed.
"The flap that is on the opening of the fistula should be such that it may drain out whatever accumulates in it from pus at any time; and you know that the passage through which it flows is very long or short, whether it digests or does not digest.
"And with this thought consider the place of the fistula itself; if its lord is there and feels pain or no pain, whether it has a hole or not.
"As a result of this thought, your treatment will proceed just like that; and you know the matter that is to be placed over the opening of the fistula there, then you know it has already adhered or is approaching adhesion: so then fix it on its own head, or at the third day. And when only one flap is removed, then exchange the flaps and restore the fingers.
If the arrow is shot from you through a long space, then don't despair over his fall, for his healing will come about, because there are people who delay the generation of their tools in wounds to them and those who help him get back up against this
If it is shot from you after a long time has passed, then you know that his fall won't happen
So if the delay is long enough for his fall to happen, and it continues on, then add to their healing medicines made by doctors, so that medicine itself is moist like human flesh, and its virtue is like cold water: as a dyafine ointment when added brings more oil to it.
And if you have reached the very end of his healing, then get him a dyafine ointment and mix it with oil that is as dark as roast meat, so that old wine will pour over him into his body.
Then take him and use him.
And when you haven't put the dyafine ointment on him yet, then when you mix it with water and apply it to his body, he will become very sticky, and it will stick to him. Or take myrrh mixed with aloes and oil, apply all of them together on top of his body when he's over the fire. Then tie a bandage over him and bind it to the altar of Sinam; then take what you made and bind that on top of him too, until he becomes very sticky; after that, apply the bandage with its species, lay it on top of him, and bind him as well.
And sometimes when you give him long aristolochia or roots of the starry lily and lily of the valley, and strew flour from herbs such as centaur's tail feathers and centaureae Use them simply or together; tie that one on too; after you've done that, apply it to him.
If the delay continues for Sinus and his healing doesn't happen from this way, then you know that corruption is deep inside him; or he makes a mark on bones or other tough parts of his body like ligaments; at that time treat him with Fistularis's care, according to what was prescribed before.
On the care of the finger nails and calluses, and cutting off the added fingers, and sectioning.
The nail begins to grow under the finger of the hand or foot; but it may also be born on one of the other fingers as well.
As a result of this, its growth is stopped; and the care for it is neglected; and it falls off from heat applied by another finger or foot; then, if completely corrupted, it may fall through to the mouth: and if only partially corrupted, corruption may occur in the nose as well. And so, on account of corruption a part may become very long until it is eaten away by corruption itself; and if color occurs because of corruption, its color becomes dark (fuscus).
When therefore you care for it according to what we discussed about cutting off; do not neglect your care at all: then it is necessary that you strike with iron the remaining excess from under its nail (nail clipping). Then, cauterize the wound after this. The cautery is made of iron.
If the mouth is healthy and also the nail itself is healthy; then the calluses of the fingers begin to bite into flesh towards the inside, they start to prick themselves, and wound them: it is necessary that you apply a small quantity of Radium underneath an angle of the finger which pricked the flesh, and so draw her upwards onto herself. And strike off her with ease, put above what remains from the flesh by means of the medical instruments used, by corrosion; until everything about him is removed completely. Then care for it with a remedy, until it becomes healthy.
If already corruption has appeared on the mouth, then you must strike it off and remove it; for otherwise he will never become healthy as long as it is present in him.
If you see signs of corruption and mutilation on a finger, then strike it off with an iron tool as was previously stated for him. Therefore heal it
If the injury is to a finger or thumb, then there will be pain and swelling; therefore it should first be treated by the phlebotomist who must examine him carefully. Then slice off the finger or thumb, up to the base, with an acute knife across it; so that you may remove its flesh and bring its pieces here for me.
And hold it so that the cut doesn't reach into the flesh below the finger; because you will cause great pain if you strike it on the swollen part of the limb where I am working, and it will be necessary to set aside any flesh added there at birth.
Then treat the place that is causing pain.
The fingers or thumbs are born whole and complete; they may be damaged, however, and their bones remain the same; they have nails as well: some people are born with their nails cut off at birth, even if it's just a slight nick or a scratch. The one born with their nails cut off at birth cannot move; and the one born from a broken finger must be moved by someone else.
As for those whose fingers or thumbs are harmed: it's easy to slice them off. It is so that you strike at the base of its finger with a broad knife blade;
The care for those born from the opening of their fingers is difficult. Avoid making a cut on it;
If the injury is to the tip of one finger at the very end of its digits, then you must cut it off first with a round knife blade up to the nose. Then put them into jars with the other surgical instruments for me; Therefore heal it.
Consolidation can occur through injuries or from the birth of people, that is: when it happens with them, or by the healing of wounds, or by fire and other things like this.
"Therefore let's complete that connection and afterwards [then] straighten out the fingers according to their own natural shape. Next, put a small bandage soaked with olive oil between them to prevent friction and separate the fingers gently in order to make sure that they are properly aligned according to what is required.
And similarly if the connection is made with one finger and a palm, then dry that connection afterwards according to what has been prepared and bring them into shape of their members.
On cutting off the skin
Veins are often filled with melancholy fluids that accumulate in several parts of the body; and most frequently they appear on the face (especially on the cheeks) but can also be found on the hands: especially on the ears of those who work or labor, as well as the ones who bring things to others.
Therefore let you administer a strong purging from black bile occasionally in order to get rid of that heaviness.
Afterwards, take out the base of the patient's vein from the body using tweezers.
The cure for them is done in two different ways. The first method is to let the vein dry and become hard, after which it will be possible to cut away any excess flesh that might remain; the second method is to drain off black blood from them using a knife. The other way is to take out the vein completely and let it dry on its own.
The cut for them has two methods: either you can open up their skin in order to remove any excess flesh that might remain, or you can use a knife to cut away the vein. First squeeze them gently with warm water until the thick and foul blood is resolved. Next, take their feet and gently lift up one of them to the upper portion of their thigh; then hold it in place with a bandage from below down to just above the knee. Afterwards let you dry off that part either by one cut or two cuts or three cuts made wide open.
Afterwards let you remove the blood from your hand down to its top by squeezing it gently; afterwards lift up their leg and take out the blood from above downwards on them first. After removing the skin and below it goes: until a certain quantity of blood is reached that you can endure with safety, and as much endurance as the virtue of the patient allows.
Follow the vein until he has been held back by his food and drink causing night-time (choleric) illness. And then repeat evacuation and phlebotomy when the vein is complete to prevent this weakness from occurring.
This method of removal can be done in that manner. If the patient has many hairs on his chest (axilla), shave them first After that introduce him into the bath; either shave him with warm water or wrap him in a hot towel until he rouses up (becomes conscious), and the veins will be stirred. Or you may exercise vigorously if there is no present bath to heat the member.
After that remove the skin along the vein's length or shave him at his knee and ankle.
Then remove the skin with the fingers, and scrape away every part until you see him (the patient) again; this is to prevent a recurrence of night-time illness. After that make him sit up on his back with the skin removed and the bed sheet over him as if it were a cord.
After that introduce under the lamp (Radium) until he is completely free of skin; hold him with your fingers and gently.
And after that remove another area along its length with three digits. Then scrape away the upper part of the skin until you see him again. After that make her sit up on her back with the skin removed and the bed sheet over her as before; hold her gently with your fingers just like you did at first.
And after that remove another area or more if necessary. Then remove the last area from his ankle.
And after that take her to an area which is above her (i.e., a higher level).
Cut it out from a section that is above or to one of higher sections and when you have cut all around, then strike her.
If you cannot remove it yourself and need assistance, then introduce the double file gently with both hands, bind her, and remove her in that way; or introduce a smaller instrument underneath (a "Radium"), tie it around, and remove them together: either way, place your hand on all parts of her to make sure she is removed. And let this happen. If it fails, you will find that removing her is very difficult and painful.
When you have completely removed her: then place a cloth soaked with wine and olive oil over the area where she has been to soak up any remaining blood or fluids; if necessary use olive oil only, and take care of it until it is healed.
If the wine has been contracted and you are holding a piece of cloth soaked with its flow that fits into her, but it is not as we described according to rectitude: then let him find a way to place it on all parts of her torturousness (the wound) and apply the solutions for these wounds.
After that tie her up with cords until you have completely removed her; and also ensure there is no cut or wound in the section where she was located, unless it is necessary to use something else; for this will be very difficult for you to remove her after all. So act prudently.
Form of the wounds being healed by wine.
Shape of cutting off the eye, and you are done.
It is not as smooth and fine as the others; it is also acute in its extremity so that she did not need to be removed yet; but it is very broad and flexible, being soft when necessary, so excessive force was needed for her removal, like we said before.
Removal of the veins on the leg
This is a translation from an Arabic text on surgery by Albucasis and it means: The veins are generated in the limbs with warm blood, like those of Alizegi, as well as the earth of the Arabs and the arid lands, with hot blood, the tender shrubs; that is, none of them generate herbs or trees.
Perhaps they are generated in other parts of the body besides limbs.
The generation of that is due to the decay which happens under the skin, just like how snakes and lice enter into the bodies of people, but in turn also they cause generations within the skin and flesh.
The mark of the beginning of this vein is that it causes inflammation on the inflamed limb. Then it goes away from the place. Then this vein leaves its location as if to be a root of a plant or an animal.
When therefore this extremity of the vein appears from it then is required to come up and go over on that very limb as if it were a rope, whose length is equal to two drachmas two nadirs; and let him drop down to two drachmas two nadirs: and let him hold his breath until he drops the suspended weight from the limb.
When therefore a certain amount of that vein is drawn out to the outside then let him pull it down with all his strength into the weight; and let him release what he has pulled down. If however the vein is prolonged much then it shall cut off a certain portion of its own length and pull down the remainder And do not cut off before he has drawn out all of that vein. Since it is cut off then retracts and goes into the flesh; and makes to sting a point of the arm, and causes decay in that place, and an ulcer forms.
Therefore it is required that he be pulled out slowly and carefully so as to leave the last part of its own length, until after being drawn all at once from its last end; and nothing remains within or on that vein in the body: and therefore this very vein will be found among certain men who are in length five palms and ten. And a finger was brought to me because it had been cut off from its hand.
If your finger is cut off at the time of your medication: then introduce a remedy into its hole and perforate it with long force until all that is within her has been extracted from the material, after which you must administer the cure for the corruption in place along with remedies on specific days. Therefore take care of your finger's healing immediately
And this vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it is seen at the incision of the foot (or ankle), or itself on the foot, for openings are made to it often, and from all these openings its course goes out
Therefore take care of this one as we said in the foot's incision, and with what has been removed from it
In order to cure a bite by worms placed on you: and there is called Aegiruddy-buggy
The name Aegiruddy-buggy is given to it at our place because many worms have bitten into it and one has been born between the skin and flesh.
It is introduced into the entire body, rising and falling; and it is shown to those walking by him from member to member until its fall has occurred wherever or whenever it falls on you and it is removed.
Its generation comes out of corrupt matter mixed with various humors. Just like worms and snakes are cut off from the belly: so too, lice and scabies are removed from within the body.
Fear arises out of its badness. Because when he introduced himself into the body and is extracted to the head and place, then perhaps it opens up in him and is removed, and destroys the eye; and many are destroyed from that
With so you take care of him, and remove him, then it is not possible for this unless he appears to the walking by him senses.
"Therefore, in order that you may draw what is above it and what is below it with a strong ligature. Then dry the above mentioned thing (the ligature), and extract from it.
If it penetrates into the flesh, but not your hand; then place on top of a location with fire until it dies.
As for what you are more afraid of, that is his corruption, which has blinded him, just as we said.
If then you see it already penetrating towards the eye or near to it, then draw a good strong ligature below it Then dry above mentioned thing (the ligature), and extract from it.
It is necessary that the weakened body of the man should be made fresh with the help of medicines, lest bad smells come out through the pores of his body.
And let him eat from foods which cause decay.
Of the cutting above the disease called Nakir.
This disease is called Nakir in our land; and there is pain which happened to some parts; then it is changed from one member to another.
And I also saw this thing already (the ligature), as you have said. I am called to a weak woman in some old age. He loses his arm and sees swelling of the veins in the new branches of the arm.
And after some time passed, I saw a swelling to come with the fire as it comes from veins; and ascending towards his upper arm location which can be; so that he is like gold flowing when it runs from one place to another.
Therefore the pain went away at this location, and was fixed on his shoulder.
After some time passed, he began to flow again through the remaining body; until it flows into another limb.
Therefore I told him because everything was happening in his entire body as I saw.
"I am making an incision in order to separate its member from another. "And I, being ignorant of that particular method before this lesson, saw it thus with my eyes. "However many have learned the art of separating one member from another; but I saw it not as you did with him, when you showed me on a woman.
"I do not think this to be true unless I see that one member is extracted from another by those who are skilled in the art of removing dry flesh; hence it appears to me the delight of such a transformation.
"It is necessary that this method does not appear as delightful to those who are not skilled or have no feeling for the art of removing dry flesh; and so it may be seen.
"Now that you are the master of this art and have felt the pain, perhaps it will be seen by your eye as we have shown; then tie it above him with a knot and beneath him too; dry over it and away it goes; and leave the cut place.
"If you do not see it with your eyes then cure it as with the removal of flesh, and with what he expelled sweetness; or bind them up to remove them quickly; and cauterize the place.
"On the art of removing veins
Veins are removed differently according to their nature and the place where they fall from the body.
Their difference is this; for some of them have large cusps and are rough or hairy while others have small ones that are smooth or hairless. And there are those that have three angles. And there are veins that come from the mouth. And some of them are from stars.
The veins removed according to the members in which they fall is done according to two different ways. Or the main veins are removed from the principal members such as the brain and heart and liver and lungs and kidneys and intestines and urinary passages; and similarly those. When a member of the body has fallen to you and it is clear that death is at hand, I am about to tell you what signs must be taken away from there, so you can take out its arrow, for death follows him where he lies, in many positions. And when these signs are bad and the arrow is not withdrawn from deep within a member, then withdraw it, and look after the wound.
When the arrow falls into the brain and penetrates deeply, it is said: Because these things happen to him as a result of falling from that height [i.e., from above]: blindness, and turning blind to others; vertigo in his head, and redness in his eyes; swelling up in his tongue, and spasming in his head, and disturbance in his mind, and death by cholera. And perhaps [therefore] the blood may come from the nostrils or the ears. Perhaps it is withdrawn and destroyed speech. And because of the white dew from the hollows [of his body] he may lose consciousness. And as a result of this, similar to that which occurs in the limbs, it is said: He exits by a loss of bodily fluid.
If you see these signs then stay away from the care and withdraw the arrow if it is not withdrawn already.
The arrow signs when it falls into the heart are as follows: It is said that this one was near the left nipple and felt as if it were fixed deeply to a hard object but not to a soft one. And perhaps the arrow movement is similar to that of a pulse and its course follows through the blood with blackness [i.e., death]. It also follows these things: it causes frost in the extremities, cold sweat, and syncope. Therefore, you know that death is near but far off [i.e., imminent].
The arrow sign when it was shot into the lung is as follows: It causes death by blood spurting from the wound and the veins collapse, with falling to the ground; and the color of the body changes. When a large vein is cut, its source and target are sought after for air's coldness
If a vein is cut off from its origin (the heart), then the end of that vein would be towards the back, causing severe pain and great suffering throughout all the limbs.
If a vein is cut off from its origin (the heart) into the stomach, then the food would be digested as if it were poison
If a vein is cut off from its origin (the heart) into the lungs, then it would bring out something bad and putrid from the veins or abdomen, having been disrupted. There was no hope of his cure through its collection nor through extraction of the vein.
If a vein is cut off from its origin (the heart) into the bladder and it is collected urine out of her, then something bad would come out to the outside causing severe pain. That person would be mortal at that time.
The members are healed like a face; the collar and jaw also, and the spatula and support for the tongue, and the spine of the neck, and the ribs (costae), and the thighs (crus) heal themselves from the limbs in different positions when they did not get any blood vessel.
I tell you what I heard about those veins so that you may understand through it regarding your treatment.
Because one of the eyes was cut off from a vein to his nose and eye socket. Therefore, I extracted it on the other side under his ear, and he was healed, and no harm came to his eye at all.
I also extracted another vein from the Judean on his ear lobe where it had been cut off under the lower eyelid of him and that vein was hidden and not reached through it but only a small part of its end towards his own wood. It was a large vein from the vein arc of the Turks, with a steel-like bend, in which no ears were
The eye of Jhoor is healthy and not a cause for harm.
He extracted an arrow from the flesh of a Christian
The arrow was Arab and it could see ears (it's unclear what this means). He therefore placed her between two guides, and she sank into his flesh. I am now skilled with him, until he extracted her; then the Christian was healthy.
He extracted another arrow that had fallen into his flesh and we pondered about it because of its death.
After 30 days had passed him and nothing was changed on top of him except for something from his disposition, I placed her above the arrow; I used my skill with her, and extracted her; then he became healthy, but not a cause for harm to him.
I saw the man who shot the arrow into his back and it was closed over her. After 7 years had passed she exited from the root of the thigh of him.
I saw a woman who shot the arrow into her flesh and it was closed over her; she remained inside of her until the arrow did not change from his dispositions or the woman did not get harmed by any of his natural operations.
I saw another man who shot the arrow into his face and it was closed over; she remained inside of him until he did not get a lot of pain, like that many others.
He extracted an arrow from the hand of the King that had fallen into his nasal cavity and it was declining toward the right side; she was hidden completely.
I am now skilled at his care after the arrow incident until 3 days. The arrow wound was closed tightly.
I asked him with a gentle touch and he did not feel her; himself also felt the pain and the discomfort from his right ear. I pierced it with a point at its extreme tip
I extracted it from the place where its virtue had been attracted by a bandage and digested. By my confidence that this place would revert to me, and there appeared to me an image of the arrowhead so that I could grasp it onto the arrow. And no accident occurred at the place where the arrowhead was placed.
I assiduously worked with the bandage over several days: and no accident occurred; it was consolidated into an injury temporarily; and he remained weak due to its extraction from his space of days until one day he became sensitive to the arrowhead when inserted into his nose. He told me that story.
He told me that story. I placed the bandage on that injury acutely corrosive over several days until it was opened; and when I tried to grasp it with my fingers, I felt its subtle extreme tip that clung onto a stick.
After that I added to the opened wound with a sharp bandage; until it appeared before us clearly its tip of the arrowhead, and remained in my space for about four months.
After the wound was enlarged and I could insert my finger into it; grasp it; but it would not obey me to leave: thus I did continue with subtlety, and attempt to grasp her with the methods of beginners until one day when I made a more forceful effort using my fingers as though they were stronger than hers at the end of the chapter, she was then extracted. After that, I restored the wound
But the physicians say cartilage of the nose cannot be restored. I therefore returned to that wound and it was consolidated back into its place; he became healthy with an integral body without anything happening to him.
And I say to you the quality of extracting arrows some day; so that you put it in regulation and meaning over what was not mentioned.
Since the parts of this art and their distinctiveness are not comprehended with narration; nor was it comprehended by that liber [book], or wise craftsman compares to little in excess: and when he is present, above what is absent from him; and a new operation occurred along with a new instrument among the descent of things extraneous to this art when they occur.
"Therefore I conclude that arrows are not shot from the parts of the body to which they are attached except in two modes. "Or through an attraction caused by a place where it had entered. Or otherwise another part's, the first being reversed.
"The one which enters where it had entered either proceeds from that place, or is an arrow shot at a dead spot, drawing towards itself and shooting out.
"If it does not move towards its exit when it fell there, then you have to remove it a few days later until the body that is around him putrefies, and this attraction will be removed from him, but his exiting.
"And similarly if it is drawn into bone and does not proceed towards its exit for you, then remove her also a few days later, and repeat the same with attraction and movement every day until she shoots out.
"If it does not move towards its exit after a day, then you have to remove the arrows from all around them on that bone until they are increased. "Then draw her out and remove her.
If the arrow has already been shot through the body and is hidden from view by its own force or that of another object, then it should be grasped with one's hand while pulling If you feel the arrow, then grasp it using certain instruments that are used to extract or remove it from its path
If you are unable to grasp the arrow because of its strength or because it is too deeply embedded in a wound, then search for an instrument that can make it possible to extract the arrow from its path and remove it from the wound's depth
If you have ears that hold it fast, then free the limb from these around all parts with every possible means to do so, and if the mind is unable to release the flesh by tearing or bending its ears, until you succeed in removing this by any means possible to find.
And when you are administering the extraction of an arrow at any place, then use your hand's force with fingers to all parts until you succeed in removing it: and lastly with the most subtle subtlety so that the arrow won't be broken and makes it difficult for you to grasp it and extract it.
If you are unable to remove the arrow immediately but instead release it for a certain number of days until its decomposition occurs around where it is embedded. Next time you come across this arrow, then use what we mentioned from the chapter on maintenance and watch for your strength to be maintained by not cutting through flesh or bone.
And administer the mind in every way possible for you to extract an arrow from it: and let this be done with ease, tranquility, delay or firmness as we have taught you.
And it is necessary that when grasping the arrow, its weakness should be according to shape as it was at the time of shooting. Because this has been explained more clearly If you are unable to do what we have taught you in the chapter on maintenance, then administer with figures what is possible for you.
A needle that is drawn from the opposite side, or has proceeded from it to something on the outside; or causes deformation of the arrow due to it passing through a nearby skin part and thereby becomes prominent; so therefore cut off this excess above it, and then proceed according to how much space there is for cutting with the fingers.
Then draw (the needle) out of her thus easily by exiting from within her.
If you want to grasp it by bone, then bend your hand according to its roundness until you have inserted the arrow into the bone and it has been amplified for yourself; thereafter draw out that same one [the needle].
And if not so, release her after a certain number of days until she returns to you again.
If the wood is in there [the arrow], then pull (her) with it [the wood].
If the wood has perished and you wish to administer the thrust: then introduce into her an instrument with a concavity so that it may be inserted through its concavity, into the arrow shaft; thereafter pull (her) along with him [the wood].
If the arrow is concave: then pull her along with an instrument entering through that same one. The arrow pierces (her) by this way [that is, she is pulled out].
If the arrow has been poisoned, then you must, so as to cut through the entire piece of meat that it is located in; if possible for you [that is, if you have the necessary tool]. Then take care of her with respect to what will be necessary for this thing [that is, perform first aid on her].
If the arrow falls into the breast [heart], or the belly, or the groin, or the thigh; and is close to that which you take hold of when attempting to draw her out: it is possible for you to cut off above her with a knife (or to tear), so as to remove her.
If you are able, then take care of the wound and see that it is healed [that is, bandage the wound].
This is the shape of a snare (trap) from which hooks are drawn out by means of an arrow
The hands and feet resemble claws that grasp iron rods when they are held over arrows but do not let go of them when the arrows pass through.
And many forms arise from them, great and small, according to the amount of arrows and their power, and in their variety; for they grasp with varying tightness as the arrows pass through them.
Shape of the extractor hook.
Shape of the snare (trap) is closed, ready to trap a creature that can't escape when it hits the arrow shaft.
This is the shape of the snare (trap) like a hoop to hold it when entering and guiding through with it.
On phlebotomy of veins.
Veins which are customarily introduced into the body number thirty.
Among which veins at the head there are six ten, two behind ears called herbae, two behind eyes called aspicientes, and one on each side above the nose; and one in the tip of the nose. And two guides (veins) which are in the neck. And two veins which are in the upper lip of each side of the mouth. And two veins which are in the lower lip of each side of the mouth. These are called algecherich veins. And two veins which are under the tongue on each side.
Veins which are introduced into arms there are five for every arm.
The left cephalic vein is located on the right side of the head; and named by the Latin word for head (capitis). "And there is blood. It is flesh; it is composed of a part from the base of the temple and another from the skull's branch. And you should call this by its proper name 'the body'. It is flesh; it is placed on the lower part of the home. And it is also called 'Titillarum'. Call this by its proper name, 'the belly'. It is flesh; it is placed above the fire. And that from which blood flows, and that on which the hand appears when pressed, are they.
The navel; there are two branches to it.
In the thigh and in the calf, three of them exist. It is flesh; it is placed under the thumb's curve from the lower side. The second one is called 'Saphena', and its place is at the back of the calf, near the ankle. There is another one; it's name is 'Nesse'. And its place is on the back of the calf, at the ankle.
The other thigh also has three branches like them.
About the flow of blood from two veins after the elbow.
About two veins that flow blood after the elbow; it is a remedy for catarrh of old times, and against hemorrhoid disease, it makes the head ulcer bad.
The quality of their flow is according to what they carry. It should be applied with a good cloth on the head; and it should be pressed against its veins at their place to stop them. Then the patient puts his neck straight up with a stick, so that two of them appear. The places where they are located after the elbow, on both sides of the head, are depressed. Ask them with your finger; and when you feel their pulse under it, apply a signet ring there with a hot iron.
After taking hold of a syringe and drawing out its contents, there is the person known as Incidents After introducing this into a vein through a needle and connecting it to the blood vessels, after the injection has taken place. After placing your hand on top of it and piercing through with a needle at the point of entry (into the vein). The length of the incision depends on the number of fingers involved in piercing it through or around it; make an incision to let out as much blood as possible.
After wrapping this with bandages and removing them, after the wound has been bandaged up.
And also remember at the beginning of a book to make an incision (of the veins) and burn those.
The two arteries that are pierced by the injection of blood take twice as long; first, to bleed slowly and then to flow quickly, until both fluids have been emptied from them into the eyes (of the person piercing or administering).
The quality of the injection is according as you narrow your opening for it. A person who has been weakened should bandage their arm much so that two veins will be visible to the appearance; and it is likely for them to beat a pulse under your finger when you touch them. Then, with burning coals
After placing the finger on top of it and piercing through with a needle at the point of entry (into the vein), after removing that from above, you will have introduced another one into the same vein. Pierce this one as you did with the two others; make it flow out of blood according to how much is needed for your needs.
After wrapping around a weak vein and placing your finger on top of it during one hour After placing the bandage over this one tightly with strong constriction and removing them, after the wound has been bandaged up.
And also remember at the beginning of a book to make an incision of their veins and to remove those in the beginning of the book.
In order to remove a vein in front of an incision made for removing the brain, it is necessary first to make the incision for removing the brain; and after that you will be able to apply cold water on the face, and then move up and down (the vein); and afterwards press upon it with your finger, so as to squeeze out the blood.
The quality of the removed vein is such that you can narrow them by using your fingers. If a man falls down while he is drinking water, until his head appears again. Then you will take the tool that is called an "Fossorium".
With the top part of the "Fossorium" you should press against this vein from above with your finger or with another object, so as to squeeze out blood; and then release it while drawing it in according to the quantity that is necessary for this process. Then you should make a small incision on it, and hold tight until it heals.
And sometimes when the vein is opened with the "Fossorium" on one side. However it should not be so that you make an incision at the end of a vein as sharp and sudden as when removing others, but rather let it come to an end gradually. And you should remove the vein by turning on that side, as its position is next to one of your fingers; and there may be a risk that when it is soft and gentle with the "Fossorium" will break away or fall off.
In order to remove veins from the two tear ducts of both eyes you need first a small incision on each side at the corner of the eye; and afterwards apply cold water on the eye, and then move up and down with your fingers over it, so as to squeeze out the blood.
The quality of these veins is such that you can narrow them by using your fingers. Then you should remove the veins; and with both hands hold tightly over his head.
"In order for a vein to be cut short and as short as possible without using scissors that are too small or too large, the veins should be cut at an equal length. "If a phlebotomist cuts off a vein in half then it will break (in two).
"After that you should draw out blood from the patient as much as is necessary. "Put a bandage over them and bind them up at night every day.
"In the case of removing veins from patients who have many veins (like in the hand), this will cause fever and chills, and a burning sensation on the face. This is particularly true when the patient has old scars.
"The quality of the phlebotomy should be such that it leaves the patient weak in their lower half (like in a leg). "After that you should hold the patient's left hand and take a fine phlebotomist with a long needle; then pierce it at its junction (between the thumb and index finger). "Because one finger does not feel anything there because blood starts to flow immediately.
"And it is necessary that you hold your hand with a phlebotomist longer and draw out blood from the patient according to your needs. "Then bind them up at night every day. "The cut will heal quickly or not.
"In the case of removing veins from guide-patients (like in the foot), there is a strong desire to constrict them and get rid of leprosy sores on their feet.
"The quality of the phlebotomy for guide-patients (like in the foot) is such that it leaves them weak on both sides and they will lie flat.
"In the case of removing veins from patients with many veins, you should cut a vein to its maximum length without using scissors that are too small or too large. "Then you should extract from blood a certain quantity of heat. Afterwards do the same with another vein
After this, apply a ligature to both veins and tighten them in such a way that the weaker of the two will not be weakened. And then remove it from its head. Then cleanse the wound.
"The art of bleeding veins by Albucasis. The art of bleeding veins by Albucasis is as follows: when you are about to bleed a vein, and the vein gets into your mouth or nose, do not let it go down your throat; instead, cleanse with a sponge soaked in alcohol, remove any bad ulcers from the gums, and clean wounds on face, arms, and any other part of his body.
The quality of bleeding veins is that you should let the patient remain in a lying position before doing so; and tie down his head with a cord. Afterwards remove his lips and look at both veins closely; one of them will be in the right lower lip, and the other in the left side of his neck; their demonstration is through black marks on either side. It should be done this way because veins are minute, dark-colored markings can be seen in the surroundings. Then cut off both of them with one stroke.
If there is doubt on your part or you do not know which veins are being referred to here, then intend a larger cut and one that shows the veins more clearly.
And do similarly to both veins on the upper lip and customarily with that, and make two cuts from the lower lip as well.
"The art of bleeding veins under the tongue after cephalic vein. The two veins under the tongue are being referred to here; it is important that the art of bleeding the cephalic vein has been done before this one.
The quality of bleeding them is that the patient should remain in your hands facing you; lift up his tongue from the left side and look at one vein on the right side, then do the same for the other vein; their demonstration is through black marks both sides.
Phlebitis, therefore both of them keep watch, lest your hand be cut off by phlebotomy They are veins (arteries). It is possible that the flow of blood may be hindered from these veins (arteries).
The three veins that are commonly used to tie up into a bundle for phlebotomy (bloodletting) are found throughout all humans.
The bloodletting of these veins can be done in two ways. Either by piercing with a lancet and applying the cupped hand to the vein or by gently pulling out while using a small knife (or spoon): or by cutting off part of the vein with a phlebotomist's tool. This is their form for this purpose.
And from these are large and small veins, depending on the size of the vein(s) and the restriction thereof. The form for using a cupped hand (myrtin) is wide as you can see it. And agreed upon the opening of various types of veins (large ones, filled with blood, prominent ones, large and turgid ones, and those that contain a great deal of turbid blood).
The phlebotomist is smaller in size than the veins themselves but more skilled at their operation.
And agreed upon the bloodletting of the smallest veins that contain clear blood (bright red).
The basilica is one bundle out of three veins used in phlebotomy (bloodletting). The basilica was used to extract blood from the jugular veins underneath and around the neck, following which the chest is drawn out towards it: and the phlebotomist agreed with the phlebomant (bloodletter) that they should tie off this vein so as to close it completely, lest there be a flow of blood through or into it, because beneath it lies an artery. If the basilica should err (be damaged) and be pierced by a phlebotomist's lancet, it will hit that artery, and there may be an obstruction of blood flow. "You must prevent a vein from being cut when another person is performing a phlebotomy on it.
If the manifestation of the basilica is not visible, then you must prevent it from being cut when another person performs a phlebotomy on it. You may either move (it) to another or seek another who can perform a phlebotomy on that vein. Or, if someone else's arm has been cut at that location, you should remove his arm and perform the phlebotomy there instead of where he was originally injured. That vein is visible and must be treated as stated earlier.
If you are performing a phlebotomy on the same arm, then it is necessary to check for any previous injury and perform the procedure at an appropriate place until you know where that point is. After the incision has been made and cauterized with a hot iron, remove the arm afterward to perform the phlebotomy on that same location as we stated earlier. Prevent cuts from occurring at or near blood vessels.
After you've tied off the ligature and cauterized with an iron at that location, then inflation of that artery occurred; therefore remove it.
If you see blood rising during a phlebotomy procedure, act like a child and treat it as if there is urine (bleeding), but know that it is from an artery. After that, place your finger above the space for a long time and then remove your finger. If you see that the blood has been cut off or is about to be cut off and then tie it back up quickly; prevent an injury by preventing sudden movement of the arm, so that there will be no shock from its movement.
And do not let him move around for a long time until he has healed completely.
If the blood is not cut off and you see it coming to your finger; then strike that artery. The opposite arm or hand is brought against him in order to prevent bleeding from occurring.
Or accept a tourniquet from the other person and find him; take one dose of medicine and tie it above that cut, with cordage and powder until another day.
This is a medieval Latin translation of an Arabic medical text written by Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Zakariya al-Razi in the 10th century. The translation reads "When blood is cut off, it's good. "However if not (i.e., when blood is not cut off), the cautery is performed upon it from its location where the previous bleeding occurred and because of the flow of the blood: and making a cut on the vein to prevent further loss, since the removal of that part might be difficult in multiple dispositions due to the narrow space available, and by ligating the artery with a bandage.
"The method for young veins is different from the old ones. The former takes blood from the superior part of the head and the inferior part of the body due to their composition being formed by the branches of the basilar artery and cephalic vein.
"And he cautorized it so that its blood would be taken out under tension since there is a vein underneath of it. "Therefore if he added that to the phlebotomy, and a vein was found underneath it, there occurred a fall into unconsciousness due to a sudden pressure change; but its treatment became difficult, and in some cases not successful.
"As for many veins being present under the skin. "However if veins were occulted in some men and are subtle but not visible; then it is necessary that you perform your phlebotomy as follows: first cauterize with the alnasel until the blood stops flowing, and then make a small cut on them applying your bandage forcefully.
"But if one vein is between two veins, then find its length first.
"Of the cephalic (neck) vein. The method for young cephalic veins is different from the old ones. They take blood from the head and flow downwards towards the eyes due to their composition being formed by the branch of the basilar artery.
"And you should perform this one when it is present and ready; so if you're able to cautorize with the phlebotomist of oil (using olive-oil based salve), or with that of myrtle (a different kind of balm).
In spite of this, if you wish to touch the veins, you should hold onto his head and gently squeeze until it becomes numb. Then, seek a more favorable location for further treatment; but do not hurt him while he is still moving as that would cause harm.
In some men, when the veins are not touched by a first blow (i.e., when a vein is not struck or hit), it doesn't hurt them at all; they endure it easily and without any harm.
Of the usefulness of phlebotomy: Pay attention to its details. The quality and accidents associated with phlebotomy, which you should consider when correcting it.
First of all, you should know that phlebotomy is not to be administered unless for the sake of health preservation and treatment; it's also important to avoid any injury from an untimely arrival (i.e., to arrive too early).
So that phlebotomy is given through the three veins which are located at the top of the arm: namely, the cephalic vein, the basilic vein, and the brachial vein. So that phlebotomy is given at the beginning of fasting (i.e., before meals), or after breakfast and dinner; if it's not done within a short period of time, its effects may cause swelling.
So that phlebotomy is given on the first or third day after three hours have passed since the previous phlebotomy.
Phlebotomy administered through veins that are injured does not have a determined time limit; instead, when it's convenient and necessary to do so, you should perform it at night or during the day, or whenever there is light available.
And it's not appropriate that phlebotomy be performed on children until they are 14 years old. A woman should not undergo phlebotomy unless she is between the fourth and seventh month of pregnancy. Nor a phlebotomy should be performed on people who have already passed their 60th birthday.
Therefore, if someone wants to be phlebotomized through the veins located within their body, they must empty their intestines before the phlebotomy begins; otherwise, they would not have enough blood flowing out of the intestines for treatment without causing damage to other important parts of their bodies.
No patient will vomit while undergoing treatment; that is, no emetic or purgative will be administered without water, until the said matter is removed from him The patient shall not be given a purge (emetic)
until the veins are opened up after passion and vomiting have ceased, until urine is passed, until ejaculation occurs, until fatigue and exercise cease, until meals are taken, until fasting, and all that which had been dissolved from him by virtue of his bodily or animal nature.
Then consider the humor before this matter; if blood is thick with foods and drinks, or medicines are used, then possibly he should do it for him.
Then enter the bath; if this does not forbid anything else, or exercise is prescribed to thin his blood,
And place the phlebotomy in his heart on the third day as we said; and cleanse him from all accidents of animals, unless he has pains or is troubled by them all at once, unless he is in great pain or is troubled with superfluities, unless he is subject to labor, penalty, and excesses.
And let his physician be present with those whom custom and common use have accustomed to the application of aromatics, odorous substances, and perfumes; so that he may do as much by measure as is possible.
Then the phlebotomist shall sit on a stool of some height higher than that used for phlebotomy; afterwards he shall take his own arm and shake it twice with his right hand or three times if necessary. Then he stretches the ligature while correcting, until two repetitions have been made
And let the ligature be tight but not too tight; for if it is too strong or through excess of ligature, then it forbids the flow of blood; and if it is too loose, also forbids the flow of blood.
Afterwards the ligature must be released so that both hands shall simultaneously shake him until he is alive and his senses declare themselves.
"The phlebotomist removed a little oil from an old vein.
"Then he placed his finger on the left hand over it and performed a gentle tap to remove any blood that might escape if struck. "After the strike was over, it remained as if a struck chord were struck and removed from the vein; after he put the finger on it, it contracted under the phlebotomist's blow but did not break or escape to be drawn out by the phlebotomist, except for that which is fully distended with air. When he placed the phlebotomist over her, she tightened beneath him and was broken, unless she escaped, in which case a strict rule applies: one must gently press on it so that the phlebotomist may draw it out as swiftly as possible.
"Then he removed the phlebotomist. "If then a vein escapes when struck, it is good. "And if not, try another location with less force or over him with a greater force; and unless the place is struck.
"If he falls back then release his hand for one day or two days and do not strain the ligaments. "At least make sure to strike gently. "Do not let it drip into a bandage.
"Then he will perform another phlebotomy if he wishes.
"If the opening is small or only a little blood flows gently out of it; then another phlebotomy should be performed into this vein according to propriety and added with fewer operations.
"And do it with a tap before striking the location; for an unstruck location is struck by many phlebotomists.
"If you want to strike that vein again then do not continue striking on top of him; for it is no excuse for something else. "And place some oil from a flask over him so as to stop the blood flow. "The better is this remedy than oil alone, and more effective than remaining oil.
"In the administration of oils for all your veins during phlebotomy (bloodletting), you should also apply them to the prohibited site on the course of the blood and prevent it from bleeding; when one of these is applied over a specific place, they will form a scab quickly.
"Blood becomes thinner and more resolved after being coarse (clotted).
"If the location of a major phlebotomy wound becomes infected and many times so happen to those who are not phlebotomized with that one type of oil alone or if there is an opening for some reason, then apply a sponge soaked in water and salt to it immediately and heat it quickly; tie it up right away.
"It is necessary that you apply this remedy after the blood has exited with its own complement or another one's.
"If anything remains in the location after a day or two of bleeding, or if it is only due to dryness; do not worry about that; and if you have some aloe, or ointment from Myrrh (a tree resin), apply it over that place; or something made with Mentha oil (such as Calamine), or something similar.
"Many times the wounds of phlebotomy at the Basilica are severe and deadly.
"Therefore, put your hand over that spot; if it occurs at the time of compression on top of that spot, then there is a severe wound. "So apply something from what we mentioned above. "Fortunately, blood from that artery flows easily.
"But apply something to him with the one where there is a stiction (clot), so he can release it and remove the clot. "After that cure him as soon as possible by other treatments until he recovers.
"It is necessary to remove all the blood from every man according to his own strength. "And if it appears from a reddish color on the blood.
If the skin is black (niger), it must be removed because it will rot and become ugly; similarly if you see a man with a bald head (grossum), shave him so that he does not become ugly either. Similarly, for an arrow wound, heal quickly to avoid causing pain or damage.
One must remove a full and strong man with abundant blood flow (plenus), so that the new vein's blood flow is increased, making it wide; while for a weak man who is emaciated or with low blood flow (debilis), one should perform the opposite procedure to restore his strength.
One must also ensure that the hole is not made too small (strictum) to prevent the vein from closing and allowing blood flow; on the other hand, if a small incision was made during phlebotomy for increasing the new vein's blood flow, it should be widened rather than closed up.
The proper method for phlebotomy is safe in terms of blood flow and avoids injury; the incision must be made carefully (neruis) to prevent injury, while using a narrow and long incision is considered better than one that increases or decreases length and width.
If you want to use a syphon for phlebotomy and prevent the syphon from falling apart while using it (syncopis), you must fill its container with warm water mixed with grated mustard before each use; if the syphon becomes too hot during use, remove it quickly from the blood vessels, at most four.
If the skin has been injured (infregidatae complexionis), before phlebotomy you should apply a pan of mixed honey and spices or scented honey; if there is no honey available, you can use scented oil instead.
If the syphon falls apart during phlebotomy (accidat syncopis), it can cause a loss of blood flow, so you should fill the pot with water mixed with aromatic syrup to prevent loss; if no aromatic syrup is available, use scented oil instead; also add other ingredients mentioned in the passage about removing the syphon from use.
If someone wants to remove their own arm so that they can bleed more quickly and efficiently for a prolonged period (suum ultrare brachium), the phlebotomist must ensure the person's blood flow is maintained at an adequate level, as it may take longer than one day of continuous bleeding.
"Whoever is trying to remove his own arm, and cleanse the blood from it secondly, he shall have his body forcefully at that time.
"Whoever is trying to remove the blood from his own arm on one side towards the opposite direction must let it be cut off forcefully at that time, or else at the second day.
"In whose body there is much blood already heated up and inflamed, he should make it fall from him in one way, and extract a great quantity of it: and the opening must be made with many incisions until it reaches its fullness at intervals. After you have become accustomed to all the conditions of phlebotomy, then place your hand on top of his chest where the blood flows downwards, so that there is no sudden death. "Indeed this has happened when the phlebotomist was ignorant and fell into negligence.
"And it is not advisable when you have already closed the opening of the arm and the blood has become difficult to extract, that you force it upwards with great effort. "This removal is a bad thing, I think remove this because of the phlebotomist's negligence.
"Or else with a phlebotomy remove what has coagulated from the blood into an opening and put something that has been dissolved in water on top of it. "And put something like tyrian purple dye or saffron, or something that is tightly pressed to prevent the blood from flowing.
If you already have a band on it, then remove that and do not force it, until all of the finger is free.
"If there is a necessity to remove the second blood and it cannot be excused, then you should either perform phlebotomy above him or on another arm.
"But the forearm is phlebotomized by the fistula and basilica because they are not used to it, and they become hidden after being made composite of them.
"The quality of the phlebotomy is such that he introduces his own hand into warm water and after a while it turns red with the focus or fire, showing clearly.
After which tie or bandage is applied over this, restricting blood flow only slightly. The phlebotomy is repeated with a gentle and slow motion in the opposite direction to that of the first one, neither horizontally nor longitudinally, and there should be ample opening for you as you apply it over your hand.
If death of blood is forbidden or prohibited, then repeat the process with your own hand in warm water and let the blood flow out into the water for a while until you're needed to release it.
If however you are in hot days or summer time then you should excuse yourself from the repetition of hand into warm water. And more than anything else, a course of blood is placed into warm water during these times.
The phlebotomy today or this one is better for all veins since it does not make the hand pulse nor cause numbness in them.
Phlebotomy of the left hand of yours confers benefits on the right side or arm.
The quality of the phlebotomy is such that you tie or bandage your hand with a bandage or your own hand after introducing it into warm water until it turns red and shows clearly to the senses. After tying or bandaging her, you should repeat the phlebotomy procedure again. And if he completely severs this from him then there will be none of it left in any way.
You should not use the hand with the phlebotomy tool after completing the procedure unless otherwise instructed by a medical professional or your doctor. Under that [procedure] are the fingers of the hands torn off from the flesh.
Repeat with your own hand into warm water and let out the blood from there. If you don't repeat her into warm water then the blood will coagulate inside that opening and be prohibited from flowing out.
"When you remove from blood a quantity necessary for healing, then place over one (ointment) oil and salt; so that it may not be hardened.
And similarly, do as when the whole branch is tight [i.e., when you are dealing with a narrow cut].
It is important that you do not press on the veins with your left hand because this may cause them to become swollen and painful; when dealing with cuts from bleeding, proceed similarly as before: apply oil and salt so that it does not harden.
You should also apply oil and salt to the veins on the lower part of the body in a similar manner as you would for swelling or pain from cuts; to avoid bruises that may occur with prolonged use (such as from varicose veins); to treat ulcers, wounds, ancient sores, or similar conditions.
The quality of the bandage should be such that it can be applied to your foot when immersed in hot water and will cause friction as you walk; hold above this so that you may make corrections without difficulty (i.e., adjust the bandage). The bandage should be placed on your heel and cover your toes; this will help to keep your feet warm while you are moving around [i.e., when walking].
Therefore place the bandage on a wider part of his limb or at the heel; because it is better and more effective [in preventing swelling].
If you place the bandage on the face of his foot then apply pressure from beneath it onto the face of his foot [i.e., to prevent bleeding].
Apply your bandage so that you will strike (or hit) the veins as it passes over [i.e., move it in a way to apply pressure directly on them].
If blood loss is prohibited (i.e., bleeding must be controlled), place his foot into hot water; and release the flow of blood from that foot into it [to control bleeding].
If the bandage is placed at too low an elevation (i.e., if it is placed inappropriately), then you should repeat with another bandage placed higher; because this is better and will not cause harm when applying pressure to the veins as we mentioned before [to apply pressure].
Similarly to the other foot
The sciatic nerve is located as we described it on the back of the heel (calcaneum).
Its accompanying vein is connected to its pain when there is warmth because of cold blood.
The quality of its accompanying vein is such that when it becomes weak from cold water and warmth disappears; and you can stretch both legs all the way up to the top of the heel with four fingers while holding on to a very fine thread, because otherwise it would not appear until then.
When it appears then you can either touch or pull from the inside; and it is better to cut her off with a single stroke than to split her open with two. Its location however is hidden from many people and itself is hidden among the multiple number of men.
Its location however is hidden from many people and itself is hidden among the multiple number of men. If not by your touch and does not appear to everyone then the accompanying vein of that sciatic nerve is visible on another's back foot near the ear; or with a turn it can run out the quantity of blood as far as you are willing, depending upon its own power.
Then place a restriction around where that accompanying vein goes through and then stretch it. In this way it is cured
Of venesection, and the use of its quality
They are to be seen from the arms, ears and face.
Venesection however is done in two ways With scarring and the removal of blood; or another way venesection without scarring.
This kind of venesection which is done without scars is done in two ways. Or it can be done with fire. Alternatively, it can also be done without fire.
Venesection and those who administer them with scarring and the removal of blood are in thirteen places on the body. "One vein is the vena cava, and it extends to the top of the head; there are two veins in the forehead; one vein descends from the top of each ear; there are two veins on either side of the nose; one vein goes under the chin towards the lower jaw; there are two veins at the base of the neck; there is a vein between the thumb and forefinger, which is medium for both arms.
"But the vena cava does not carry blood to you from thin veins scattered on your body, and this is due to its lack of power coming from these veins; thus it is caused by phlebitis. "It is not necessary to administer the vena cava either with fire or without fire from any part of your body until it fills up the entire body.
"If a need arises to administer the vena cava due to heat or custom, we will administer it at any time during infancy, its end and in between, whenever necessary.
"It is so because the one who multiplies blood within him through his veins does not cease from extracting it by its administration until he is completely emptied of his load at the top of his head.
"And there are those who fill and cover their face with blood from its own forehead, neck, and shoulders. "And there are those who fill the face itself with itching, its front, darkness, and cloudiness of the eyes.
"And there are those whose location for administering their own vena cava is affected by itching or other conditions. "And there are those with an increased number of eruptions on the body. "And there are those who fill their own mouth with the taste and feeling of blood, or whose tongue is paralyzed so that they cannot speak. "And there are those with a greatly increased sleep. "And there are those who see within their dream blood and its effects, as well as other things that happen.
When it is necessary to remove any part of the three body parts listed above, let us make incisions for removal at a time that falls between noon and two o'clock in the afternoon or three o'clock.
The removal of the nose is an exception to venesection (vein cutting), as it leads directly to the face and results in loss of vision At that time we should remove everything from the body.
The removal of the nose is a location for cephalic phlebotomy.
It's not allowed to remove it if it's extremely cold or has phlegm. He was given a large bandage.
And for that reason it is not allowed to remove it if the body part has extremely cold feelings (freezing).
The one who does this repeatedly becomes an obstruction in front of him.
And for that reason it is necessary to remove the arm when it has become an obstruction in front of him while he is performing venesection from above downwards, afraid of being obstructed by his own generation (i.e., his own limbs).
Venesection or Alkehel is a location for cephalic and basilar phlebotomy, and also because of the desire to constrict (restrict) and open wounds with instruments, and in order to relieve constriction and prevent tears.
It is necessary to make sure that the Venesection or Alkehel is forced downwards so as not to weaken the heart and stomach.
The removal of the nose or Alkehel causes pain and blindness (opthalmia), and hemigranulon (half paralysis) of the face and neck, and perforatio (perforation) and dolor (pain in the ribs). And it is a location for basilar phlebotomy.
It is necessary to make sure that the Venesection or Alkehel does not force the hand towards it so as not to hit the artery and cause a loss of blood flow.
The removal of the nose or Alkehel below the chin causes damage to the tongue and gums (gingiva), and also to other parts affected by coldness in the mouth: it is a location for alternative phlebotomy on both sides of the lips.
Venous ligation
Venous ligation of the lower extremity's three veins (Basilica, Fusca, and Cephalica), followed by ligating the internal jugular vein to facilitate access for blood collection from the superior vena cava through a catheter introduced into the femoral vein.
And it is necessary to prevent multiple punctures and cuts when the site has been exposed skin, as well as beneath there are veins and arteries.
Venous ligation of the superficial veins over the elbow to ligate hemorrhoids or treat minor varicose ulcers below the knee.
And it is necessary to perform the ligation in one long movement and make sure that all veins are closed; since the area is more susceptible to strong suction which can tear delicate veins, so a larger cut must be made for such purposes.
The veins of the lower extremities will be ligated with a visible decrease in size because they are drawing blood from all over the body and causing pain in the kidneys, liver, and urinary tract; as well as causing menstruation and making both orifices swell up; and there is constriction at the saphenous veins below the knee.
However, they will weaken the body greatly by causing many deaths in humans.
The internal jugular vein is close to the veins of the lower extremity ligation.
The quality of the position of the veins is to make them loose and soft first, then tighten them with a gradual increase in tension until they are equal on both sides; do not prolong this position too long because it may cause discomfort for those receiving blood samples and will exhaust them quickly: but after removing all obstacles so that they can move freely again. Then consider the body's disposition.
A person whose skin is very tender and prone to bruising needs frequent bleeding at that place so as not to cause ulceration.
"The cauterizer is warmed up so as to increase the burn and deepen it; also for warming the suction so that it may be easier to grasp with both hands.
If there is excessive bleeding, then you should apply a second cautery at that time. "The first incision is made in a delicate vein and to extract the blood; also in the second case, make an incision that is most skillful for removing excessive bleeding.
If there is foul smelling blood, then you should apply a third cautery at that time; to result in the final outcome.
"And when we desire to remove blood quickly and efficiently, one incision is sufficient for us. If you wish to extract blood in multiple places, make a many incisions.
"If the blood is excessive then you should make a deep incision; and when both incision and depth are equal, it is at that point where the depth of the skin reaches its maximum.
"What should be done with the oils placed near to the area around the cautery and what is their purpose?
"For the skin is rough and thick, with its pores being closed; for such a person it is good to apply oil in a way that they can be rubbed vigorously, using very fine oils or oils of sweet taste like almond oil.
"And if the time is hot and humid then use oils that are fragrant like those of daffodils or lillies; also for these.
"If excessive cold is present then use oils that are bitter like those of balsam or those made from the plant called Alben; also for these.
"If excessive bleeding is present and the skin is tender then you should apply oil so that it may be prevented by the oil; after that, they should be washed with warm or cold water depending on what suits them better.
"One who has blood that is excessively moist should cleanse himself with vinegar and water or a mixture of vinegar and myrrh, just as follows.
"If there are excessive ones, cleanse them with a mixture of wine and water or a solution of vinegar, saffron, water of samsuci, or a decoction of anetii [aneth], or with the addition of camomilla.
"It is necessary that he bathe himself with vinegar or water of the bath, or from a bath towel [vestigium balneae], and it must be administered after leaving the bath for an hour, or two hours.
"And it is not necessary that anyone should sleep after being washed with vinegar.
"What does one need to regulate the Ventosus or Phlebotomatus before cleansing?
"After that one should consider the following first: if a Ventosus or Phlebotomatus is choleric and there is pain in his blood or inflammation, he must take cold to soothe him just as one would crush alum [granatum muzum], with vinegar and lettuce, and secanibin, and iuleb. And do this for all of them.
"And he must eat [feed] his body with a food that is not too hot or cold, and cooked dishes mixed with barley, and similar things.
"And for someone whose constitution is cold, he must take in a bowl syrup of honey or molasses or secanibin from the seeds and drink water fragrant with middle fragrance that is between wine and dew, and should be taken sparingly because it causes an upset stomach. "And he must feed his body with food that is not too harsh and does not cause indigestion, such as the flesh of pheasants or pigeons, i.e., birds eaten in moderation, and flesh from young geese.
"It is necessary that the vessel for cleansing and phlebotomy be large enough to hold food as well, and it must also be in a bowl of certain people whose eyes are red or inflamed from too much drinking, or medicine made from musk, i.e., muscatum, or aleesilith before the cleansing or phlebotomy, or after to comfort the principal veins and blood. It is not permissible for them to burn her in a container [made] of embers
Without incisions The members of the vagina which are without incisions should be put upon a board [made] for this purpose; and then they should be struck by an instrument on their vulvae (small lips), labia majora, labia minora, mons veneris, umbilicus, anus, and clitoridis. For these members have not undergone incision above them.
It is not permitted for intercourse to be sought through them unless there is a contact from the member of the blood towards the member, as we put the vagina on the breast during the flow of menstrual blood; and so it must be done with regard to the vulvae. We apply them that we may put cold water upon her member to cool it; as we put the vagina on the breast and the umbilicus [belly button]. Because of this the member is swollen and heated up due to it; as a result it relieves pain because she has resolved [or settled] her desire for intercourse.
She is put on the kidneys when there occurs a stoppage within them or with a bandage. By reason of her strong desire for intercourse she may either open the flow [passage] by force or remove the obstruction from its place.
And similarly when she is put on top of a board and her vulva is to be gently taken away within them both.
The members of the vagina are administered with water only after incision, that is by pouring it over them. And sometimes they are given [administered] with fire (as in cauterization).
And sometimes they are given hot water to bathe [in baths] with; and it is so that the vagina should be large like a bath of warm water, or water alone that has been heated up, or water mixed with herbs which have been cooked.
The form of administering the members of the vagina by fire.
The form of administering the vagina by fire. And its aperture is opened up to both hands; and its quantity in depth are moderate palm size; and there it lies on the side where it was placed on [the board], near the middle thereof, hole through which the probe goes in, according to the quantity for which it must be inserted with an instrument: so that the member may not pain from being above itself; also it is between its parts a sword transversed by wind or iron when it is put upon with fire.
This is translated as follows: "And now it's ready for use in great size, greater than that we had learned before, and smaller by but little, according to the age and temperament of him who uses it.
"The size used for children is different from those for adults, as they are more delicate and less robust.
"When applying this tool on the skin with fire it should be done carefully and gently to avoid burns, either by using a candle for more delicate areas or by using a lamp made from soot.
"Then we apply it on the skin and keep our finger over the hole I mentioned until we have finished using it.
"After that, when you come across another one of these instruments
"The size used for urine collection using water is different from that one and does not have a hole in it, so it cannot be applied to the skin directly.
"This is its shape.
"The size used for urine collection using water is larger than that one and allows collecting a lot of water making it better.
"On the subject of drawing blood
"Bloodletting is not done on many people unless there are specific areas that can hold the tools, due to their delicacy. "Or on an exposed part of the body like fingers or nose and so forth
"The quality used for bloodletting is to make use of those present in the water and not in any corrupted ones.
"They are given rest for a day and night in sweet waters until they become dry and there is nothing left on them. "After that the body is prepared with bloodletting and then rinsed Remove the member while it is still bleeding They are placed on top of him
As a result they are inserted and fall away until the bleeding stops. And if not, then it is possible to make suction from there with an arrow, at that time being more ultimate in injury: and if not, then go back with vinegar to the place. Remove when much water remains, until it starts to drip, and is expressed.
If the course of blood after the death of blood occurs for a long time and it has become still left over then take out the cold water, put it on top of him until the remainder is discharged.
If blood becomes excessive then take out a vessel or a jug and pour it over him with vinegar and similar things from vessels until the blood is discharged.
Or they may be placed on top of the place for treating ulcers by removing all kinds of lice or nits from them and take away until the wool is held together in that place because blood is discharged.
And if it is necessary to make a second incision into the body with vinegar then change these things when possible.
If the bloodletting is prohibited by suspension then remove from that place where there has been recent bleeding. Or if it goes into a vessel or another thing with blood then come back until something is taken out of the blood. They are placed there when they sense something from the blood and immediately hold it.
When this is necessary to make them fall then pour over them something from alum, salt or pitch and they fall immediately.
This chapter is very necessary for the art of Medicine and it is restoration of fractures, dislocations at joints in bones.
Brothers, since you are studying this chapter on medicine and surgery that you have not yet examined the ancient book or read it from beginning to end
Because of this, a mode has been established for those of us here who are familiar with science in our own land. And I, having never known its benefits or proficiency in it, and not being accustomed to extracting its knowledge from others because of the length of their ancient books' chapters and the effort they put into studying them until I had acquired that science through study with them.
Therefore having studied it for a long time, I have now come to understand its benefits
And now I have explained to you everything from that book which contained my knowledge and the experiments beyond it after having taught it to you and given it out of length through reading, and after having shortened it by abbreviation and declination until finally showing it through shortening as well: so that in this way forms were made for me from instruments used in its administration with the addition of declination just like I did in two preceding chapters.
Chapter Two
It is appropriate to say at the beginning of this chapter that our master teaches first and foremost about the artifice required for the station over their excellence: so that you who are eager may learn or teach this noble art, as well as others among you.
I say then when any fracture or dislocation or twist occurred to him: it is then that the first thing needed is to apply a tourniquet and secure the injured part with something similar so as not to cause further harm if one does not prohibit anything, just like weakness from old age, or a heated or cold bath, in order to prevent this.
"In his hunger he is satisfied with cold foods and those of the flesh; and for him there should be prohibited wine, large meats, and any food that fills a person to excess. "Until you are satisfied with the cold foods given to your partner and not excessive material effusion on the member; then restore weakness to its first course, according to his custom.
"When you restore the broken mouth, then it is necessary that the sick person should eat from nourishment to nourishment, much, big, coarse, which are sources of weakness; like those made with boiled wheat and rice, head, feet, hands, heart, liver, kidneys, lung, liver, fish recently cooked: and large wine and similar things. "When the course of treatment is established, it is better than before.
"You know that broken bones when they are in the elderly who are in their first old age and decrepitude cannot be possible to continue as before due to the exhaustion of members; and they must remain and continue according to their nature forever, for the benefit of their members: and they will strengthen and continue what from them is at the end of lenity.
"However nature has arranged something similar to gluttony into the mouth from all sides, which is bulkiness and can stretch it and hold it until the ones binding it are released; then there will be at the end of strength and firmness like before unless he does not prevent with his operations anything: for this reason, they must put nourishment on the sick person's food as we have said.
"You know that the species of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of members; for example, a fracture of the thigh is different from a fracture of the head of the bone: and a fracture of the chest bone is different from a fracture of the arm: and similarly all the other bones are different as regards the tongue. There are many kinds of fractures of bones and also within themselves.
Because it is curved fracture, they fell apart from the stars that happened to her And sometimes there is a fracture of his by length of the bones: and these fractures belong to the bone disease, that is, stars, and additional sources come from it, as they are in a cloak when cultured for writing And not coming: and there's a fracture with wounds and disruption to the head: and there is a fracture that cuts through it.
For all kinds of knowledge or tool to be used by him for the restoration of it, according to what is not remembered by him, being separate at their places.
And from the one who knows about the fracture of bones is its winding and prominence: and appearance to him senses, and sound when compressed by your hand.
Therefore when there is no more winding appearance in place, and not the sound near your touch with the lips and agitation, nor did he feel a great pain: then there is not there fracture, it's possible to be a curved wound or even broken bone.  And do not need that you hold him with his hand and compression constantly, but must throw it on top of it from medicines, whose memory was after the moment mentioned above in place: then it will be tightened with a fine cord
You know that when it is curved and divided into two pieces apart from the fact that there are stars in him, but all parts will be separated by his comparison: then you must begin to do this with your own time for its restoration before he falls on a cold hand.
If it happens that the cold hand will fall off him after some days then rest on his arm until he stops falling off After all, you can try gently and intelligently.
And remember that the restoration of him and his adjustment is easier than bones where there are stars
"Therefore, draw it as you remember it.
If the bone is broken in more than two places, then it's necessary to extend this member with both hands or feet if one hand can be used as a foot and vice versa; either using your own hand if the member is attached to it, or using two ropes or tying a knot with both hands.
And when you place the member on a level ground with your own natural shape, until the parts of the broken member are extended; then tie them together in every way possible and according to whichever method suits your location: and also according to your strength so that no pain or injury occurs from your operation, neither damage nor hurt. And when you apply force equally on both sides against each other with a partner, use more beautiful forms.
In that moment, stretch and pull it out of your own hand. If therefore you see something different there, correct it according to the amount of your strength.
And with a very strong stretch and compression as many other strong people do. Indeed, they make the cut very cold and use compression on a member of their own; as we have seen it from their operations many times.
Afterwards, tie and untie the member after the stretch; fix its parts in place with tightness and calm; secure it firmly so that no one can move on top of it. And fix it so that it doesn't move during your own hours of work and in the sleep you have taken; make sure to remove all your motions from its last strength So that the position of the member is not with a pain following it. This is because when the member senses pain or damage from its positioning, then it's necessary to change its position to another one without that pain being felt.
And when you are with it so that its positioning is equal and straight; so that no twisting occurs when it's restored.
The quality of a fractured member is determined according to how it heals
If a fractured bone differs in length or size, and shape as well
Therefore, since they are similar to the arm and finger (forefinger), you should apply a soft, smooth cloth for healing However if it is large like the thigh or leg, then use a broad, rough cloth for healing
Because the large ligament holds the bone tightly and connects it to all parts of the fracture with equal force, therefore the cut cannot penetrate
After removing your bandage from it and placing the liniment upon it gently on top of the place where the fracture is, you should begin to apply pressure with a soft, smooth cloth over the entire area. After removing the bandage from it and applying liniment gently on top of the place where the fracture is, you should start to apply pressure with both or four hands depending on how much effort can be made on the bone: while holding your hand tight along with the ligament.
Then proceed to apply pressure further up towards the upper area of the fracture and hold it as tightly as possible while releasing some of the tension you had previously applied. Then continue applying pressure further up towards the upper area of the fracture while gently relaxing it slowly until you have released enough tension to cause the large bone part (arm or leg) to return to its normal state.
After this continue applying pressure on another hand and repeat it with a second hand above the area of the fracture. Then proceed to apply pressure further down towards the lower area of the fracture. And your operation shall be based on our first mention of the application of pressure at the higher area, and relaxation and gentle touch to it, as we mentioned earlier.
After this place an interval between the two pressures and either apply a bandage or cloth to it depending on how tortuous the fracture is (if there are any twists), or do not put anything on it if there aren't any twists.
"Then remove from above the same wound another. "Next, apply an equal bandage to cover up the incision, and if there is no inflation from above, do not put on a cold compress.
"If there is an inflation above it, or if there was one earlier, then place over it the same bandage that caused the inflation, and continue to wrap it until the inflammation subsides, removing it every few days. "Then tie up the incision as above.
"And the bandages above should be of different types and sizes, such as those made from linen, rope, or reeds that are wound around a pole, or strips, or branches with palm leaves, or rushes: and their size should match this form and shape exactly.
"However, it is necessary that the bandage placed above should be larger and more extended than any other bandage.
"Then tie up the other bandage as described earlier with another bandage of a different type or size. "Finally tie the second bandage above with another bandage of different type or size, and it should be such that your bandage is placed on top of the fracture, which has been described as being higher; and how much more extended will your bandage become at the time when there is a fracture compared to an uninjured area: so in this case you have to make sure that your bandage becomes larger.
"And it is necessary for the middle file of bandages to be softer and more delicate than any other: they should be made from linen cloth.
"Since if the middle file is coarse like those put there by experienced surgeons from tightly bound threads, it's a major mistake because the bandage will fall off due to its quality.
"And delicate middle files should never be used together, since you won't achieve what was intended by using them with these.
"Do not make the distance between the two bandages less than one fingerbreadth.
"If a bandage is loosened or injured as it passes over the incision and down to healthy parts, then place something soft under them, like linen cloth or a dampened piece of clothing until nothing more slips off from there.
When there is a fracture accompanied by a wound and disruption of the skin occurs, I apply remedies to commemorate his memory according to this specific rule
And you know that every fractured member should be treated with splints on the first day. Because when a member is large, you should not place splints on top of it unless five days have passed, or seven, or more, according to your safety guidelines from the cold wind and rain.
And this is how splints were used by old physicians who are placed over fractures or dislocations.
A common method of splinting is to use them over many days with various dressings and especially on the head, breasts, or legs because it does not cause heat or cold.
And it is so that you remove the moles from the flesh and apply a bandage around the ear, holding them with strings as mentioned above except for the mole itself, which should not be bound tightly to avoid damaging or irritating it. Then use this splinting method.
Another way of splinting is to treat fractures and dislocations as well as twists or bends. Take aloe, and labdanum, and cedar, and mulberry; and put them all together in a mixture with water or with the juice of aloes (used for moistening); or apply them as bandages if there is heat from putting on too tight a bandage. Then use this splinting method. This is a good mixture to splint fractured bones or to support limbs many days in succession.
Another way of splinting is to treat fractures and twists as well. Take mugwort, and mullein white (used to treat skin conditions), and aloes, and acacia; put them all together in a mixture with water or with the juice of aloes (used for moistening); or apply them as bandages if there is heat from putting on too tight a bandage.
The modus of separating bones from their places is as follows. And one must cause pain to them and cut open the flesh with a knife, so that they may be separated. Scald the wool until it is loose and dissolved; then immerse it into vinegar solution (vinegar mixed with oil); and place this on the affected area.
However, regarding the modus of separation by means of an implement, there is no virtue for restoration but only a benefit to those being soothed with warmth; and it gets rid of pain itself.
The modus for restoring a broken bone (which I assume means setting the bone back into place). Fold your fingers like this [demonstrates], and your other hand makes a loop around them; then take all of it, and make the separation implement (plaster) out from both.
The modus for reducing a fracture is as follows. When you have finished the treatment and are left with the remaining parts to be soothed (the other bones), do this. The recipe for the treatment of high fevers is as follows. Take a mixture of radish tops, chamomile, and the flowers of hawthorn; and add ground herbs to it all in one part. Then mix them with wine if the member being treated isn't heated up (i.e., not scalded).
If the member is already hot when this treatment is to be given, then mix it with warm water or wine for cooling (but if scalded by wine don't use it).
The modus for a stronger separation procedure is as follows when the pain is severe due to the soothing of a member's part. The recipe for treating high fevers is as follows. Take a mixture of radish tops, linseed, walnut, millet, and sweet cicely; add all these to one part, then mix them with salt water or sugar water (wine if available) Treat it according to the member's temperature and calm his heat.
Hippocrates stated in his book that one should place a plaster over the broken member if it is necessary for restoration of its parts, but only from the horn of a goat and oil; he also mentioned to maintain an equilibrium between coarseness and subtlety.
Galen advised that when a member is fractured for repair of its part, which contains heat extraction, such as myrrh, aloes and olibanum; similar things from them which we have taken
A method for application in plaster to heal wounds and alleviate pain. Make of mugwort and chickweed, or the hair of men's incisors, or the beard hairs, or salt parts equal; they will be mixed together, and sifted, then made into a plaster.
The quantity according to what is necessary for the bandage to hold, then it will be soaked, so that you consider at that time if there was no accident of weakness or pain or itching not to be opened with its mouth in its place; thus it does not resolve itself within days many. If it happened to him with the itchiness of a man or pain and swelling; then quickly soak that plaster immediately, and apply it at the same time: take linen cloth or sponge soaked in warm water, put it over where the itching is or the pain arises; until the itching stops and the pain subsides.
If it happened to him with the itchiness of a man or pain and swelling; then quickly soak that plaster immediately, and apply it at the same time: take linen cloth or sponge soaked in warm water, put it over where the itching is or the pain arises; until the itching stops and the pain subsides. Then allow one hour for the member to rest quietly. Then put on top of that member a hot compress soaked with vinegar and oil, or almond oil; bind it on at night for one hour until it is secure from the heat by the next day's morning, then the swelling in the member will stop, and its pain will be removed.
Then repeat this to a thin bandage and the plaster, and do not tie it with your constriction first, and gently as you go along with it until it is cured.
If you see that the plaster and bandage are loose or broken from accidents and injuries which have already occurred, then repeat this as before, equally.
If none of those things which we mentioned has happened to the member in these days or weeks, then do not apply it again until after three days, four days, five days, seven days; at your discretion When an object remains a hundred days unbroken and has the appearance of being dissolved by your solution (in other words, you are not able to dissolve it completely), then until that time when the fracture happens or the coagulated flesh is above the fracture, add more than before in binding together: also at this point put on the addition of the loosening food for the patient.
If you are already aware that a fracture has occurred and if it is necessary to extend the treatment further than before, then know that nourishment must be withheld from him (the patient). Therefore dissolve it with hot water into all kinds of vessels that are available to you and let this continue for three days; also increase the binding together more than before.
With this procedure, the treatment is directed towards restoring or healing the member.
That which restorers of a broken member do with another vessel when the restoration is not accomplished first, according to what needs to be done and according to the tortuousness; this is an error from their procedure and great fear exists: if it was rectus they say that those men in their books did perform operations on him.
And I (Albucasis) do not follow the request of any of them for doing that to him at all times, and it is correct as long as he does not want this.
Of a fracture or injury on the head
There are various species of fractures and many shapes of them; their causes also are distinct.
From the fracture is what happens from a blow with a stroke, and this blows all of it until it reaches the siphon that is below the bone as an axe cuts through wood; for this reason, this species of fractures is called Axialis.
Or a blow is struck by the very bone of him and hits his face, but does not penetrate into the very end of him; this species of fractures is called Kalaan, which means an absolute severance.
The two arteries may be either large or small.
If it is fractured, whether there was a contraction (contritio), or an abrasion (attritio). And the cause of this was either a blow with a stone, or a fall on a stone, or something similar
And this fracture is also when it pierces through and meets the flesh of the body (panniculus), so that a blow on the face would be like one hitting bone with a stone, or falling upon bones.
And this fracture is when it passes secretly into the bone through a very thin channel (capillus), so that an injury to the nail would be like one hitting bone with a stone, or falling upon bones.
And from these is the fracture that occurs by chance or by impact on a stone, and are similar to those who enter the layer of bone into its inner part, so that there comes a hollowing out: like what happens when hot air strikes against them (aeris) and hits their parts inward.
And this occurs very often on the hands of people's bones, like children's heads.
There are separate species of fractures from those mentioned above for all these days and times.
And we know all the species of fractures from the examination of them and their examination with hands, and also the destruction of corrupted tendons that are above them.
The species called "Capillaris" is recognized through this one, in that it is grasped over the eye and pulled out by wax with a stroke of the pen; for thus the black fracture appears.
In the healing of a fracture, it is first necessary to consider the accidents of an individual; if you see from accidents what signifies a clear manifestation over fear, such as in cholerae and its extension and damage, and excision with words, and syncope, fever, and exiting the eyes, and reddening them. And like these are caused by many accidents, proximity does not heal well: and if you do not see accidents, but you have faith in salvation, then begin the healing of it.
"If a bone is broken to you and it hurts first of all, then this is the time to study how to heal bones on the fourth day following.
"And if the tooth is broken on that day as well, then this should be studied how to remove it before the seventh day, before what occurs beneath the bone from the socket and any accidents that occur.
"If a bone is broken to the socket and it is causing discomfort as well, then this should be studied how you hit that portion of it which was separated and torn off, according to what happened to you.
"And it is so that you remove the head from what was broken to you, and cut above the bone according to any way possible for you, and according to how bad it looks over the sick one.
"If an accident occurs at the fracture of a bone by blood flowing or a hot stroke, then you should bind it with what is necessary. "And it is so that you bind the place with burned fat and oil until the stroke settles down, and you are safe from blood flowing. "Then begin to study on the healing of bones and their removal.
"This will be according to one of two ways.
"One way is so that you cut the bone with a sharp and narrow knife; and this is its form.
"The other method is to administer another incision above those, and this is its form.
"Then you administer the second incision still more than according to that one.
"The second way is so that there is a different number of incisors than yours, some of which are wider and others smaller; and the last ones being at their extremity, they hurt and are used in cutting with iron, or burned; and you use it easily to strike over the incision so as not to cut off your head, and to cause its pain.
If the nose is strong, you must then perform an incision in its vicinity before applying Incisoria, while using the blades that are called Terebra and not penetrating deep: furthermore they do not call them so because the same does not pass through the term of the flesh to what follows immediately after this. Because, since the Terebro is round about it which is below his head sharp like a circle and prevents submersion by surrounding completely with the blades
And it will be given to you that you take from these many Terebras of various sizes until the present moment when all the Terebras are around your neck: whose sharp extremity has a certain quantity in length and width, according to the quantity of the blade of his head
These are the shapes of three species of Terebras or Trepans
The quality of piercing the flesh through and through is as follows: put the Terebra on your nose and keep it there with your fingers until you know that the nose has been pierced. Afterwards change the Terebra to another place and put it between every hole in a row or around it.
Afterwards make an incision with Incisoria between every hole in a row or around it as subtly as you can above the same using its edge, just like we said until you remove the nose or with your hand or by means of some other instrument which is used to that effect: so carefully and with subtlety.
And you must be very careful not to touch the Terebra or Incisoria at all.
Once you have pierced the nose and it is separated from the shaft if there was continuity with that, then remove him quickly so that he does not remain attached to bone with some other instrument similar to Incisoria Nevertheless, it is necessary that they be thin and subtle more than the others Incisoria
If something needs to be removed from bones using a saw, then take it with ease, accompanied by that which is in your instruments Then apply the wound care after removing as directed
Another method of treatment is easier than that for wounds, because it was said by Galen and praised greatly with great praise: and this is his word. It is not necessary for you at first to remove the portion of bone from that place where it was more broken and visible: until when you have removed that part and placed under it the extremity of this arrow-shaped cutting tool whose form is like that one.
And the flat part does not cut anything at all: and the sharp part of it is drawn by both sides to its length like a picture: so that the flat part should strike towards an end, the sharp face of it hitting on bone.
Then strike over the arrow with one edge gently until you have cut it all with ease, just as before: and you are sure from the bone not to hit where the fall was, which delayed at last.
If the physicians were not more stupid and ignorant than they are, then something would remain attached to the bone from the shoulder in some places, it would come away with ease accompanied by that of the flat part of the arrow-shaped cutting tool whose form is like that one, and it would let him go free with ease. It will be released from it without harm, and without fear.
If the fracture of the bone does not extend to the shoulder blade, and what is removed from the bone is the face of it, and remain in this place sharpness and subtletiness: then you should try to remove that sharpness, and get rid of those subtleties with the help of the ones prepared for many quantities by number. So that you can administer them on every part more conveniently yours, and better theirs according to what was done to you, and it is broken bone face, whose figure is like that one. "Firstly you must administer your veins through which arteries of greater size. "After that, use a smaller vessel afterwards to administer it.
"Firstly you must administer your veins through which arteries of greater size. "After that, use a smaller vessel afterwards to administer it. "Do not cease the administration of this medicine until you return to administer it through a smaller vessel and use a more narrow one.
"From the remaining small veins and capillaries you must break a smaller vessel to administer this medicine in order for it to return from its incision.
"And there is that which we did not conceal above all things, of which here in this art whatever study or knowledge was possible and stood over what we have written and demonstrated the great fractures.
"If the scrotal vessel is detected and retained when you open your mouth, then it must be taken up by its lining as much as possible to the oil rose and placed over a urethral opening. "Then take up another doubled or tripled lining and immerse it in wine and rose oil to place it over the first one and do this as easily as possible so that you may not be embarrassed.
"Then administer the broader ligature over it and do not bind it except to what extent is held by a small vein; then loosen it with this care one or two days later until you are six times secure from another person. "Then let it go loose and administer after that medicines with which there is excess of dryness as much as the roots of lilies, flour of herbs, and urine of thurys, and parsley, and similar things: so that you may make a poultice from these less dried-out medicines which will be applied over the vessel in the same way as you would apply them if they were not dry.
"And universally administer all medicines of which it is necessary to withdraw and do not bite upon it. "And according to your virtue so that the vessel is clear during your care and not has any foul ointments or foulness.
"And according to your virtue so that the vessel is clear during your care and not has any foul ointments or foulness. "Do not remove the knife from any part of his body unless it is on the skull; because when the knife enters through the brain's sheath and touches the brain itself, it corrupts it, putsrefies it, and causes him to fall down when great malice intervenes at that point. And if it happens in the neck, while its head is being held out of its sheath with negligence towards its care, then his flesh turns black on the surface.
Therefore, if accidents to an invalid occur as we have said (i.e., injuries to an invalid that are life-threatening), you know, since it is extremely harmful close by.
If blackness does not occur unless some medicine is placed upon him and has the power of that medicine to make it dark, then you should take one portion from oil and three portions from sesame seed paste and bind them with threads on his body. Then place him upon the sheath; after this, care for him as much as you can according to the procedures which I have mentioned.
"When restoration fails.
Know that the nose does not break through unless two of its upper parts are both broken at once or one of them; moreover because it has two bones: namely, the lower part is cartilaginous and cannot be broken, nor can he fall except from injury, dislocation, and contusion.
If one of the two upper parts breaks through, then you should put your thumb in the nostril to push it out with your index finger and pull its fracture back towards yourself; and press downwards on both sides as much as possible until the nose is restored to its natural shape: and let this be done gently by art. And also, that you do not cause harm from your own operation on him.
If the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and does not reach that finger, then you should stretch your hand to its utmost limit, where there is some fat.
If the fracture is in both parts at once, do something like that; and proceed with his restoration on the first day of the fracture if possible. And if not then on the 7th day after, or on the 10th day at calm and friendly places.
Afterward, if the bandage becomes loose or torn at all points except for one, you should insert two bandages; and let their width be such as to fill up the opening of the vein.
Some ancient restorers said that the bandages should often be changed with butter; and daily change would occur. I am afraid this is beyond my capacity to understand, but it seems necessary that the bandage be filled with white egg yolk beaten with pulse powder. After removing the bandage, let the mouth be opened up and the cartilage softened.
And sometimes a feather from the wing of an ostrich is inserted into the vein on Nasum's arm; when it has been stretched gently over this band without any effort: and so that if the injury to Nasi extends upward, then she does not prevent the weak one being inspired.
No, these are not necessary things. If you wish to do this, then do this; if you wish to do that, then let the bandage be done.
If Naso is operated upon by a cold vein, he should bandage the nose with crushed laurel leaves or crushed saffron; or if cooked in olive oil, or mixed with a certain amount of dried fig powder.
If the vein is not cold however, then it is necessary that you put a bandage on him with flour and egg yolk beaten together; or if he has already been given an ointment of flour and pulse powder mixed with white egg yolk. Afterward let it be placed gently on top of him without any others; or else you should place a bandage on his arm separately.
If Naso's bones are broken and torn in several pieces, then it is necessary that you saw through them; or else remove him with any instruments which fit for this purpose. Afterward you should saw through it; and look after him as he is placed in the bandage with a suitable substance to hold him firmly together, or with an ointment if that's necessary.
When a man sustains an arrow wound in his neck, then it is necessary to treat him with the right remedies and administer a poultice of lead until he recovers.
Restoration of lower mandible when broken
When the lower mandible is broken and the fracture does not involve any wound, then only a simple break occurs; however, if the bone breaks through the mouth (fractura deforis tantum), or if it splits in two (frangitur in duo), there will be some damage to the interior of the mouth.
Therefore, if the break occurs in the right side of the mandible (si est fractura eius in parte dextra), then you should insert your left index finger into his mouth to provide support: similarly, if it is on the left side, you should use your right hand and push with both hands to quickly bring the bone out from within, using one hand for support at the interior part of the face, while using your other hand to hold back against the exterior.
If the mandible has already broken into two parts (si fractura mandibulae iam separatata est in duo), then it is necessary to administer an extrusion with both hands, following proper procedure until there is equality between them.
If an accident occurs to the teeth or disruption has already occurred (si autem iam accidit in dentibus commotio, aut disruptio), then secure them with whatever you have for preventing loss of the tooth: wire from gold or silver, a file, or a needle. Then place over the broken jaw (deinde pone super mandibulam fractam caerotum) Then place over it a double band (deinde pone super ipsum pannum duplicatum), and over the broken head an equally large star that has been made crooked; or you may use a skin patch of equal size to cover up any remaining wound on the face, running lengthwise down the length of the mandible.
Then bind it over with the bandage that you prepared for yourself (deinde liga ipsum desuper), apply it evenly and securely until no further damage occurs; and provide him with something soft to lie on, so he can be at rest in peace and quiet: and bring him a gentle drink of food.
If you suspect that something has changed regarding a figure of any kind, then proceed and remove it on the third day. Then correct what has been altered in it and scrape out the mold with a scraper made of pumice stone or ashes mixed with lime or flour, depending on whether you use pumice stone or flour paste.
Once it has been attached to the figure in this manner and its disposition is not changed, you may remove it; however, if anything should change regarding the disposition of his limbs, then set him free (i.e., let him go). It often happens that a fracture is held in place by three supports for seven days.
If an abscess becomes hot while we are administering the remedy that I mentioned earlier (i.e., if a complication occurs during administration of the remedy), then remove that abscess.
And if there is a fracture along with a wound, consider it carefully. Now if the bone has already separated from the flesh (i.e., if there is no longer any connection between the two), either by force or by cunning, then proceed carefully to this procedure so that you may remove what came out with them during the removal of their instruments.
If the opening in the wound is narrow, then widen it by means of a phlebotomist according to your needs.
After removing the abscess and nothing comes out of them anymore, then you must widen it if necessary; otherwise, attach a scraper that conforms to this on top of him and scrape off what is coming from there until he is freed (i.e., let go).
Of the restoration of the phallus: when it is broken
Indeed a lot of phalli can be broken from the front part to the side of the arm and the fracture occurs according to one of three modes.
Alternatively it can be broken apart from both sides without complications arising; and restoration is easier for him (i.e., the phallus).
Or so that complications arise with bone injury; and this makes the restoration more difficult.
As a fracture accompanied by a wound.
If there is no wound accompanying a fracture, then the surgeon should have two assistants present; one assistant to follow the fractured limb and another to stretch the other side of the body upwards.
Afterwards, straighten your fingers as much as possible until he forms his hand according to what is appropriate; but there should be no excessive elevation or fall of the hand itself.
If your fingers extend more through the stretching process, then you should put a small sponge or thread on it so that its size matches what is necessary for your needs; and stretch out your arm as well as possible to get the elbow free from around the hand.
If you are unable to pull the elbow out of its socket; instead, because it has gone deep into place, then put an assistant above his head so that he can be lifted up from beneath him onto the ground below: and have this assistant put a medium-sized piece of cloth under the elbow itself.
If you feel that he is falling out from around it; then in this case, put an assistant next to him and pull him gently away quickly.
If the fracture is on a bone, then in this case take one of the assistants who has prepared it and put it under his arm so that he can be freed from around it; but if you are using wood or iron as an instrument for this, you should prepare another assistant to hold onto him. And here is the form of the operation.
If he has no concavity, let a small sponge be put in his ear to help with this.
And the length of it should match what your fingers are extended towards from their size and reach. The length of his arm as well, but also according to how much you can manage during the operation.
And he has two arms just like yours; one is wide and the other is narrow.
If you disrupted when extricating the sutures of a wound and it became wide open, then secure it with a ligature from an apostle's hand; then close both lips together over the suture
If it is wide open, or you have used too much force to remove the sutures; then secure it with a ligature from an apostle's hand; and close both lips together over the suture
If you used too much force against an apostle's ligature; then insert a linen cloth soaked in oil and vinegar into the wound, together with honey and wine, and place it on top of that.
The suture was undone because there was no wound and no incision; it is as if you placed a plaster made from flour mixed with egg whites over the mouth that had been smeared with it. Then place a linen cloth soaked in vinegar on top of that. After that, smear the ball under his titillation if he becomes tired out. After that, take a date palm leaf which the Saracens use; it is long and thin like a rope. And its breadth on one side or all around will be enough to close his mouth. After that, place two layers of linen cloth over the plaster and the titillation. After that, take a star from a small table; its breadth is similar to three fingers' lengths. After that, put it into the linen cloth. After that, place the star where it fell upon a fracture and location. After that, place the star over the fracture just as you put it; and put it on top of his head, and under one titillation for him to heal and under another for him to be healed from: And reduce her above all parts, so that you know how to hold the suture tight when holding onto a fractured bone tightly. It is this way which cannot be hidden from you, and in total it will not go away from over his mouth unless he removes it And for that reason, you should strive to have him always during the day. "Therefore soften the ligament and look for the star that has slipped away; then correct it by pulling the ligament.
Then lie the patient on his back and put a feather beneath him while he is asleep; then blow into the ear of the same person during sleep as if you were helping them breathe by placing your hand over their mouth, until they die. Therefore a broken bone will heal through elevation and manipulation of the arm.
Bend his arm at the elbow and do not loosen it unless there is a fall or accident from scratching or falling on an object for twelve days.
Then resume the plaster if you see that face to it. And add to it when it is contracted and remove it when restored; then it will heal and coagulate.
A broken bone is bound up gently and firmly within twenty days, sometimes for shorter periods among some people.
The healing of the fracture
A spatula is often broken at its base and does not break away from the part it is attached to; unless one of its edges breaks.
When therefore it is broken from that location and it is broken through the middle of it, then one does not know about this until they touch; at which point they remove what was a figure of the fracture. Reduce that to an inherent form in any way that you are capable of doing it.
Then lay the patient above a bed with feathers and pillows; then cover him up with a linen sheet two times over. Then lay upon them a feather spread wide from the small table as large or larger than it is.
If there has been excess in the concavity of some spatulae; then equalize that concavity with the feather gently until the star descends according to equality.
Then firmly fasten upon him above with long and decent constriction and the firmness of feathers until he is moved from his place.
On every day For whatever reason the ligament softens, tie it up and align the star so that when pulled loose from its place, there is relief for the patient to his proper health.
And a spatula should be restored every 10 days or every day
When that number is completed, then the tie securely. This same thing happens when the bones are not connected and their solution cannot be made.
If the bone is broken, or if it has been pulled to pieces, then hold its upper end up, lift it out of place. And do what we said when the neck bone is broken because of a cold and wet environment if it comes into contact with something
On the treatment of a broken shoulder.
When it is broken on its middle part and rarely happens to that one. His extremities are the least frequently broken from accidents occurring there.
When the middle part is broken and it falls towards the lower end with pain and difficulty to raise, there may be a loss of blood, there's a weakness in the bone declared when fractured, and not hidden from those watching over him; and its treatment is that he lies on his back until lifted up by the spatula.
Then raise his upper arms and both sides with hands, and gently towards alignment as much as possible until it is restored to its original shape according to the way it can happen and agreed upon, when that happens and it has been done then restore to what should be the figure of the bone, according to how necessary it is.
Then put a bandage above him and a spatula on top of it, and put the star from the small table or the salt shaker over his head as well, and similarly to both sides after you have wrapped her up, so that she may be bound with care. Then gently bind her to the broken part so that it may not be pulled loose and hold the binding according to its shape towards the back a little bit and tie it firmly.
In every hour when the ligature is becoming soft and loose, gently tighten it; if a need arises to remove or cure whatever has happened there through injury, corrosion, pain, or loss: then proceed immediately, tie off the ligature again and cleanse and treat the affected part with the appropriate care.
After you've tied it off, if you wish to examine its appearance more closely: then wrap your fingers around it and examine the ligature again.
In the event of a break in costae.
When the costae break and are not accompanied by more serious injuries elsewhere on the body or from its extremities to the front: then you should examine their connection with the back. Nor is this breakage caused by a weakening of cartilage; You should not miss the opportunity to examine them with your fingers during an inspection, as this may reveal any connection or weakness in their support system.
And the restoration of such costae can be done so that you gently correct their break and adjust them as best fits to restore their shape in accordance with what is necessary. After you've corrected it: if there are still any signs of tension or looseness around the wound and ligature after all this work has been done; then gently wrap your fingers around them again to tie off that part as well.
If the costae break inwards, causing pain to the wound and to the surrounding tissue as if struck by a fuller's spindle or a point of needle; then you should examine with great care for any injury to the hand that has been weakened, especially because this will cause discomfort to the injured part, and many other injuries as well: wounds, bruises, multiple bleeding points. And these are very difficult to treat.
And they have also used remedies such as those who say to put food into the hand of an inflamed and swollen intestine so that it will be calmed down by this application: or perhaps a remedy where you apply pressure on one side of the wound to prevent any breaking outwards.
We are afraid that we should not cause harm or looseness in order to perform a cold application if it does not help at all. If an injury has already occurred, then apply this remedy immediately
Some of them said that it should be placed on the injured part and applied with force, then the reasoning is similar to this one. However, caution must be taken because too much pressure may cause paralysis due to weakening of the affected part.
Some of them said that the injured part should be treated with wool that has been soaked in warm oil and then placed between the ribs until it swells up; so that a knot may be tied at an equal length when pulled out, according to its roundness.
After this the injured part was cured by treatment with food and medicine.
If the injured part swells too much and does not tolerate food or drink, or it emits a stream of fluid from the wound accompanied by pain, and we fear for the patient; then let us cut away the swollen part and remove any broken fragments that may remain attached to the ribs. After this we place on it an instrument for holding its shape which remembrance follows: and strike it with ease both in front and behind.
After this we gather two lips of the mouth if a big stitch has been made; and we treat it with plasters until it is cured.
If an accidental injury has occurred to the lips with cold oil and is being treated; let a warm wool be soaked in oil and placed on it; then treat the injured part as if it were from the finger, until it is cured because of its contact with the cold.
In addition a warm wool soaked in oil should be placed on top of the affected part when it has been sleeping to speed up its cure.
Of the treatment for fractures of the spine and collar bones.
The collar bones sometimes break and rarely sustain injuries; similarly the vertebrae of the back also do so. When this occurs to someone else, inquire if he is able to recover or not; then be advised. As soon as the hands are soft and relaxed, and motionless, and dead; nor can they move them or stretch out, when you press on them with your fingers, or try to pull them apart, for this is not possible: and if you should grasp them together by means of your fingers, and squeeze upon them with force, it will not be felt or cause any pain in the hands themselves; but then you may know that such things cannot be cured, and death has come to many men.
If the hands should move them and there is felt a squeezing with your fingers or pain, then you may know that such things cannot be cured, for the hand has become weak from illness.
If the hands become like those of a man who is paralysed or lame (swayed and disordered), you will know that they cannot be cured, for the hand has become weak from illness; then consider his feet to see if he can move them at all, when placed upon him - whether it is movement with force, or without force. And if he moves upwards towards his back, in such a way as to be moved downwards by weight and not able to do so, you will know that this also cannot be cured: for death has come to many men. Therefore, no more work is done on curing him.
If nothing falls from that upon him, it's lighter.
And the curing that fell upon him from that is such as you would apply a soothing ointment and place over his paralyzed limb some warm, fragrant oil or with a touch of sweet food.
Place him over that thing on many occasions in a day until when the cold application is finished; then place something else upon it with plasters and moistening, and tightening around to him by means of a rope or bandage: and anoint gently so that he may be made quiet and tranquil. Do not let him stay over the part from which pain was caused until it is cured.
If something should fall from the diseased hand or limb that has already been separated from him, then you must take it off and give it to someone else. After making a large incision in two layers of skin Then apply the incision with a knife to remove the flesh
The remaining bones are removed after the incision by cutting them out with a knife, and then you should insert your left hand's finger into his anus, while simultaneously fracturing his right arm at whatever point may be possible and breaking it along its length, and then finally break the second one as well.
After this is done, apply pressure to stop the bleeding while simultaneously cleaning with what precedes it in order to prevent further loss of blood.
In the restoration of Anchae
The 11th head
Bones of Anchae break easily If the bones break, then a fracture is not made unless there are comminutions at their extremities; and they are severed along their length, and decline towards the interior; and there occurs pain by force which is inflicted on that which breaks; and it grows dim where it is fractured.
And the restoration to him is as follows: You extend your hand over him until the fracture has healed just like he himself was doing.
If the fracture is only at his extremities then you should make it equal to that which was taught to you from an agreement with him until the natural figure of his own body comes back into place.
If the fracture is along his length or has already declined towards its interior; then you should place a soft object above him until the restoration of that fracture occurs with precision. When you make it equal then you place above him a soft object; next to that you place the star from wood or hide and bind with a strong knot so that the motion of the fracture is prevented by the star and the movement of the constellation is not hindered.
And you make the equality with him in order to fix it; and you bind the soft object tightly so that he lies on his back or flat chested body.
"If the cold object touches him (the patient), then immediately cease applying it and begin his treatment in restoring its position as soon as possible.
"If a satchel accidentally touched his bones or came off by itself, remove it.
"On the restoration of broken leg bone with Adiutorium.
The Adiutorium is that which lies between the elbow and head of Spatulae.
"If it breaks then his restoration will be in one of two ways.
The first way is to apply a flat middle sized plank following this shape.
"And the two ligaments at both ends are tied.
Then the suspension is removed from its place and it rests on the bed. After that he places his broken arm above the plank and when it reaches its end, then hooks into a splint attached to its middle.
"Then he suspends him something heavy from above so that he may be stretched downwards. After that the physician simultaneously deals with both broken limbs until the fractures are healed in accordance with what is necessary.
Another way is for him to rest on his own bed and tie the broken arm to its head with a ligament. And he prepares two assistants to support the one above the break with his hands and the other below him so that each of them stretches towards their own side.
If it is desired to have a stronger stretch then he ties the broken limb under with a ligament and above with another one following this shape.
If the fracture is close to the elbow then it is necessary that a ligament be placed under the elbow and one below the break.
And similarly if a fracture is close to it, then there must be placed over that point a ligature and above the bone itself
After that, when the fracture is equal to it without difficulty or labor, only then will the fracture be in line with what needs to happen and a good application should occur. Then bind her if not she will escape unharmed.
If by chance it escaped from the cold ligature, then release the restraint until seven days have passed And place on top of it a thin thread soaked in vinegar and oil and make it into a ball with honey, until the ligature has quieted down; then bind her like this: and there is the mode by which you can bind her so that she may be placed over the fracture.
After that, place a new cloth on top of the ball. Afterwards, hold your arm up and put your open hand over your own shoulder.
And place the cloth and bind it over your arm so that it will be held in a stable position; if this doesn't hold you from something falling on it or anything else escaping out of the fractured bone, then nothing will escape above or below you.
If something else escapes up from the fractured bone above you after that, use a star like this; and it is so that you bind her over the fracture with one which is smaller and stronger than others. And place between all of them a width equal to your finger; the length of the stars should be according to the fracture with an additional three fingers on every part.
After that, bind the ligature as I said at the beginning of this chapter.
And so it should be that your ligation is placed over the place where the stricter fracture occurs. And as the length of the fracture increases, then the ligature will decrease in length.
If you have everything ready and the ligation is placed as I described it at that time when you will restore the member quickly, then do this: if by chance she escapes from her cold ligature, then release the restraint and let her go until seven days have passed.
"In considering a ligature for three days, ensure that it does not cause itching or swelling at the site where it is applied, nor shall it be removed from the body by force, due to the constriction of fluids. Therefore, let this be done as we have said so.
"If it is too close to the skin, then do not let anything come from it; for three days at most, unless otherwise specified.
"The nurse should lie down on his back and hold his hand above his belly; and place under the support there fill a full sack of equal weight.
"And consider at every hour of the night or day that it does not remove or soften the fractured member, nor ease the ligature. "Therefore, do this with your skill.
"Place food for the nurse according to our order so that his mouth is first fed and does not start choking; then he must eat as much as possible.
"Therefore it is customary for the nurse to bind his hands and feet with ligatures for forty days; then he must be given water so that he may drink, and a bath will be provided for him, and medicated with oils that are suitable.
"If a fracture has occurred in the body, bind it tightly; then remove the ligatures and fasten them until fifty days have passed, or two months.
"Of the restoration of the arm's broken bone.
"The arm is composed of two bones called the forefinger and thumb.
"One bone of it is small; that one follows the hand. "The other bone is large and is placed below a smaller part from below.
"Therefore the larger bone may be broken along with it by the small one, or the small one alone; and sometimes both are broken together.
"Therefore, when the larger bone is broken by the smaller one at its top, then the restoration and healing of it are easy.
When the lower eyelid is broken, it's a bad injury and healing for it is difficult
When both upper eyelids are broken simultaneously, that causes great damage.
If only the upper eyelid is broken, then it should be treated by a physician as soon as possible so that he can apply a patch to cover up the defect and make things equal.
If the upper eyelid is very broken (i.e., badly injured), then it should be treated by a physician as soon as possible so that he can apply a stronger patch to cover up the defect.
It is necessary for him to have someone else apply a mask over his face during treatment and to stretch it as much as possible above the eyebrows. The hand should be placed on the upper eyelid and all other fingers of both hands except for one that is broken or disabled should point downward to protect his face from injury while he lies flat down.
After applying the patch, stretch the arm above him using a bandage if necessary. And another person extends it from the other side in the same way.
After applying both patches and stretching them as far as possible, the physician should make things equal to him by reducing the difference between his two eyes according to what he can do.
If both upper eyelids are broken simultaneously, then you should reduce each of them separately where they were broken with your strength.
If you see a defect separately from it and mark it with ink so that it is not lost to you; then find something above him similar to what we described for the patches on both eyes, and apply it as far as possible over his face according to how much was done in the ones that were applied.
If a defect is caused by injury and I have already provided a separate bandage for it separately; then take care of him from that point on.
If the bandage on your face turns cold in the beginning of your treatment and you need a warm one; then use a warm, white patch with some oil or rose water mixed into it to keep his eyes moist, but don't let it drip off him as he sits there, until after applying both patches everything is equal. Then remove the warm bandage and apply another fresh one made from flour and egg whites that you can mix together in a similar way for each patch separately. "In place of stars, put another one that is placed above the cut in a manner wider than it and stronger.
"You know that the number of stars in the arm is six depending on their arrangement; either there should be one fracture in one pair of scissors or two fractures in two pairs of scissors.
"And place your own stricter over the fracture of strength more and stronger than it, as well as some amount with a stricter above the fracture or below; either place the stricter milder over his own fracture instead, remembering that this was mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
"And there are those wrapping around a fracture, with loose ones and wet; they should not be hard or sharp. "And it is the thread that is stretched from linen itself, in between subtle and coarse like we mentioned.
"And consider the member and ligament after a day. "If you want to apply something whose rectification is necessary, as itching that strikes a member; then there should be such as the member becomes heated with water until the itch stops and the member is not twisted, in order for him to stop, after that stricter.
"If the stricter has already been made milder and removed its mouth as well as similar ones; then rectify that thing with your own strength and consider it again.
"If food is prohibited from being given to the member due to excess in stricter, then there should be such that it becomes milder instead and you remove him for a certain number of days until he comes back; after that you should stretch it.
"If on the other hand none of those things listed struck you with weakness, then there is no need to do it unless after one day or around them.
"Then your hands should be held weakly against his neck. "And the neck of him is equal and he should protect himself with his strength from movements that are agitated. "And make him sleep on top of his back.
"It is known that this fracture will be restored within 30 days or 29 days; and possibly it will take more than one month. It depends on the dispositions of the complexion and virtues.
On how to restore a fracture with the hand
It is known that the fingers of the hand are rarely injured by a fracture of the thumb. And it did not happen to him unless there was excessive atrophy beforehand.
When the plants are fractured due to their own structure, it is necessary that he lie down flat; and his body should be placed symmetrically about him as though lying on his side. Then place one of his hands upon her extended arm.
Then he extends the broken bones and arranges them symmetrically; until they are held together by a good jointing.
When it is necessary to lay the plaster and bandage on him, unless there has been severe cold injury. Then place a star above according to its quantity; you have now covered it with linen cloth.
If the plants are fractured on all sides except below, then make a ball of linen cloth; and place the weakened one upon it in such a way that he holds onto it with his fractured plant. Then tie him up with long cloth after this manner.
And the star should be of lead; so that it is rubbed against his body until he is covered with a plant's skin; and tie her up as necessary.
If the plants are fractured on all sides except below, then place a star above; and another one of them from below upon the plant; have his hand open straight. Then tie it up as before with the hand, so that he extends between the fingers by a cord.
If one of his fingers is fractured, then it should be placed as necessary to the side. "After the application of a plant, if you are in love with it, apply to it an appropriate star, and then bind the wound with sinew so that it does not move.
"If the fracture is in any other digit except for the middle one, then bind it just as you would with the thumb and forefinger or ear lobe; at that point it will heal well, and if done correctly, all of them are bound together [in a similar manner] and it works better. "Or you can apply the star to the top with sinew as I mentioned for the thumb; this will also heal well if done correctly.
"And consider the restoration of yours and after its placement be careful with your hands in a gentle manner; hold it tightly when something happens to it from that moment on according to how its story is told.
"On the restoration of the fracture of the tibia.
"The shin bone is often broken and declared to the interior and exterior parts.
"And the restoration of it happens like this, where you bind sinew above the fracture and another one below it. "And with his leg stretched out in front of him.
"Then he extends all ligaments so that they are equally balanced on the part and this is when there is a fracture in the middle of the bones.
"If the fracture is close to the shin bone's root, then it will be sinew bound to the chin side so that the extension goes upwards and another one below the fracture.
"And in similar fashion if there is a fracture close to the knee, then it will be sinew bound near the knee so that the extension goes downwards.
"Then the physician equalizes both hands with their own sinew and until it is reduced to its proper shape according to the nature of the figure; it is then bound together through a good connection.
"Then you must apply plaster and bandage if there was no damage to that member. "If you injured it then remove the plaster and bandage after a few days so that the member is cold; thereafter return to your care.
The stricture is such and so A stricture should be removed by applying pressure to it from both sides until the bone is broken through its thickness. That means binding and stretching simultaneously on one side or two sides alternately while pulling out excess flesh Afterward, apply pressure to the heel from beneath it until both are released.
Insert a long thread between the thigh and calf up to the knee near the bottom, so that both extremities extend from the top of one half of the body parts to the top of another half. Afterward release pressure on the thigh and calf which is excess from beneath it.
Afterward place a stick over the thigh where the fracture was made above this, and then apply one stick on top of the heel.
After that, attach both thighs with strips to equalize pressure so as not to damage the bone from too much force.
Begin by applying pressure with great force at its middle where the fracture is made through three or four solutions. And if you make the strip longer at the place of the fracture so that it becomes smaller and softer and less tough.
Afterward, attach both extremities to each other as before between thighs and calf. Finally tie three sticks which are above with one another. Afterward push downward on both extremities to the foot so that you break it free from below. And tie together also the extremities of sticks with one another, in order not to remove the ligament at its place itself.
Afterward release pressure on this so that there is no damage to the member or limb from below, nor breakage of the nail, nor swelling, and similar things. If you do not succeed in removing it without harm And repeat the solution to that place until it is corrected as described many times before.
If you are unable to remove by bone what bites the bone then you must apply pressure from above until that is equal if it is possible for you. If not found, remove it and cure what precedes it until it is healed
And when the heel fracture occurs without adding stars to it, just as we said in support and arm.
However, in restoring such a fracture, there is no risk of paralysis or weakness. If it is restored only, without applying another heel to it, then he must walk with the one that belongs to him always.
And you know that the heel is stretched for 50 days or added and reduced according to its different kinds of complexion and disposition.
Of the restoration of the bone fracture in the knee.
You know that bone fractures are rare in the leg but often occur due to wear and tear.
If it occurs only to him as a fracture, then either an opening or a hole should be made on its parts. This is with the aid of a tool and without one. And it is raised entirely with the help of understanding.
The restoration of that is thus done so that the restored thing matches what was torn from its parts with your hands until it is complete and then connected according to what can be derived by calculation and ease, and making.
Then place a plaster of flour and egg white or milk on it; and put over that round stars if they are ready; and stretch it with strength above as much as to it.
Then consider all the dispositions that we mentioned in other fractures; such as cold irons and similar things; so that you should act with everything that can happen to him until he is healed.
Of the restoration of the bone fracture in the knee joint.
You know that the knee has two bones; one is large and named after it, and the other is fine and called phalanges.
"A bone was broken in two places and as a result of this injury the arm had to be restored; thus restoring an equal limb to its original state.
"If two bones are simultaneously broken, it becomes an emergency situation where all parts become converted (reassembled).
"If a bone is fractured slightly, only the anterior portion is restored.
"If a larger bone is broken, it will be inferior to that which was not hidden from you; and this operation must not obscure what is not hidden from you.
"Then administer the correct stretching, straightening, and stitching as needed according to it in equal measure.
"However, if the arm is broken and there are many injuries present (as in a battle), let extension be shorter than normal and healing take longer.
"And in the arm there is an operation performed on top of the arm; and it will be as if you have equally stretched the elbows, and completely perform all your operations. Take two cords from the pinewood which is put down under tables: and they are to become like the palm branches: and choose those with a larger size, not from small ones: and its length should be according to the length of the arm from the elbow downwards.
"Then bind the skin with two stitches on both sides according to the length of it. "Put one part of the arm onto another and alternate them from elbow to heel.
"Then tie two cords with three stitches, at each end, equally spaced. "As long as the arm is in its correct position and you continue to administer correctly, it will recover.
"Then administer the bandage from the wood according to the length of the arm and put it on the arm so that it supports him with movement.
"Moreover, if there is a fracture when it has not been caused by an external injury, you should do more of these operations as needed.
On the final day of each week and during every study session with him until he is exhausted from fasting or other external causes If something happens to him during that period of time (that he is studying with Albucasis), then let the following be done by his side: whatever needs doing until such a point as God wills it should be done.
Regarding the bones and joints of the foot and hand.
Only once during that period did he suffer a break in his ankle.
Regarding the bones of the foot and hand sometimes fractures occur and so do fractures of the fingers; but not all at once unless there is a fall in several positions.
If the foot's bone is broken then he lifts his leg to rest on the ground as an invalid does when he falls.
Then you lie down and place your foot on what has been made by the broken bones; later praise it, or call out for help; but until then keep still and be quiet where you are.
Then he lays his mat beneath him and places a thin plank beneath each foot having two flat surfaces.
Then tie it down with the other end after you have used it as a pillow and the others to whom it is appropriate.
After three days or four, then let the rope go loose. You make sure both the bones and joints are either broken, fractured, or dislocated when you put on your shoes and boots. The operation is done there as such.
If any of your fingers break then you restore them and do the same for each finger that I showed you how to repair hands. Then you place your finger's astillam according to the length of each finger and make it wider than that; then you put under the foot this plank as I showed you how to do and tie it down with the rope securely.
If the bone is broken into two or three pieces, then hold onto all of them with a single finger and use that to draw out the string on the palm: And when you have drawn it down through the heel of one foot, let its tail hang outside as you keep tension by holding both ends.
And when you have done this, do not neglect the things I told you about other broken bones and all that pertains to accidents we mentioned; for oppose every accident with what is necessary.
About the fracture of a woman's ulna bone, in her arm and man's arm.
When a woman's ulna breaks, hold it with a square grip. Then tilt her towards the side of her back further and hold onto the rear end.
The midwife will then apply a dressing to it until she has applied it evenly; and make the ulna into a sphere as smooth as if made of wax.
Then the woman lies down and stretches out her arm gently. And this will be done until it has become level in front of the ulna like a sphere; and its mouth is broken open.
Then place a small sponge over her back. When he is done kneading gently and has moved it onto her back, then knead lightly; reduce by the same amount you reduced it by initially; and then move it towards its first sponge again.
It will be done in seven days or as near to that time; for indeed he will restore the mouth of it back whole.
And if there is an obstruction, take the hollow sheath of the bone; and tighten it onto its canal with the help of the tendons; insert the whole sheath into the ulna of her. Then blow gently through it until the sheath is inflated inside the ulna; for indeed its mouth will be broken.
Then apply a dressing to it and hold off some days until we have spoken as to when it should be done; for indeed it will heal.
When the windpipe is broken either by man or woman then administer to restoration of it, and its balance will be found as we have described it in the bone of Anchae
Nor should a man's or woman's rectum be hidden when it is broken, which rarely happens and especially to those who have much study or use
And read my book thoroughly, for the fracture itself means to you that the right of restoration and the restraint on it are many. Therefore understand
When a man's windpipe is broken, take the bird feathers; insert them into him. Then place over it a solution from the cloth and it is done (i.e., insert into him), or otherwise as many days as there are until he becomes better if God willed it
For the restoration of bones when there's a fracture with a bone.
He who has a bone fracture with a blow to the head is especially treated as if it were the pelvis or assistant's hand, in order that he may be quickly relieved by phlebotomy; should you find conditions for phlebotomy (i.e., symptoms) according to our description.
If the blow caused blood to flow, then immediately apply phlebotomy so that the ulcers are removed; if not present at your hand, you must apply immediately as described.
Then begin to restore the fracture on that day itself and do not delay it, if no other has been hit by an arrow.
If a hot arrow has struck him then postpone the restoration of his fracture until after one day; until he no longer feels pain from the arrow. Do not approach to him on the third and fourth days, nor thereafter if you were to bring upon him bad accidents.
If the windpipe is broken high above the throat then it must be reduced to its place with you, and made equal with your hands in ease and extent.
If the extension is not prepared for him and his balance cannot be restored by your hands, then reduce it to this instrument It is an instrument made of iron, the length of which is equal to seven or eight digits; and its breadth is proportional to the amount of your nails For that reason it is necessary for a doctor to take three or four of them according to the amount he needs from this instrument after being broken in all respects
It is round; and its size is equal to that of a pear so as not to be doubled up when compressed during the time of an operation; but it has sharp edges such that there is room for the fingers on both sides of itself. It sits above with respect to its size, from just below it up to the bottom.
This is its shape.
It is suitable for this operation so that its sharp edge can be placed on the protruding finger or thumb; and with it alone pull back when he has emptied his mouth and reaches an equilibrium through some balance.
Therefore, align both fractured limbs in one direction.
If the limbs of his are broken and he cannot grasp it with a good grip because of that, then let him try to strike one of its extremities onto another extremity of his own, until the instrument has power over him.
If you cannot reduce them with him as we have described, then strike him with an instrument in any way that is possible for you.
After striking it to the bone from its sharpness and fine texture, release your own weapon.
Therefore, when you have reduced the mouth and he is relieved from severe pain, then know that his mouth cannot return to its original position.
Do this. Thus the restoration of your strength is completed as you have done with your hands.
"The finger must be washed with vinegar. And it is proper that there should be water used for washing. Nor apply any oil above the nail, lest it cause infection and decay of the flesh near it.
Then administer the pills to you at your hour for restoration of bones. Then wash off the finger nails so that you strike with a hammer through the holes into the proper position according to quantity of bones.
Be careful not to pull the nail apart when it breaks. Many surgeons of old did practice this method on the sick or dying, causing death by cutting through bones and flesh, eating away at the bone itself, i.e., the bone was eaten up. Your grip should be soft, flexible, different from those of broken bones' remnants.
If the nail is bad or large, and some very bad accidents happen on top of it, causing great pain near the spot; then you should not apply anything above that at all. Then provide solutions from hard nails in place so they can be struck with them.
When the day has passed one or two days and you see the nail starting to grow, then wash it off with vinegar above where you placed it on top of itself using vinegar. Then administer the medicines and ointments as we have always done for our wounds; such as the ointment Tetrapharmacion, and similar ones.
And it is fitting to you so that there are only bonds left. Consider the nail every day morning and evening until it settles down and heals.
It is fitting that you will prepare the body in this manner so that the discharge from above may go down to below with ease.
If many days pass and it does not heal or consolidate, then you know that the bones near there are already broken off. Certainly! The Latin phrase translated directly from medieval Arabic is "When you seek (for something), grasp it with your hands. Indeed, when removed are the attachments that bind them apart, remove her and then take her herself. And when those that are not detached remain attached to it and cause it pain by grasping the part of it, strike her with a blow so as to release her from all manner of binding constraints and obtain her in any way possible for you that thing.
When you strike the bound one with a blow or tear him apart, that is to say, either remove his head from among those who have been mentioned earlier and those who have been corrupted by putrefaction, or take some other way of escape; then it is necessary for you, having come to grips with each one as he has provided in his chapter on this matter.
And from that in which it is necessary for me to remain silent when the mouth breaks and blood flows forth from between the teeth like those of a horse or dog, and those who provide support, and similar large ones among them; so as not to give him excessive attraction, since often death comes by this way too. So I let go of him until he has putrefied.
Indeed, if you stay alive for more than 21 days or 30.
Then give him a cure when it seems to you, and otherwise release him.
About the care of fractures that occur through the use of ropes or cords.
Often death comes by this kind of treatment for fractures that occur through the use of ropes or cords. Especially when it is about stitches; and it becomes detached from that figure on a member. And sometimes it prevents the member's natural use of his own body.
Therefore consider at that point if the treatment is with a rope; administer medicines containing astringency like aloe and myrrh, and others, and bitter substances such as acacia.
In that case, either grasp some of those with a rope or all at once; and bind them with wine or vinegar or acid (wine acidity); then place them on the knotting above it, and tie them tight to the same good suture.
"Remove the stricture but not its cause from many days. "Then remove that thing and try another one until the blockage is removed.
"Cut through the same membrane from both ends with a sharp knife. "The membrane is the property that needs to be removed, which cannot be done without cutting into it from both sides.
"If the blockage is in a stone and tight and pressing urgently for removal, then find it from above his part, and cut off excess material to one side with some forceps until it can be removed; then treat that which was found, so that it may heal.
"After the membrane is restored and remains after this subtle, not according to its nature.
"When the fracture of the bones is restored and the membrane after it remains subtle and weak, then that thing cannot be done except for many causes. "Of one there is a solution and ligature of his; not according to what should be done but for many reasons: either the ligament's stricture or the excessive embrocation, until the nutrition run to it may be prohibited: or for too much abundance in non-his hour: or for lack of blood in the weak body, and its weakness.
"The care of it is to feed a sick one, to make his body strong until he may multiply blood within him. "And administer the medicine. "And insert joy and gladness upon it [the sick person].
"Then place a needle over the membrane so that many a picture can be drawn into him with much nourishment. "And diligently administer to him with hot water so that the nourishment may run through it and return to its own nature.
"About the care of fractured bones when they are restored in a tortuous manner.
"When the member already restored after healing of it tortuousness has come upon him or a blockage and its form becomes a member, yet the membrane cannot be prohibited from its operation naturally; therefore one does not need to give a sermon to him who exists so that he may break it with force.
"Many surgeons and restorers have come from foreign lands.
This operation is extremely difficult to perform, either causing death or great fear, so that it may be called fatal.
The recent collapse and paralysis require a treatment with hot water; boiled herbs should be used that are soothing, such as those of the elder tree, its root, mallow, and others like them. A plaster made with softened linen should also be applied; it is effective for relaxing muscles.
Or mallow roots can be used, or the lard of geese could also work; or you might use olive oil as well and apply them both.
Or fig leaves can be used too; or you might use pine resin mixed with columbine and other such things that help reduce swelling.
And sometimes paralysis can be treated by a combination of persistent friction, ancient, and gentle, which is like the treatment using human hands. The limbs should be gently moved to all parts of the body in every direction possible.
If the body is already rigid and has been overcome with strong measures, then a firm grip of stone should be obtained to remove him from there; continue the treatment with the use of hands and incisions must also be made for those that are left behind due to the removal of swelling or bones with sharp instruments. And it should be applied with ease in this way using eagerness and persistence.
Of the dislocation of the tongue.
Dislocation is the exit from the joint, where it was. Because of this, motion should be avoided and the member's appearance restored. It causes injuries to the sick and those who are already injured.
Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it is necessary then to take immediate action for its restoration; there should be no delay whatsoever.
"When time is delayed, separation occurs at that place, and sometimes with it reduction of dislocations.
Therefore, it should not be done to prevent delay so that extension does not occur during the time of his separation. Because many things cause spasms and pain accompanying them
Indeed when that happens, then it is necessary to order an intravenous infusion of fluids. Afterwards, until he has stopped moving away from the time of separation.
Afterwards it is moistened with a warm bath and oil. Afterwards, it can be reduced easily.
And everything else is cured along with that memory that has forgotten its place.
I have already ordered the bones of the dislocated, and also according to what preceded it in fracture, going from the upper part of his body all the way down to its lower part.
Treatment for the lower jaw bone dislocation.
The two jaws are rarely dislocated.
And the dislocation of both is done in a manner similar to one of them. Or they may be separated by movement from their places and softened slightly. Or they may be separated by a complete dislocation until they are softened to the point of the chest and saliva is released as well as she can no longer hold her mouth shut and her tongue slips out with words.
When their dislocation occurs suddenly they return to many positions by themselves with a few, but when it is complete then they are returned to the normal position on their own.
If the dislocation is complete and integral then it needs to be treated immediately either with immediate reduction or otherwise; and it is important that he holds on tight by having the head held by someone else so as not to miss out on any pain, whether it was due to one part or another of his jaw. Or if both jaws are dislocated then he holds onto two fingers each at once. The fingers are removed from his hand
And he will perform the surgery with great care and precision; freeing them to move the hands up and down at all times. The surgeon adjusts the amputated limbs and propels them until they reach their proper place (wherever that may be).
If the surgery is difficult for him, especially if both hands are affected simultaneously; in that case he administers a mixture of warm water and oil to facilitate the process, until they become easier to separate (from each other).
When they become equal and relaxed, and the arms weaken but do not soften (i.e., don't lose their firmness), then he places them over some kind of padding or cushion with a layer of wax on top; and oil is used for lubrication.
After that, they are tightened up again using soft bandages to regain some of the strength which had been lost.
He then sleeps on his back with a pillow between his head and two arms to prevent him from rolling over; not to chew or swallow anything (i.e., nothing goes down the throat). His mouth is bound gently in order that he may take only small sips of something, until the pain decreases and his limb is loosened up enough for the doctor to administer it with ease.
He does not eat anything by mouth during or after surgery and avoids breathing in any air; he is given something to take orally until his arm is loosened up enough for him to swallow normally (i.e., he's given food).
If the surgery is difficult for both arms at once and they become dislocated, then it may be necessary to apply heat frequently (in addition to oil) until they return to their proper place; there are also instances of severe fevers and heavy sweating that require additional measures or a change in diet towards purgatives.
When you know this has occurred, remember that it is a serious loss and many people who have suffered from such a thing may die within 10 days.
The reduction of dislocations in the elbow (forearm) or any part of the arm
The furcula cannot be dislocated from its own place because of its connection to the chest wall. However, it may sometimes be dislocated externally; and this is felt by the sense.
The restoration of its connection to the chest wall allows for relief on the back and extending of the arms. Therefore, when you join your palm with the right hand's strong grasp, she will be restored.
Then place it on her own clasp, and pull gently and firmly, until she is recovered.
Those that follow the elbow joint remain in their place, continuing with them without dislocation, unless rarely. Whenever it is dislocated on one day; then you must reduce and equalize it according to what we have said, and prepare yourself for it.
Then place her back into her own clasp, and pull gently but firmly until she is restored. And you must gently hold the injured one, with ease and tranquility, until he recovers his strength.
And with this same care, the extremity of the arm is reduced when it is separated even from its own place.
Of the reduction of dislocated arms.
It is known that the arm cannot be dislocated except in three ways.
The first way is to dislocate it so that its lower end is pulled upwards towards the tip of a finger. The second way is to dislocate it from near the chest wall. And perhaps it may be dislocated externally towards the top of the arm; but this is rare.
It cannot be dislocated backwards for fear of hitting the shoulder blade. And it cannot be dislocated forwards, due to the nerves.
It is most likely to dislocate and reduce downwards towards the tip of a finger; especially on those whose flesh is thin. For when you pull it back in quickly, and release it quickly.
In those whose flesh is abundant are they opposite one another; for their appetite grows with difficulty and their digestion with difficulty
And some men have died from blows or illness and the arm is torn off by its fellow in a heated state; so that it is dislocated because of this occurrence
Therefore you should seek out what happened to him until he has proven his story and then proceed with the treatment of that part of the body.
The dislocation is known when it is below and opposite to the wrist; distinguish between the dislocated arm and the healthy one. You will find a difference between the two and distinguish the one at the top of the arm from the other; and you should grasp it under the chin as if it were your own hand so that you cannot weaken its grip on your shoulder but cannot move it with all your movements.
Similarly if the dislocation is above or to the side; then you should find a visible touch and it cannot be hidden.
And this kind of dislocation reduces easily when there are no longer any restrictions on his movement or he is young.
The reduction of that part will be so you can let your hand go to the top. Then put your fingers under it and gently pull with strength towards the top; you will release the grip while extending to its own place and then let go of the hand. And afterwards he puts her back down below and straight away releases or moves her quickly
If he does not release as we have described and there are many days from the beginning when dislocation occurs; then it is necessary that a cold bath be given to him, so that he may recover through the use of embrocation which soothes and cools just as if the roots were cut off by frost or the leaves of the apple tree wither in water and so on.
Then he is placed back down onto his back; and put under it the sphere of wool that lies between restraint and freedom.
Then lay the surgeon upon his heel and lift up his head with a stroke of skill, then stretch out his arm to bring it down gently
And if you wish to bring his body down this way; he will be lifted up by an assistant on the opposite side so that it lies flat and its arm is brought downwards under control of the assistant, then lifted upwards towards himself from there until the limb is held suspended in the air And another assistant should hold onto the surgeon's hand so that it moves downward; he will be brought up again by an assistant on the opposite side. If the limb is weak and should not move; then it's necessary to hold onto him something else so that he can be lifted up again; as for the dislocation, this will happen quickly.
And can also be brought down by another method; as when a long stick with a round head is used so that it may rest on the ground like the hand of death which should not be heavy nor thin. Then lay him under after he is laid on a long stick; and then the limb will remain in place according to the length of the stick.
Then his hand is stretched out to its opposite side and the body from the other side with strength; as for the joining together it will be in place with a firm connection.
And if the reduction of his body is difficult through all that we have described; then use this care; and it will be as when you take a stick whose length is equal to the sum of two arms, its width is equal to four fingers, its thickness is equal to the sum of two fingers, its head rounded so that he may be lowered into the depths with control in this shape.
Then wrap a soft stick around his round head to prevent him from falling off.
Then lay him under the control of an assistant so that his hand may be stretched out or be held by a stick above it all the way down to its opposite side; and bind the stick above the other arm and the end of the hand with binding materials.
In order that the arm be placed on the steps and extended downwards towards the lower part of it so that the hand is moved to its lowest extent while leaving the other body suspended in support The stroke should immediately follow.
When the entrance is thus completed according to whatever manner possible, it must be done that one places an equal quantity of wool balls beneath [the patient's] ear. After the above, apply a pre-prepared plaster from flour mixed with water and egg white on all of his body as was done previously.
After all of that, tie the plaster bandage tightly and it should be able to hold up well. The arm will then be extended upwards towards its body as was previously mentioned and is left immobilized for seven days.
It must also be done that the limb of the sick person be placed so as to be in a comfortable position for its recovery since it is one of the means towards his health improvement.
After seven days or five, when he's placed on a stretcher and moved to somewhere suitable. If it then becomes firm but does not loosen up, at that time the sick person is cured.
If the stroke occurs due to excessive moisture that has happened [to him] or because of another reason, it must be done so that a cautery is administered with three holes as was mentioned before in the chapter on cautery.
If everything is done as mentioned above and the bandage loosens after seven days without being tightened up again, it must be cut off and thrown away because it cannot stay fixed to him and he will not be able to raise himself up with his arms stretched out or loosened up either: then you know that the hand injuries are made.
Or if a dislocation occurs on the breastbone or nipple, or towards the back, it can be done with the use of force and stretching with the hands until it is no longer there after which the remaining bandage must still be applied so that he may heal.
If the wound is treated after a certain period of time has passed and there is swelling and slowness in motion due to it, then that member becomes weak from lack of blood flow many times over, until finally the pain subsides and returns to its original nature
Of dislocations involving the Cubitus.
If the cubitus joint is dislocated with difficulty and also returns to its original position with difficulty as well; it itself may dislocate from all parts especially towards the anterior or posterior regions.
The dislocation of that joint is not hidden from you because it lies beneath the hand and under touch; according to whatever position it may be dislocated in. When you connect a dislocated Cubitus with a healthy one, that is clearly visible to you. The joint becomes swollen and cannot simultaneously use the arm; it can only move while separate from it.
It is necessary that you should make haste to restore the joint immediately before any cold comes upon it.
If a cold attacks that member, then the reduction of its dislocation becomes difficult; perhaps it will not recover at all, especially if it is towards the posterior region. The dislocation itself has many forms and its pain increases; sometimes they even fall with death accompanying them.
The restoration of that joint when it can be reduced is as follows: the hand is extended with two hands; the arm is fully expanded and the hands of a physician are above and below the joint, while itself it presses down on the dislocation by using both its hand or the palm's root until it returns to its place.
Alternatively the dislocation can be towards the anterior; then it returns in this way to double up its hand with its own hand until it strikes against the dislocated Cubitus's root.
If the dislocation cannot be reduced then administer an intensive and strong stretch; it is as follows that two ministers expand the arm while holding onto it from both sides so that it may not be moved away by stretching.
After having been moved away from its original position above one's hand due to a broken strap on the forearm or wrist being stretched too far
And when the surgeon joins up with oil on his own hand after having cleaned it himself with lubrication, making use of those that are applied to facilitate the joining process The joining motion is completed by a strong force.
After the reduction of it (the strap) is necessary to put it on top of its own wrapping, which provides support and allows for proper movement; then stretch and tighten with a bow tie in order to achieve the desired tightness. And the arm is lowered from the shoulder to the elbow after having been reduced by a certain amount of time.
The motion is completed. If the joining operation becomes solid at its own place, then remove it (the strap) immediately afterwards and dispose of it.
If you find that the joining is not done properly, then try again with another wrapping and remove (the strap) after a certain amount of time has passed, until tightening occurs. The motion is completed.
If the joining process causes the strap to be injured after reduction, then make adjustments according to motion; that is, administer wet dressing in bathing water and apply rubbing and compressing techniques until the wound is closed or if it is put over the joining point (the strap), as long as a small piece of flesh remains. And tie up again with another strap after day and night. And remove it afterwards from that place in a bath After cleaning up, apply rubbing and tightening techniques to the joining operation. Repeat this process with another strap after each one, until it is done properly.
If there's a knot above the joining point (the strap), wet it with butter, apply heat and tighten on top of that.
Do this repeatedly until it is done properly. The flesh is removed and returned to its own place
Of cuts
The hand is cut through multiple times, meaning the incision made between the arm and hand.
Reduction of this injury is easy. After cutting off all fingers However it is necessary that the wound should be bandaged before it has been dislocated and afterwards, to prevent a cold or hot object from coming into contact with the injury at the time when the dislocation occurs.
The reduction of the dislocation is to place a soft bandage over the hand and extend it across so as to support the arm; and then put on the doctor's palm that incision which was made, so that he may move it gently downwards until it becomes detached.
However it is necessary to consider if the palm has already retracted towards the other hand; in that case the arm supports its back over the bandage at extension and reduction, so that the hand may be placed on top of the incision with its inside part against the bandage, meaning that only the inner part of the hand should be put on it.
If so he does quickly well; and if not, then tie her with a bandage and let him go loose, that is do nothing further.
If it does not tolerate the reduction of its dislocation after a day has passed away, then the incision remains as per the tortuousity of its own; and nothing else is harmful except for what softens the hand, nor can anything be tied on; you see that the nails have been broken off or torn.
It should not happen by chance but should be bandaged gently for its benefit. And perhaps nothing else may occur.
As it does not do with the hand of Almahassem then put a bandage over him so that we might bind or tie it in place. After five days, it is bandaged and then taken off; after that it is soaked in a solution, then wrapped again and used for surgery
If the movement of his hand is restrained and held in that way for some time, it will become soft; he then gently washes it with warm water, rubs it vigorously a few times to soften it, until it becomes soft
Of the treatment for dislocated fingers
When the fingers are dislocated in such a way that they touch all parts of the body or rest on the palm of the hand, or between them and you want to release it: first extend your finger(s), then press down on their dislocation with both hands until it is released.
After that, support the head of the finger and suspend it towards where it was dislocated, then let it rest for two days.
After that, hold him tightly while straightening his fingers, until they are equal to their former state on the day after.
When you have finished with him for the night, bind his hand according to its own way of binding and do not relax him during that day; then exercise him with movement, but bind him at night.
Do this on several days until it is bandaged.
And similarly do with him if the fingers are dislocated between them; bind him to his own way of binding and perform your first surgery on him until he is healed.
Do this when they are dislocated in any other part as well.
Of the treatment for dislocated shoulders.
If the shoulders are dislocated or completely torn apart by falling forward with both arms at once; do not try to treat it as there is no cure and death comes quickly from weakness.
Its sign is that the release of its strength without resistance cannot be held by it; and certain members of his body may lose parts or become weakened in this way from him as well
"Many things are moved when many things move away from each other towards four parts.
And if something is moved to the rear part [of the body], it is called gibbositas
Therefore its cure must be sought out if you remember that gibbositas happened to the youth; then there is no care for it, nor any healing from all diseases.
But if this happened through case or impact, the ancients said many modes of treatment in a long and difficult speech. Which one did not return with great success.
I myself already mentioned that from it to the one whose fault was partly mine and who was nearby my intent: with my exposition which I showed him, and I formed his tool in a different way from how they presented this thing to me
Therefore, that which was moved away from the preceding part of [the body] is not a result of its own nature nor healing by it.
Similarly, if this happens towards two sides as well.
And it is not cured from them except that which happened in the back part as I mentioned; and there was one to extend [the body] upwards towards its own face over a level platform nearly up against the wall: and to expand under him moist bandage so he may not be harmed by his chest.
Afterwards, a fixed straight piece of wood is put into the ground at its lower end on the earth; another one around the head and another one around the feet near to the other side [of the foot]; he holds it tight so that it may not be loose in the hole. And the second holds the second piece.
Afterwards lift up the head of him with his hands loose but holding it tight; and extend its end to bind that piece at his head firmly and bind him on that part [of the body].
Afterwards tie another piece over his ankles; above his knees too; above his thighs as well; and at his calves [of the legs]. "And remove all ligaments and tie them on another bone which is below his feet.
"Then he extended all the ministers to the bone of the ligaments and did not remove two bones from their places where they were fixed; however, these are not set firmly as we said.
"And the doctor put his hands on the spine with strength until he was exhausted; or placed it on a table. "Then he fixed his feet on top of the table until he was exhausted.
"If not by this treatment, then take a tablet whose length is about three times his arms. "And so put the place where we said it should go near to being weakened and insert the extreme of the tablet into him. "Then he placed a middle tablet on the spine. "And the doctor placed his feet near to another extreme. "Then he tightened well and until it was bent by the spine, and until it was exhausted at its place.
"Afterwards if you are able to operate using a turn-around and what he had used with your hand; it is that way the figure stands on the ground at his head near to two bones of the feet whose length is one arm, and at his feet near to two bones from the feet whose length is also one arm.
"The length that is between all the bones of one hand; and it has been done everywhere a hole through which the arrow runs; and every bone will be firmly set down on the ground much.
"And an oblong bone is inserted; it was a hole through which he pulled the ligament from two bones of two rods.
"And at his extreme there is a hole through which the bone will be fixed whose length is between his hand and what was pulled; and similarly with two other rods.
"Then you tighten the ligaments that were torn from his chest using a turn-around which is below his head; and the ligaments that were torn from his limbs with another turn-around which is below his feet.
The thumb is held by every surgeon who performs the operation on his hand with a bandage soaked in medicine until the wound has healed completely.
This is the form of a tourniquet which follows this pattern.
After applying the plaster bandage soaked in excitant oil to the wound and it has been applied evenly, then it is time to apply the tourniquet. The tourniquet must be tightened. After the plaster bandage has been placed and stretched over a surface of three fingers' width or around them, it is necessary to tighten the tourniquet. The length of it should be such that its thickness does not exceed the space between the fingers and is even on the healthy side of the thumb.
It must then be tightened with a bandage which we have mentioned before, until complete healing occurs. And it is fed with a subtle nourishment until it heals completely.
If anything of importance has happened at the place where healing is occurring and it does not heal completely in its final stages: then it is necessary to administer the medicines that alleviate pain until the bandage has been used for a long time, as mentioned before. And now the bandage soaked in excitant oil must be applied there again.
If anything of importance happens at the place where the thumb is being removed and it comes out with a dislocation, then there must be an application of that which has already emerged to restore its function. This is because if he were given this medicine it could potentially cause his death instead of healing him as intended.
Of the dislocation of Ancha
It is known that the injury to Ancha and the elbow joint did not happen unless it was a dislocation only; neither of them happened as if caused by something else in the other joints' remote places or with violence.
The injury to Ancha is done according to four parts. This means that the dislocation of Ancha can happen towards both the front and back of her body.
The most of it is dislocated towards the internal parts; very little moves towards the front side, and even less towards the rear side.
The care of dislocation is towards the internal parts; because when you join a sick limb with a healthy one, it takes longer and there is more upward movement than in the healthy part, but he cannot make both legs stand upright at once on an uneven ground: and there is a track following behind that has been heated up to be able to remove the head from its place.
The sign of his dislocation towards the external parts is: it was an injury contrary to these accidents.
The sign of his dislocation towards the front side is: it spreads out the healthy limb according to its complement; however, he cannot extend himself without pain in the knee and when walking forward cannot reach the front as well as before, the urine will be retained and the foot behind him will move upwards on the heel.
The sign of his dislocation towards the rear side is: he cannot extend himself and cannot reach forward before extending both legs; there is a shorter leg and the foot behind him will be more bent upwards, and the head behind will remain in its place.
The reduction of this dislocation is that you should consider that if it is a false dislocation which has already become old and has been accompanied by the same person in the past. Then if you administer its reduction, it remains according to her own disposition; at that time there is no care for all of them. Therefore, it must not be that he suffers a penalty.
In the person whose dislocation is being discussed now and there are four signs of dislocation in him at that time it should be followed as follows to join them together and extend her towards both the internal parts and external parts, and move her with your right and left; for perhaps she will rise up again.
If not in this way, then you should prepare a strong remedy and extend her the foot from its lower part; or with your hands, or with a bandage that is tied over her foot above the knee; another one extends his hand on top of it so that he can put his hands underneath hers. "With a ligature tightened above the hip joint and holding with the other ligament.
"This is to stretch either towards the anterior aspect of the thigh or to the posterior aspect of the back.
"Or it may be stretched uniformly in all directions until he falls with his body to the ground and remains hanging there.
"The nature of this stretch is that of a common stretching for four limbs.
"If the dislocation occurs as described, it is good; but if not, then it is necessary to do everything that I have said about self-curating.
"If the dislocation occurs towards the interior of him when he is in reduction, it should be as if the patient lies on his healthy back. "Thereupon ligatures are placed over the hip joint, in the place between the head of the thigh and the knee. "Then stretches it to the upper aspect of the leg towards the higher part of his body, then to the posterior aspect of the back.
"Thereupon takes hold of his stronger arms and makes a large stretch over the injured hip joint, then extends it to the external direction. "I remain in my place.
"The nature of this stretch is easier than the others that I have described when we are curing a member.
"If you fail or can not go on with this stretch when I am curing, then it is necessary to do as follows. Ligate the two lower limbs with one strong ligature and another tight with a ligament over both calves, over both knees, over both thighs: And let each of them be stretched towards his opposite leg four times.
"Thereupon the patient is suspended over a beam that lies within our home, and it remains stretched towards each of them as much as two arms.
"Afterwards command the strong man to support his head and to suspend him with a second ligature; then pull towards each of them and help together by force, for the ligament was attached to its place when it is held by you.
In its own version when dislocation occurs to external, it should be necessary that the patient lies on a platform as we illustrated in having a hump or protuberance. And tighten ligaments over his thighs and over his breastbone
Then they are placed two wooden planks, one under the legs of him, and another under the top of his head. Then the additional wooden plank is placed at the middle of his legs and firmly fixed so that it doesn't allow him to slip away when wet clothes are put over; also a wooden plank should be placed between his thighs to prevent his legs from being pulled downwards by extending movement.
Then the assistant moves all the way down to the patient's side and the physician holds back the reduction with their hand.
If so, it is a good thing.
And if not, put the same board over his chest and below as we illustrated for the hump or protuberance equally. However, it is necessary that the patient lies on a healthy thigh length wise.
When the dislocation is to anterior, then it should be necessary that the patient's leg is extended by his own effort or else he will assist with his right hand and place a palm on the knee of him. Then support him with one other hand while with another he should extend his leg to the lower part of his knee.
If the dislocation is to posterior, then it should not be necessary that he extends himself downwards and lies on the ground; however, if he dislocates his shoulder towards the outside, we must place him as before over two planks so that both arms can reach out to support and the extensive ligaments are stretched according to what we said previously.
It is necessary that a compression should also be applied at the place from where he will receive the joint and after the reduction has been completed according to what is necessary.
"Thou art not hidden from the sign of his redemption; and if you stretch out two limbs to him, he will seize with both hands his breast (the crus) and extend it without any excuse: then thou knowest that now has been given a limb as is necessary; then you bind up the two thighs together, lay on an implement, and tighten with rope, namely, stretched so that there may not be moved by any part of him towards one side or the other. And he will remain quiet in three days or four.
"Then you loosen the ligature and implement, and compare the legs together; then if you see that they are equal in their standing, then you know that the dislocation has already been fixed; so therefore the limb is now straight for walking.
"And if you see any softening of the leg; then remove it and the implement, and tighten it according to your first ligature; and give it also quiet in three days.
"Then you loosen that leg, make him rest a little while for walking over some time, until he is well-adjusted.
"Of dislocations of the thigh.
The thigh can be dislocated in three ways. It can be dislocated externally, internally, and downwardly or downwards towards the back.
"And it is not dislocated forwards.
The sign of its dislocation is that the limb applies its leg towards itself in pain and discomfort. "If it does not stay together with the thigh; then you know that the thigh has been dislocated.
"The restoration of all the modes for its dislocation is that you make him rest the straight limb; so that now it can extend if it is able to the leg on top, and keep your back against his face; and put the foot between your feet.
"Then you hold it with your hands to the thigh on top of him; and place them straight over his thigh between your fingers. In order to apply with your hand two lateral surfaces of his knee joint when he is in a state of strength And another assistant extends the foot towards him until it reaches its place (i.e., his knee).
The sign of relief was put on so that he could grasp the thigh while lying down without exertion.
He then grasps him and holds tight to the thigh. And at that time (i.e., when he has grasped it) he will hold onto it with both hands for 2 or 4 days depending on how long his hand stays attached to the thigh. And then he releases him.
Unless he is too weak and cannot walk around for a certain number of days until he recovers.
If however you refuse to release him and insist on trying to move his body again with the aid of strong assistants who support his ankles while they are being described (presumably as part of a medical treatment) until he recovers.
The cure for dislocated ankles
The ankle can be pulled away from its normal position or dislocated by force at right angles to itself. The dislocation is either towards the inside of his leg or towards the outside
The sign of dislocation was put on so that you can inflate and position his ankle so it is dislocated in such a way as to heal faster.
The cure for dislocation is easy and quick: just have assistants hold his ankle while it is being pulled towards the right position with ease using their hands so that once it has been moved to its place he will be held on until he recovers.
When dislocation occurs towards the inside of his leg however you must ensure that he is not made to lie on an uneven surface and assistants hold him while being held gently by strong men from behind who support his feet so they are at right angles with each other in the middle of it until he recovers.
You should then hold his right foot towards its top part and with your left hand from below the lower part of his feet until you reach each ankle separately.
And then pull it towards you with your right hand. "On both sides.
"Extend on the left and pull towards the belly with the right foot, without effort (or: without strain).
"Do it twice as we did before.
"Pull the belly towards the heel on the third time, and you will draw the rope.
"If so returned on the first time (that is, if you pulled him towards the heel in one motion), or twice as we did before and both feet equally equaled, then this was a good thing; but if not, do it again over his body: for he himself has done it.
"If you are not allowed to pull him with him as we did before, then let go of the rope while standing on your back and place a firm peg in the ground at one side so that he falls between his legs: and you will have pulled the sheet over it.
"Then receive the foot of him as his minister; after that, let your other minister extend it, either with your hands or with a rope tied above the leg. "Then let every minister stretch against his own comparison (that is, the ministers of both feet should extend equally), so that the peg may remain between two legs holding him up without drawing his body towards the lower side.
"Then let your other minister hold tight to the good foot towards the lower side. "The dislocation was accompanied by fatigue.
"Then declare the health of his restoration to you; and fasten tightly with a peg and a rope, and tie it firmly with a strong cord, and bind the leg with its band towards the heel.
"And you must make sure that when you pull or push from the posterior part of his heels above, they do not carry the cord over them, and let go of them.
"Then release him in two days, or three. "If the band becomes slack, tie him up again; and then release him on the third or fourth day, or after forty days. "If a man is able to walk before reaching that space without fear of dislocation occurring and dissolution following from it, security does not exist; otherwise he must prepare for its destruction.
"If you deliver him a cold cup of water at that moment (i.e., during the process), then it is necessary for you to administer his medication there, which precedes our narration elsewhere due to care and anointing; otherwise remove the result.
"Regarding the dislocation of a finger or hand, cure [the cause].
"It is necessary for it to be made equal when dislocated with slight extension and without effort; however, that thing itself isn't difficult at all, but easy.
"If the dislocation occurs due to some knots of the forearm's finger(s), then it is necessary for him to support his foot on the ground or table in such a way that it is as if walking; and he remains like this until healed.
"Afterwards you remain there [i.e., supporting his foot on the ground or table], and place your hand upon that from which he is coming. "And strike it with his foot along with vigor until it is redressed; and you should then strike him again to make him equal once more, and he will not appear to be superior.
"And place your foot beneath his feet as if it can support the entire foot; there are two hands for that purpose. "And then stretch him with a decent cord over three days. "Then remove him and make him rest from all movement for several days until he is stretched and securely reduced.
"Regarding the species of dislocations along with fractures.
"When something happens to him and you cure his illness and restoration of it, many times there is death; and for that reason it is not necessary that he should become superior in the care of him as a result, which I have said earlier unless someone who is prudent with long use in the art of medicine, compassionate, pious, slow, without fearlessness, or extravagant. And to be used by doctors who administer cold bandages. "Unless you wish for good health and salvation from damnation with gentleness and humility, there is no hope. Therefore, reduce its severity at the very beginning of things before it can cause coldness to others.
If therefore you reduce the limb according to our wishes, then immediately administer a treatment that will make it healthy again; and care for wounds with its assistance in drying out through ointments.
If the dislocation occurs with a fracture and they are separated by separating pains, then you must cure their wounds as we instructed earlier through it what preceded them from its simple remedies.
And so, according to your virtue and trust me when you come into the house of fear; according to what I have taught you before.
That is better for you with your Creator and remaining to glory, and more food for your body among those of yours at that time.
