After I have completed this book for you, O sons, which is the last of medical knowledge with its completion, and I have come to an end in it, from its expositions and its pronouncements, it seemed to me that I should complete it for you with this Tractate which is a part of surgery, that is, surgery by hand.
Because surgery with the hand is in our region and time entirely absent; until perhaps the knowledge of it perished, and its trace was cut off: and there remained from it, except for small descriptions in the books of the ancients, which hands have altered: and error and hesitation happened to them, until their intentions were closed and the strength of theirs was elongated. It seemed to me, that I should revive it with the arrangement of this Treatise on its path according to the way of exposition, and declaration, and abbreviation; and that I should come with the forms of instruments of cautery, and the rest of the instruments of work: when it is made from the addition of declaration, and from the preparation of it that is necessary.
The cause for which a good artificer of this craft is not found with his own hand in our time is: because the art of medicine is long, and it is necessary for its author to be exercised before that in the science of anatomy, as Galen narrated, until he knows the connections of the limbs, and their forms, and their joining together, and separation, and has knowledge of bones, and nerves, and ligaments, and their number, and their egress, and the pulsating veins, and the quiet ones, and the places of their exit.
And because of this Hippocrates said that a name with a name is much, and with work little, and especially in the art of the hand.
Now indeed we have spoken of that at the beginning of this book.
Because he who is not learned about what we have said of anatomy, does not evacuate himself from error, into which men are killed: as I have seen many of those who make themselves from this science, and boast about it without knowledge, and without experience.
That is because I saw a foolish physician who cut an abscess on the neck of a woman and he injured some arteries in her neck; therefore blood flowed from the woman until she died in his hands.
And I saw another physician who presumed to remove a stone from a man who was advanced in years, and the stone was large.
Therefore it came to him, and he extracted it with the fragment of the bladder.
Therefore, the man died on the third day.
And I myself had been called upon to remove it: and I saw from the size of the stone, and the disposition of the sick man, that he would die.
And I saw another physician who was receiving a stipend from a certain Duke of our land because of medicine: and it happened to an eunuch, black in color, who was with him, a fracture in his leg near the heel: and the physician hastened with his ignorance, and bound the fracture over the wound with splints, and straps tightly fastened, and did not allow the wound's discharge.
Then he completed it according to his desires.
Afterward he dismissed him after several days, and commanded him not to untie the ligature. And he stood thus until the abscess came on his leg, and his foot, and it arrived at destruction.
Therefore I was called to him; and I hastened to loosen the ligament; and there followed tranquility, and he was freed from his pains.
However, the corruption was already confirmed in the limb: and I could not restrain it.
Therefore, when corruption has ceased to spread in the limb until it has perished.
And I saw another physician who lanced a cancerous abscess; and it became ulcerated after days, until the malignancy of it had increased with its master.
That is, because when cancer is pure from melancholic humor, then it is not necessary to come to it with iron at all, unless it is in a limb that can tolerate it, so that the whole of it may be cut off.
And therefore, sons, it is necessary for you to know that an operation with the hand is divided into two divisions: namely, the operation which is associated with health; and the operation, with which there is peril in many dispositions. And I have now roused myself in every place of this book, where an operation comes, that there is fear and terror.
Therefore it is necessary for you, that you beware of it and halve it: so that the foolish may not find a way to speak and dishonor it.
Therefore, receive measurement with care and protection, and your patients with ease and firmness, and use the better way leading by the grace of God to health and a praiseworthy succession: and dismiss terrible illnesses difficult to heal: and take your souls away from that which makes you fear, so that hesitation may enter upon you in your faith and your advantage. It is indeed more remaining for your glory, and more sublime in this world, and finally to your quantities.
For Galen indeed said in some of his admonitions. Do not treat a bad illness: lest you be called a bad doctor.
First chapter.
On incision and piercing, bloodletting and ventosing, and wounds; and the extraction of arrows, and things similar to these; and the whole chapter, arranged according to the forms of instruments.
Chapter third.
On the restoration, and dislocation, and cure of torsion, and similar things of this sort: a chapter, arranged from the head to the feet, and with forms of instruments.
Glory to God alone.
Book of Surgery of Albucasis.
Part I.
On the benefit and harm of cautery: and what temperaments it is suitable for, and at what time; and whether with iron or gold.
Book I.
But before we remember the operation with him, it is necessary that I say the quality of his benefits and harms, and in what complexion they are shown.
Therefore I say that the discussion on the quality of cautery and its use is a lengthy and subtle discourse, a science and a hidden secret.
Even many wise men spoke on it, and disagreed about it: and to me indeed, a little from their speeches suffices, fearing the prolongation.
Therefore I say that cautery applies universally to every constitution, which is with matter and without matter, except for two constitutions, which are hot constitution without matter, and dry constitution without matter.
In a heated and moist complexion they disagreed with the matter.
Some say that a cautery is helpful in this.
And others said the opposite of this, namely that cauterization is not suitable in illness which is from heat and dryness; because nature is heat, and it is unsuitable that healing should come from a hot and dry ailment with heat and dryness.
And he who says the opposite of this said: that cauterization provides benefit in every ailment hot and dry that happens to the bodies of men; because when you compare the body of man, and its humidities, to the complexion of fire, you find the body of man cold.
And I indeed say through his speech: because from experiment already he has detected it to me many times.
Nevertheless it is not proper that he should come to this, unless he has already been proven and exercised in the chapter on Cauterization in the final exercise, and has known the diversity of human complexions, and the disposition of diseases in themselves, and their causes, and their accidents, and the space of time for them.
There is no fear of these remaining complexities, especially in cold and wet ailments. For indeed all physicians have come together on these things, and they did not disagree in treatment with cautery on them.
And know, sons, that from the secret of healing by cautery with fire, and the goodness of it over cautery with burning medicine is this: because fire is simple, whose action does not reach, unless to the member which is cauterized; and it does not harm another member joined with it, unless with slight harm.
The action of burning medicine, however, comes to that which lengthens from the limbs; and perhaps it causes to happen in the limb a pain difficult to heal, and perhaps it kills.
Fire, however, because of its subtlety and goodness of its substance, does not do that unless it is in excess.
Now it has become known to us through experience, because of the length of service and study with the art, and standing above the truth of things: and for this I excuse myself from the length of the speech.
And know, sons, that they disagree about the time in which it is proper to perform cauterization, and they place a better time for truth.
And I say that cautery is suitable at all times, because the harm that happens because of time is submerged in the benefit which is drawn with cautery.
And especially if the cautery is because of pains from necessary pains, strong, swift ones that do not tolerate slowness; therefore it is feared from them that an evil might happen which is greater than the small harm passing in time.
And do not let it come to mind, O sons of mine, that which is thought by the vulgar and foolish physicians, namely that in those illnesses which are cured by cauterization, there is never a return; and they place this as a consequence, but it is not so as they think: because cauterization is, except for medicine, which alters complexion, and dries up humors which are causes, therefore pains occur.
However, cauterization is superfluous over medicine because of the speed of its health, and the virtue of its operation, and the strength of its dominion: and it is possible that illness may return at some time, according to the constitution of the sick person, and the location of his illness, and the virtue of it: and what is prepared in his body from the aggregation of superfluities therein: and what comes to him in its acquisition from foods, and similar causes, unless an illness occurs, in which cauterization is administered. A slight pain in a limb with few redundancies and humors, like toothache, because of the pain, and similar to it, for it is possible that the pain does not return there.
But this is done in a few.
But again the common saying that cautery is the last resort of medicine is a correct statement: not to that which they intend in it; because they believe that it is not a cure that can compare with medicine, nor with anything else after the occasion of cautery.
The matter is contrary to this, and the intent, that cautery is the last of medicine, is not, except when we administer ways of healing in some illness, and those medicines do not help: then at the end of the matter we administer cautery, and it helps: therefore it falls, that cautery is the last of medicine, not according to the intention which the common people and many foolish doctors understand.
The ancients said that a cautery with gold is better than a cautery with iron, and they did not say this except because of the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance, and they said that it does not make pus the place of cautery. But it is not absolutely true: because I have already tested it and found that it does not do that in some bodies without others.
And a cauterizing iron with itself is good, and better than with iron, as they said.
However when you heat the cauterizing iron in the fire from gold, it is not clear to you when it is heated according to the quantity that you wish, because of the redness of the gold; and when it hastens toward itself cold, and if you add on top of it ignition, it melts in the fire, and turns into plates.
Therefore the artificer falls from that into the work: and because of this, cautery with iron among us is more quickly and closely done, from straightness to the operation.
And I have indeed arranged this Chapter on cautery, according to chapters; and I have arranged them from the head to the feet; so that they may relieve whoever seeks it. On the manner of cauterizing the head at the coronal suture.
Chapter II.
This application of cauterization pertains to the dominion of humidity and coldness over the brain: which two are causes of headaches, and the multitude of flow of humors from the head to the parts of the eyes and ears, and the multitude of sleep, and toothache, and sore throat: and universally all illness, which happens from cold, such as paralysis, and headaches, epilepsy, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
The method of cauterization is that you instruct the sick person to evacuate first with a cleansing liquid medicine, three nights or four, according to what is required by the strength of the sick person, and his age, and his custom.
Then command him to make a cut on his head with a knife.
Then make him sit between your hands, in a square manner, so that he has placed his hands over his chest.
Then place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his eyes. Wherever therefore your middle finger shall reach, mark that place with a markless one. Then cautery with oil fire: whose form is this. Then place it on the marked spot with an untied bandage, a descent, by which your hand will gradually be constricted, and you turn it.
Then lift your hand quickly, and look at the place.
If you see already exposed from bone the quantity of alkiel, or the quantity of zeuherbi, then lift your hand.
And if not, repeat your hand with the iron itself, or with another one from it if it cools down: until the bones which I told you about appear.
Then take some salt and dissolve it in water, and drink it on the wound, and place it over the spot: and let it stand for three days.
Then place on top of it a cloth soaked in butter and let it lie over the place until the fire's scald is destroyed. Then treat it with ointment of four drugs, until it is healed.
They have said that the more a wound remains open, the more it emits pus, wherefore it is better and more helpful.
And some of them said that the skin should be cauterized up to the bone, and that the cautery should be held until something of the thickness of the bone is burned.
Then it is scraped after that which has been burned from the bone, then it is cared for.
And others say that it is necessary that with a cauterizer one should arrive at the last part, so that it imprints in the bone a form, so that the bone falls, which is done like the shape of a kirate: or an instrument that women put in the infusion of small alphabet letters: and they think that vapors of the head are exhaled from this place, and that the wound is dismissed open for a long time.
Then it is treated until it solidifies.
To me, these two kinds of cautery do not seem to be anything but in some men according to the way of fear.
And to release him, in my judgment it is better for his health.
The head is weakened by the disruption of its natural continuity, as we have testified in other members, and especially when the head of a weak patient is naturally feeble. And indeed, the first kind of cautery is more safe and better for me, and I use it; therefore operate with it in safety.
On the manner of cauterizing the head in pain throughout the head.
Chapter III.
When a chronic pain occurs throughout the whole head: and it is prolonged in the sick person, and he uses  hyenas, and cauteries, and head purges, and oils, and emplastrum.
And especially if it has already been cauterized with one cautery, which we have narrated, and nothing benefits from those: then consider.
If the head of the sick person is of strong constitution and not weak, and finds extreme cold, then cauterize with a different cautery beneath it a little.
Then cauterize it over every horn of its head with a cautery, so that it does not pass through the skin, and discover from the bone the quantity which we have narrated.
And cauterize him with a cautery one on the back of his head, in the place which is called uas: and it is the place where a ventouse is placed: and raise your bandage there, and do not uncover the bone.
He found that the patient was suffering because of this violent pain, and different from the pain of other cauterizations on all parts of the head.
And I shall say this concerning the cautery: and it ought to be a cautery which is used for cauterizing the horns of the head, and the nape of the neck with a finer cautery than that which is used for cauterizing the middle of the head.
And this is its form.
On the manner of cauterizing in headache, both with medicine applied hot, and with iron.
Chapter IV.
When pain and swelling occur in the head region, or the pain extends to the eye, and the head is cleansed with purifying medicines, and the rest of the treatment is administered, as I have said in the divisions of ailments, and this does not suffice entirely: then cauterization in it is according to two modes: either cauterization with a sharp, burning medicine: or with iron. A cautery with a sharp and burning medicine is, to take one tooth from another, and to scrape it, and to cut off its extremities on both sides.
Then cut the place of pain with a broad surgical knife until a place under the skin is made where the tooth can be grasped.
Therefore introduce it into the skin itself until it is hidden; then tighten above it with a small ligature of decent constriction, and let it remain for fifteen hours, then release it, and remove the other one, and leave the wound for two or three days: afterward put upon it a cottum submerged in butter, until the place makes pus; then care for it with ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish to do it with certain medicines that burn, which I have written about in the twelfth treatise, On Burning Medicines.
The cauterization thereof with iron, is according to this mode.
Burning cautery, whose form is this.
And it is called Clauis: because the shape of its head is like the shape of a key, in which there is some curvature, and in the middle of it there is a small prominence.
Then place it over the location and hold your hand: and you revolve the iron gradually with speed: and let the quantity which is burned be as thick as half its thickness.
And lift your hand so that the artery which is below does not burn, and let there be a flow of blood.
Then drink a cloth in salt water and put it on the place, and let it be for three days; then put the cloth with butter: afterwards care with ointment until it heals. And if you wish, cauterize this headache with the secondary edge of the scalpel Cauterii.
And beware of cutting an artery in this headache, not properly an old one.
On the method of cauterization in ancient headache.
Chapter V.
When you are treating a headache, with that which we have said from the previous treatment, and that which we have said in the divisions of diseases, and it does not help the treatment: and you see from the illness, that what we said from the first cauterization with medicine, or with cauterization with fire, is insufficient, then it is necessary to use the Cauterium cultellare fire until it whitens after marking signs over the place of pain with a line, whose length is half a finger, or about such: and lay your hand vice one, and squeeze it until you cut the artery, and reach up to the bone. Nevertheless, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuation of the jawbone, which moves when chewing, lest it be burned on one side or the nerve that moves it, so that a spasm occurs.
Let there be care and caution of the flow of blood from the artery which is cut.
For in the cutting of it there is fear, and especially to him who does not know what he is doing, and is neither studious nor experienced: and he puts aside the operation with this first of all.
And I shall come with a remembrance of the regimen of blood flow accidents from an artery according to my manner, and in the place of this book.
If you see from illness that this cauterization is not sufficient for him, and you see the body of the sick person enduring the cauterization in the middle of the head, as we have narrated, take care of the wound until it heals.
And if you wish, administer a cautery, which we said in the chapter on artery extraction with a cautery having two blades.
For indeed cauterization is better this way and more efficacious. On the manner of cauterizing in pain of the ears.
Chapter VI. When pain occurs in the ear from cold, and it is treated with solutiuis, and the rest of the cure which we said in the division, and the pain does not move, then cauterize with fire: and it is that which is called Point, whose form is this.
Then the points with it after its ignition on the circumference of the whole ear, as it revolves; or on the circumference of both, if pain is at the same time in both.
And lengthen yourself with the cautery from the root of the ear slightly, after you have marked the places with encaustic: and let the quantity of the cautery be ten pricks in every ear, and like this one.
Then care for the places, until they are healed.
On the manner of cauterizing in a torture.
Chapter VII.
Torments that are cured with cauterization are not anything else but those species that occur from phlegm, according to what we said in the divisions of diseases. And avoid cauterization of a species which occurs from drying and spasm of the nerve.
When you treat this type of torture with yarrow, and head purges, and gargles, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary to cauterize the sick person with three cautery: one at the root of the ear, and a second slightly below its point, and a third at the junction of the two lips.
And place your cautery on the opposite side of the weak part.
Because softening does not occur unless in the part that appears healthy.
And the form of cauterization is, that you cauterize it with a cautery in the direct extremity of the upper earlobe under the corner of the head a little: and at another time: whose length shall be according to the length of the thumb.
And place your hand with the cautery until the quantity of half the thickness of the skin is burned.
And this is the form of a cautery, and it is a kind from a knife, whose form is given before: but truly it is not too subtle, as you see: and it ought to be a knife in it of superfluous thickness little. Then care for the place, as that which preceded: until it heals.
On the mode of cauterizing in old apoplexy.
Chapter VIII.
When apoplexy has advanced and you have treated it with what we said, and your treatment is ineffective, and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize him with four cauteries on every horn of his head, and with a cautery in the middle of the head, as we said, and with a cautery at the back of the head, according to what preceded: and the method of cautery shall be according to what preceded.
It is also cauterized with a cautery over the mouth of the stomach: and it is most final.
Then it is treated, with what has preceded.
On the method of cauterizing in a fistula.
Chapter IX.
It is necessary that in the drink first be given to the sick large quantities of barley gruel, and purifying pills for the brain.
Then shave the head of the sick person completely, and place on the back of his head a dressing of synapi as described in the treatise on dressings: and apply it several times. This is indeed the manner of cauterization: and do it according to the same order which I said there. If therefore it is healed by that, it is good.
If not, then make three cauteries on the posterior part of his head, which are descending from the upper part of the head to the lower part of the eye: and put between each cautery the thickness of a finger.
Then care for cautery, with that which preceded.
If, however, you wish an addition, and the patient is weak and can tolerate it, then make for him a cautery in the middle.
If you wish an addition: then cauterize it above the two horns.
Then care for it until it heals: and let the cautery be oiled according to the form which has been set forth.
On the manner of cauterizing in Paralysis, and softening.
Chapter X.
It is necessary that you proceed in the purification of the head with the herbs, and with what we have said.
Then shave the head of the sick person; afterwards cauterize it with a cautery in the middle of the head, and with a cautery over every horn of the head, and with a cautery over the back of it, and with three cauteries over the vertebrae of the neck.
If however you need in the pain of softening the body with many of those things, and he is weak and enduring, and the sickness is strong: then cauterize him with four cauteries upon the vertebrae of the back, and the last with a cautery, until it burns from the skin most of it, and elevate your hand.
Then care for him until he is healed; and so apply a hot iron, Oliarus.
On the method of cauterizing in Epilepsy.
Chapter XI.
An epileptic is not cauterized unless their epilepsy is from phlegm. Therefore, it is necessary that you cleanse the brain of him first with a pig and with the rest of the treatment which we have said in the division; when he is greatly weak or is tolerable in the reception of medicine.
If it is a boy who does not tolerate medicines, then a gargle and cleansing chewings for the brain are administered, before which many days with improvement of food.
Then shave the head of him, afterward cauterize it with one cautery in the middle of the head, according to what preceded in manner; and with another cautery on the back of his head, and above every horn of his head with a cautery.
If the patient is weak but tolerant, then cauterize him with the cauteries which I have mentioned in one having paralysis and softening of the body over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back: and let the cauterizing oil be according to the measure which preceded. If the patient is a child, then place a fine cautery in this way.
On the method of cauterizing in melancholy.
Chapter XII.
When the cause of melancholy is corrupt humors and thick phlegm, then cauterize it with cautery, which we have said is used in those having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is superfluity inclining to melancholy, and the body of the infirm person is wet, then give him in drink what will purify his brain, according to what preceded in the division: then shave the head of the infirm person, and make afterward a turban properly made of linen, like a circle.
Then place it in the middle of the head: and the weak one sitting square shall be held from every part.
Then present the ointment. And it is more fitting from old butter of wool.
And heat it over a fire with moderate heating, as much as the finger can bear when it is introduced into it.
Then draw out pus from the middle of its head in a circle and let it go until it cools.
Do this for the infirm person once a week, with the rest of his good regimen, until he is healed.
Or if you wish, cauterize it by making small points all over it, besides holding your hand with the cautery: even while smelling it.
For this kind of cautery moistens the brain with its quality.
Then place upon it a cloth soaked in butter, or chicken fat.
On the manner of cauterizing descending into the eye's water.
Chapter XIII.
When you are told the beginning of water in the eye by the signs, which I said in the division, then begin and pot the weak eye, with that which cleanses its head.
And guard him from all moisture, and make him sit in a bath, fasting for several days.
Then order him to shave his head and cauterize it in the middle of his head. Then cauterize it over both temples with two cauteries, if the onset of water descent is in both eyes at once; or from one side, if the onset of water is in one eye; and cut off with a cautery all the veins and arteries that are under the skin: and let the cauteries be long in the width of the temples: and beware of the flow of blood.
If you see something of that kind, then immediately cut it away with whatever medicine is possible, and I will come with wisdom, which is in the extraction of arteries, and their cutting, and care from the flow of blood.
And sometimes it is cauterized in the neck, under two bones, with two last produced cautery instruments.
On the manner of cauterizing in old tears.
Chapter XIV.
When the tears of the eyes are old, constant: and they are upon the veins, and arteries which are in the manifest head exteriorly, it is verified that this is from superfluities cold, phlegmatic: then cauterize with a cautery the same as I have narrated in the beginning of the descending water, a cautery in the middle of the head, and two cauteries above the two temples, and two cauteries in the neck under the two bones.
And if you need an addition, then cauterize it on every side carefully of the eye, above the end of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
On the mode of cauterizing in the nose.
Chapter XV.
When you treat this with that which we said in the division, and the treatment does not help: then hurry, and give in drink  infirmations three nights; then shave his head, and cauterize it with a middle cautery, with an olive cautery.
Then cauterize it with a cautery held in two cauteries, above the two eyebrows under the hairs a little.
And guard against the artery, so that you do not cut it.
And this is the form of the cautery of Claudius.
On the manner of cauterizing in the softening of the eyelid.
Chapter XVI.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by illness or moisture, then cauterize the eyelid with one cautery, with this lunar cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize him above the two eyebrows with two cauteries on all sides: and let them extend from the two temples: and let the length of each cautery be, according to the lengths of the eyebrow: and do not bring your hand with the cautery close to the end, but according to the quantity that burns the third eyelid.
And this is the form of the cautery according to this mode of lunar cautery.
On the manner of cauterizing the eyelid when hairs are turned inward and pierce the eye. Chapter XVII.
A cautery is of two kinds: either a cautery with fire, or a cautery with burning medicine.
When using fire in cauterization, instruct the sick person beforehand to remove their hair, if they are among those who trim it, until it is lengthened and made equal. If they prick him at his birth place, then bind his eyes with a cloth so that they do not move until they are born.
When therefore they are born and equalized, then place the head of the sick person in your bosom: then mark above the eyelid of his eyes with encaustic, a mark that is according to the figure of a myrtle leaf: and let the beginning of the mark be near the hairs.
Then place a soaked pad in albumin of egg: or in slippery elm mucilage over the eye.
Then a cautery of fire, whose shape is this.
Then cauterize over the figure which you have marked little by little in many parts until the surface of the skin is burned, which is like the shape of a myrtle leaf, wholly appearing properly.
And the sign of the health of your work is: that if you see the eyelid already contracting, and hairs being removed at the point of the eye.
Therefore lift up your hand then, and dismiss him for three days.
Then place over it a poultice with butter until the scab is removed.
Then care for it with ointment until it is healed.
If any hair returns after an hour, and the eyelid softens; then apply the cautery again to that spot, as you did at first.
If hairs are in the lower [area]: then cauterize it, until it is raised to its natural place: and so that the hairs do not prick the eye.
On the mode of cauterization with a burning medicine in the same case.
Chapter XVIII.
It is as you should instruct the sick person, that he let go of hair until they lengthen and equalize.
Make from cloth a shape like a myrtle leaf.
Then take from known soap, and from unsatured lime, each an ounce in weight or thereabouts; then rub those together well, and make it with haste so that it does not become cold.
Then from a pad take from it onto paper which you made like the form of a myrtle leaf, and place it over the eyelid of one eye, or two.
And place under the eye a cloth soaked in white of egg: and the head of the sick person be in your bosom.
And place your index finger upon the medicine, and press it for a little while.
And you will move it as often as the sick man feels the bite of medicine; for he finds its bite like fire.
While therefore he persevered in what he himself had invented, biting, then let go of medicine, and move it with your finger.
When therefore the biting ceases, then remove medicine and wash the eye with water.
And consider then, if you see the eyelid being raised, as it is raised with contraction with fire, or with incision, it is well: and if not, then repeat on the same from medicine over the place, in which the medicine does not imprint, and does not blacken, until the operation is equalized, and the eye contracts.
Then place upon it a poultice with butter, until the burnt skin is eradicated.
Then care for it with ointment diaphanicum, or another, until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you at the operation, that you guard with the last care, lest anything from the medicine fall into the eye.
If the eyelid softens after days and something from the hair fights in the eye, then repeat the medicine on that place which softens from the eyelid itself, as you did at first.
Then take care of it until it is healed.
And this is the shape of the myrtle leaf.
And know that the eyes of men differ in size and smallness.
Therefore, according to this, let your consideration be: and the way of rectitude is not hidden from him who has a study of this art.
On the method of cauterizing in a tear duct fistula.
Chapter XIX.
When you treat a fistula, as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatment does not help; then, it is necessary that you cauterize it according to this method.
Tell the patient to put his head in your lap, and have an assistant hold his head between his hands so that it cannot be moved or agitated.
Then place a poultice of boiled linseed or marshmallow on the white of the eye, and then apply fire cautery, whose form is this.
Let it be concave, like the form of a feather quill from one end, with which cauterization is performed; and if you wish, let it be penetrating to the other end, and if you wish, let it be curved upwards.
However, this is better for your work.
Then place upon it a cautery, which is heated greatly.
And hold with your hand a little by the cautery from the eye to the part of the nose, so that your hand does not stray or rest the sick man; and place the cautery in the fat of the eye and corrupt it.
If therefore you come at the beginning of your cautery up to the bone, it will be well.
And if not, then apply cautery once, or twice, if it needs it: and leave it alone for three days.
Then place the cloth with butter on it, and care for it with a drying ointment until it heals. If forty days pass and it does not heal, then place on top of it medicine sharp and corrosive, until the bone is uncovered, and smooth it according to what comes in its chapter.
And there is another method of cauterizing a fistula, which some of the first ones said.
Attend to the place of the fistula, and find it: then place in that fissure a fine camel's hair, that is, a fine cannula, whose form is this.
And pour into it a quantity of an ounce of lead melted down, and hold your hand with a good retaining cane, and do not move the sick man at all so that he may not run or the molten lead may come to his eye.
And you should place over the eye of the sick person a cloth soaked in albumen or in water.
Lead indeed burns the place of fistula, and heals it with a marvelous healing.
If the fistula is healed, as we have said from cautery and treatment, it is good.
And if not, then it is necessary to administer a hole in the nose, and to reduce the fistula to the course of the nose, according to what will come into its own proper place.
On the manner of cauterizing wounds in the lips.
Chapter XX.
Many times fissures happen in the lip, which are called Pili, and especially in children's lips.
When therefore you cure these fissures, as we said in the division of diseases, and the treatment does not help, then apply a small scalpel-shaped cautery to the fire, according to this form.
And let its concavity be according to the sharpness of a knife.
Then care for him with a cautery until he is healed.
On the mode of cauterization in an oral fistula.
Chapter XXI.
When an abscess occurs at the root of a gum or on the palate or at the roots of the teeth: then it produces pus and ruptures; afterward it heals and pus runs, and a fistula forms; then cure this itself and treatment does not avail in it, then it is necessary that cautery with fire be applied according to the amount which it takes in the fistula.
Then introduce it burning into the hole of the fistula, and hold your hand until the burning iron comes to its depth and end; do this once or twice.
Then care for it after that, as much as we have said about its care up until now.
If therefore the pus is cut out and it heals, it will be good.
And if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place, and to remove the corrupt bone according to what will come in its head.
On the manner of cauterization in gums and softened teeth.
Chapter XXII.
When the gums become soft because of moisture and teeth move, and you treat it with medicines, and it does not help: then place the head of the sick person in your bosom.
Then cauterize with fire, whose form will come after this, so that you place the cannula over the tooth: and introduce the burning cauterium quickly into it: and hold your hand for a little while, until the diseased one feels the heat of the fire has arrived at the root of the tooth.
And raise your hand; then repeat cauterization several times, according to what you wish.
Then let the sick person fill his mouth with salt water and hold it for one hour: and spit it out.
For the moved tooth is fortified, and the softened gums are tightened, and the corrupted moisture is dried up.
Chapter XXIII.
When toothache is due to cold, or there is coldness within the tooth itself, or a worm, and treatment with medicines does not help; then cautery in the tooth itself according to two ways: either cautery with butter; or cautery with fire.
The cautery with butter is as follows, take clarified butter, and put it into an iron ladle, or into a bronze vessel.
Then take a pad and wrap it over the end of the limb.
Then immerse it in boiled butter: and place it upon the aching tooth quickly, and hold it until it cools; then repeat this several times, until the power of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, submerge wool or a cloth in cold butter and place it upon the aching tooth; and place upon it heated iron until the fire reaches the bottom of the tooth's cavity.
Cauterization of it with fire is, that you may apply it to a tube of air, or a tube of iron. And let there be something of thickness in its body so that the sharpness of the fire does not reach the bone of the infirm.
Then cautery with fire, whose form will come: and place it on that tooth: and hold your hand until the cautery cools.
Do this several times, for the pain will be removed, either on that same day or another day.
And it is necessary in the pressing of that cautery, that the sick person fill his mouth with good butter and hold it for an hour; then he spits it out.
And this is the form of the cautery.
Sear with whatever extremity you wish according to what is possible: and this is the form of the Cannula.
On the mode of cauterizing in strophuli.
Chapter XXIV.
When Strophulae are from phlegm, and from cold humors, and are not obedient to digestion by medicines, and you wish the digestion of them quickly: then use a concave cautery, whose form is this.
Having two open ends so that smoke may exit at one end during cauterization and the other end is placed upon the abscess once, and a second time if it does not digest, until it reaches the depth of the abscess.
If the abscess is small, then apply a cautery according to the size of the abscess.
Then leave it alone for three days, and put on top of it a poultice soaked in butter until what was burned by fire is removed.
Then care for it with ointment of teeth until it is healed in the form of a tube.
On the mode of cauterization in hoarseness of voice, and constriction of breathing.
Chapter XXV.
When humors collect in the canal of the lung and especially when this is accompanied by coldness of constitution, then it is necessary for the sick person to be evacuated first with medicines that are soothing.
Then burn it at the root of the throat in a depressed place, and beware, lest you come with the cautery to the throat, or into the skin, except for a little of it.
Then cauterize it with another cautery at the junction of the neck on its last vertebra; and let the cautery be clamped according to the manner which preceded.
Then care for him as with what preceded, until he is healed.
On the manner of cauterization in diseases of the lungs and coughs.
Chapter XXVI.
When cough and lung pain are from cold humidity, and the patient has no fever, nor consumption, and old pain: then cauterize him with two cautery instruments above the fork in the depressed, soft, places.
And with another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two nipples: and let the cautery be a tube according to the form which preceded.
And if you wish to cauterize with a point using a cautery, which is called "Point," whose form precedes in the piercing of ear pain; and let there be points from thirty points up to almost others.
Then care for him with what preceded, until he is healed. And now let there be a cautery having three branches: according to this form.
Therefore, when you are doing that with him using a vice and three cauteries, the cauterization should be eased.
On the manner of cauterizing in a wound caused by  Titillico, in the dislocation of the humerus.
Chapter XXVII.
When the head is dislocated due to moisture and does not return to its place within an hour after dislocation, until it becomes accustomed to returning, then it is dislocated with a slight movement, which happens as we have already testified, then you must reduce the dislocation first.
Then the sick person is laid on his back, or on his healthy side.
Then lift the skin which is in the inner Tilici to the upper part with your left hand fingers: and if the joint is dislocated inward.
Then cautery having two handles, of fire. Its shape is this.
Then cauterize the skin until it penetrates to the other side, and the figure of the cauterization will come with four cauteries.
And sometimes cauterization is done with a cautery having three handles, so the figure of cauterization then becomes six cauteries: and the handles are according to the fineness of the thread.
And this is the form of a cautery having three handles.
And sometimes one is added above this way, because there are eight cauteries.
Then place over the cautery chopped onions with salt.
Then make the injured person adhere to stillness, so that the limb is not moved for some time until it has been strengthened.
And if the dislocation is upward, and this rarely happens, then cauterize it above the shoulder with a single cautery or with many cauteries puncturing it.
For the joint is strengthened and humidity is removed, and the weak one is healed.
On the way of cauterizing the stomach.
Chapter XXVIII.
When coldness and much moisture happen in the stomach until they draw it out of its composition, and catarrh multiplies to it, and continuous modes of cure are applied, and it does not help: then it is necessary that the sick person be laid on his back, and extend his legs and hands.
Then cauterize with three cauteries, a cautery under the concavity of the chest the size of one finger with one cautery, and two cauteries below from both sides of one cautery, until the figure of the cauteries becomes triangular.
And lengthen between the two so that they do not join when they make pus. And let the depth of the cautery be the quantity of two thirds the thickness of the skin.
And let the figure of cauteries be according to this form without addition: and if you wish to cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form: and let the cautery used for this cautery be one according to the form of a circle according to this form.
And the stomach is cauterized by pricking it with a burning iron for those who are afraid of this cauterization; and let signs be on the stomach according to the quantity that you wish with the cautery; then cauterize it with the cauterizing iron, and after that treat it with the treatment which preceded until it heals.
On the manner of cauterizing a cold wound.
Chapter XXIX.
When there occurs in the Liver pain from cold and moisture, or from a coarse wind, until it goes out from its natural composition by superfluity, and the sick person is cured, with that which we have said, and does not profit in him: then it is necessary that the sick person be laid on his back over his neck, and signs with encaustrum three cauteries according to this figure, and this same quantity below the Liver from the hypogastrium, where the arm of a man arrives: and let the space that is between each cautery be according to the thickness of a finger: and let the cautery be according to the length of the body straight: and do not press your hand with the cautery much.
And let the quantity of that which is burned be equal to the thickness of the skin, and the quantity of half of it not added; and let the patient stand weak on his feet.
If he is not standing, then let him be lying down, who has already extended his legs and raised his arms. This is the form of the cautery.
And it is possible for you, that you cauterize these wounds with a knife cautery when you have subtlety and prudence in the art.
And guard yourself so that you do not go too far in cauterization, and the thickness of the skin is burned throughout, because the whole body is burned and it reaches the intestines: because the skin there is thin, know this.
On the way to cauterize abscesses of the liver.
Chapter XXX.
When an abscess occurs, and you wish to know if it is in the liver flesh or its tunic; then if it is in the liver flesh, a dull pain invades the sick person, and heaviness without sharpness; and if it is in the tunic of the liver, with pain there is vehement sharpness; and you see already that it has fatigued his physicians with treatment.
Therefore, let the sick person lie upon his neck.
Then the figure of the place of the abscess with an encasing; then fires cauterium which is assimilated to a ray.
And this is its shape.
And burn it with one cautery until the whole skin is burned and it reaches the fascia, until all pus comes out; then take care of it with ointment treatment until it heals.
And it is not right that this cautery be used unless the one who studies the art of medicine has prolonged their practice, and through whose hands these ailments have frequently occurred with experience; then he may dare to attempt such an operation.
But in my opinion it is better to discharge her.
On the manner of cauterizing in pleurisy.
Chapter XXXI.
The ancients said that a cautery with the roots of asarabacca was applied to cold pleurisy in this way.
And there is, that you receive from the roots of dried and long birthwort, one root longer, which is found in it, and be like the thickness of a finger.
Then immerse it in oil: and set it on fire.
Then cauterize with one cautery where the fork is joined to the neck, and with two small cauteries under a slightly sloping guide on the part which is under the beard.
And with two cauteries also in that which is between the fifth and sixth ribs sloping to the rear a little; and one cautery in the middle of the chest, and another above the stomach.
And with three cauteries from behind: one in that which is between two spatulas; and two cauteries from the two sides of the chest, lower cautery which is between the two spatulas.
And you must not press your hand with the cautery, but rather let it be on the manifest skin smelling. And some ancients have said that there are men who use a cauterio made of iron like a rod: and they ignite it, and put it inside where the ribs are, until it comes to the abscess, and pus flows out: just as we said in the case of an abscess on the liver.
But in this perforation with a cautery there is fear that either the weak one dies immediately or a fistula occurs in its place which has no healing.
On the manner of cauterizing the spleen.  Chapter XXXII.
When you treat the illness of the spleen, as we have said from the treatment in the division of illnesses, and your treatment does not help, then cauterization in it is according to three ways, which are all right.
One of these is that you make three cauteries, or four, by lining them according to the length of the spleen, according to the figure of the liver cauteries, which preceded in figure.
And let there be among all cautery a quantity of thickness of a finger, or a little more or less.
And let the mode of cautery be as we have said in the cautery of the liver.
And do not press your hand with the cautery: and let the weak one be lying on his back.
And another way of cauterization is: that having a cauterium with two handles, which we said in the chapter on dislocation of the shoulder; and elevate the skin, which is directly on the spleen, where the elbow of the left arm arrives; and let your elevation be as you elevate the skin according to the width of the body, so that the cauteries fall according to the length of the body.
Then introduce two burning rods, until with them you penetrate the skin from the other part: then remove the cautery: therefore four cauteries are made. And if you wish to cauterize with a cautery having three handles.
Then care for the cauterization after you let it discharge pus for many days, for it is more healing than all that preceded from the cure.
On the manner of cauterizing in dropsy.
Chapter XXXIII.
A cautery does not fall upon a hydropic condition unless it is properly applied.
When you treat Hydrops with the methods of treatment which we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, then it is necessary that you cauterize it with four cauteries around the navel, and one cautery on top of the stomach, and another on top of the liver, and one cautery on the spleen, and two cauteries behind the back between the vertebrae, and one in a straight line across the chest, and another in a straight line across the stomach: and let the quantity of the depth of the cautery be near to the thickness of the skin.
Then release the open cautery so that it may discharge pus for a long time.
And do not remove the infirm from treatment after cauterization, for it is necessary that two intentions are brought together to him: and healing will hasten to him with the help of God.
The form of the cautery with which the abdomen is cauterized should be a clamp, according to what precedes about its form; and that with which the back is cauterized should be an olive, according to what precedes about its form.
On the mode of cauterizing feet and legs. Chapter XXXIV.
When boils are treated on the watery [skin], and they are filled with citron water: it is necessary to cauterize over the top of the foot in the night area, which is between the auricle bone and the ring bone: and lift your hand with the cauterizer, and do not twist it: then lift your hand: and do not repeat it at all.
The acid water will suffice, and let the cautery be according to this form.
Then make on each leg two cautery incisions, and let the cautery be made with the sharp edge of the knife, and let the cautery be made according to the length of the leg, one below the knee, and the other lower in it, about the middle of the leg: and above each hip make two cauteries. And dismiss the open cautery without treatment for a long time, so that water will flow from it: then treat it with the rest which we have said.
On the method of cauterization in the treatment of an abdominal wound. Chapter XXXV.
When there is a solution of the belly from cold and humidity, until it weakens the retaining and digestive powers that are in the stomach and intestines: and it is cured with modes of cure, and it does not heal: and you see the weak one enduring the cautery of exuberant virtue, then cauterize him with a great cautery over his stomach, according to what preceded in the cauterization of the stomach with a circular cautery, and four subtle cauteries in the circumference of the navel, with a subtle clauili cautery: and a cautery on the alcatin above the alhosos with a great one, or two cauteries.
And if you see abundant humidities and the weak one tolerating it, then cauterize him with a cautery on top of a comb, and cautery on all of it: and perhaps add two small cauteries near the stomach by the large one.
It is indeed a healing treatment, whose benefit does not fail.
On the manner of cauterizing hemorrhoids.
Chapter XXXVI.
When there are many old hemorrhoids in the anus, or one, and they are from thick humors, cold ones, or corrupted humidities, and they are treated with what we said in the division, and the treatment does not work: then cauterize with three cauterizations on the lower spine of the back, under a little bit shaped like a triangle, and with a cauterization under the navel, like two fingers.
And if you think that his stomach is chilled, and his food is not digested, and you see his face suppurate, then cauterize him over the stomach with a large cautery, according to what preceded: and with a cautery on his Epiploon, and another on his Spleen, with a caultery clamp: and release the open cautery after a while: then care for him until he heals.
On the method of cauterizing a wound after its excision.
Chapter XXXVII.
When you cut the flesh, then apply fire cauterization that resembles a ray.
Then introduce the burning one into the cut flesh and last of your hand until the cauterizing comes to the mouth of the vein, through which blood flows; do it once, or twice. If therefore the abscesses are many, then cauterize each one with a cautery according to what we have narrated.
Then care for that, with what it confers of ointment, until they are healed.
And if you cauterize him with a large cautery on linen, it is more final in healing.
On the manner of cauterizing a fistula in the anus.
Chapter XXXVIII.
When the patient does not obey the incision and operation which we have narrated in its place, and fears it, perhaps he is healed with cauterization.
When therefore it happens to someone that they have a fistula, and it becomes old, pus runs out of it, and there are corrupt humors.
Therefore it is proper that you examine it with a fine probe.
Then know the quantity of its depth with a probe.
Then a burning cautery, which is like a ray.
Then introduce yourself burning into the fistula itself and the quantity into which the nail has entered. And repeat the cautery over it until all those corrupted bodies are burned, once, or twice, or three times, according to the quantity of your necessity.
And guard yourself from burning a nerve, if it is there, or a large vein: or if a fistula goes to the body of the bladder, or to the body of the intestine, then guard yourself from all these places.
And do not do this unless there is a fistula in a fleshy place, and you think that it does not penetrate.
Then care for the place until it heals.
If, however, the place is sealed and the materials are cut away from it, and it remains so for a long time, then you will know that it has been healed completely.
And if they do not cut away the matter from it, then know that it is penetrating, or there is a corrupted opening in its depth, or like those of which remembrance will come in its place.
On the method of cauterizing the kidneys.
Chapter XXXIX.
When pain occurs in the kidneys from cold or thick wind, and it is diminished because of the weakness of the patient, then it is necessary to cauterize it above almethenem above the kidneys, with a cautery over the entire kidney with a cautery clamp, which preceded this recollection.
And perhaps we cauterize it a second time in the very wound.
Therefore three lines will come.
Therefore they will be more useful in healing.
On the method of cauterizing the bladder.
Chapter XL. When weakness and softening occur in the bladder from cold and moisture until it cannot hold weak urine, then cauterize it in the lower part of the pubis above the bladder, where the hairs of the comb begin, and with one cautery from the right pubis, and another from the left of it: and let the length of this cauterization be according to the amount of a finger-knuckle, and cauterize it with a lower cautery of the back, or with two cauteries if you need it: and let the cautery be closed as before.
On the method of cauterizing the Matrix. Chapter XLIX.
When coldness and moisture occur in the womb, and it is prevented by this from conception, and its menstrual flow is corrupted, and its arrival is delayed, and pain occurs to her upon their arrival, then it is necessary that she be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we said in the cauterization of the bladder, and with a cautery above the lower linen on the back, or with two cauteries: and let the cautery be clauile.
On the manner of cauterizing a joint in dislocation.
Chapter XLII.
When the mucus humors are poured out to the Anchae point, and they become the cause of its exit from its place: and the sign of it is that one leg is lengthened over the other when they are compared adinuicem: and the place of dislocation is found in it empty.
Therefore it is necessary that the weak one be cauterized over the base of Anchae with a similar cautery circle; after you have marked with encaustic on the circumference of the base, just as it turns: and that the very base may fall in the middle of the circle.
And let there be a cautery whose form preceded in the cauterization of the stomach.
If this cautery is not present for you, then cauterize it with three cauteries, with a large olive-wood cautery; and let the depth of the cautery be according to the amount of thickness of the whole skin.
Then take care of him until he is healed.
On the method of cauterization in sciatica. Chapter XLIII.
When pain occurs in the hip joint and the cause is cold and moisture, and the sick person is treated with what we said in the division, and the treatment does not help, and it becomes old: then it is necessary to treat the sick person from gross humors with foul pills or artificial pills, and similar ones.
Then cauterize it.
And the mode of cauterization in it is according to two modes: either cauterization with medicines that burn, or cauterization with fire.
Cauterization with fire is according to many modes.
One of these is to cauterize over the pyxis of the anus with three triangular cauteries, according to this form.
And make for them a good depth, or a bad one.
Let there be a space which is between every cautery of the thickness of a finger; let the cautery be oiled.
Sometimes a cautery is applied in the middle on top of the arch of the same (bone).
Therefore there are four cauteries.
And if you wish to cauterize with a circle, whose form preceded in the cauterization of the dislocation of the hip, one: that it be a circle containing the entire hip.
And burn the thickness of the skin entirely.
This is the mode of cauterization in sciatica when the pain adheres to the hip and does not extend to the hip and leg.
If it extends to the hip and leg, then cauterize it with two cauteries above the hip, above the place where the sick man indicates, where there is pain, and with your cautery on the tail four fingers' breadth to the left part a little: and let the cautery be a knife-like one. And let the depth of the cautery be according to the depth of the thickness of the skin.
If the patient states that the pain extends almost to the toes of his foot, then cauterize him there where he indicates with a cautery point, three, or four, or more, if it is needed.
And if he indicates pain being under the knee towards the leg, then cauterize it there with a single knife cautery.
And beware in all your cauterizations that you do not go to the extreme with the cautery so as to burn nerves or a large artery and draw through it an evil ill upon the weak, or contraction.
And I have indeed seen one and another of those who cauterized above the groin, and continued in the cauterization, and the leg was inflated until the swelling reached the foot, and the whole was perforated and the whole foot corrupted; then there occurred a solution of the belly, and death after that.
If there is pain in two parts at the same time, cauterize both according to this method.
And some wise men said in cauterization of the anus, whose cautery this is the way.
Make a probe like a rod of iron, whose diameter is half a palm: and let it be at its opening according to the thickness of a finger's kernel, or a little less: and inside that probe let there be a third probe.
And let there be a space which is between every ligature the quantity of a thumb's width: and let the ligatures be open from two parts: and let their height be like a knuckle, or two knuckles: and make for them a handle out of iron fitted in the center in the ligatures.
And this is its form.
Then it is set on fire until it glows red and throws sparks; then it is placed upon the wax of the infirm limb laid on its sound side.
Therefore cauterize him with three round cautery tools in one place.
Then let him be left undisturbed for three days.
Afterwards apply plasters with butter: and let the open wound be left for many days.
Then care for it with ointment until it is healed.
Albucasis says, on this kind of cautery, my sons, we have used it little, because of the fear of its appearance: and therefore, because we have found few who await it upon itself.
Nevertheless it is good for those who suffer from it, and finds with it its place.
But cauterium with medicinal things burning is, that you make two samia having perforated armilla, into which descends the hinge of its door from brass, or iron, length of the wall: of which the height of them are two knots, or as themselves.
And let there be a space that is between the two quantities the thickness of a finger, and let them be open below and above: and let it be such that they contain themselves adjacent to each other, according to this form.
Then place it over the wax tablet, with the weak one lying on his healthy side.
And press your hand upon the resin of the cavity much.
Then pour between two circles hot water, which has been heated for a short time with fire, and keep it for an hour's time: and let the sick person endure its biting and burning, for he himself found the biting like fire until the biting subsides.
Then lift your hand with the instrument and wipe away the hot water from the whole incision with sweet water; then leave it alone for three days.
And put butter on top of it until the blackness of the burn is removed; and let it sit for several days, and pus will flow from it.
It is indeed the last resort in healing.
Then take care of it with ointments until it heals.
If pain extends to the hip or leg, make for him a position in that which contains water, according to what you have done in ancha equally.
And this is the method of hot water: and I have already written it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines.
Take alkali and unquenched quicklime, each one part. Grind both, and place them in a new pot, whose lower part is pierced with a small hole, according to the quantity that will enter the radius: and place under the bottom of the pot another pot glazed: and pour over the alkali and quicklime from sweet water, so that both are submerged by a finger: after which you compress them with your hand good compression: and let go of the pot until the sharp water descends to the lower part of the glazed pot.
Then gather all that water and pour it over another lime mortar: and stir it until it is renewed.
For it will then be a keen sharpness of great force which is administered in many operations of medicine and the cauterization of the remaining members.
For it performs the operation of fire itself.
And among medicines there are those with which wounds are cauterized, even as a sponge, and oil of cashew nut, and chalk mixed with soap, so that both may be mixed together.
And Galen indeed narrating recounted, of a certain man from ancient times the cure, by which he was cured of pain in the hip and sciatic vein: and magnified it to be truly great.
And he said, because he did not need other treatment, and because he was healed from one vice until he returned, because perhaps he himself had entered the bath carried in, and came out of it already healed. And it is, as to be taken from the seitaragi green: and if not found green, take dry, fresh: and arranged much with a little fat, and put upon an ache, where there is pain, or leg, or in the hip: and bind it, and let it go for a quantity of three hours, or for a quantity that the sick person feels sedation burning.
Then introduce him into a bath.
When therefore the body is made wet, introduce it into the socket.
For the pain departs, and it is healed.
And know that it is not right for someone to use a cautery with these medicines unless after evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides who said that the dung of goats, when it is cauterized with a vein, helps it; and the cautery is made in this way.
Take wool and soak it in old oil and place it over the deep spot which is between the little toe and the heel, and it is closer to the heel.
Then take dry goat dung, and set it on fire until it becomes charcoal.
Then place him upon wool, and let him alone until it is extinguished.
Then repeat it.
Therefore, do not cease doing this until you come to a sense through mediation up to nightfall, and the pain rests.
And this method of cautery is called cautery Vaccinum.
On cauterization of back pain.
Chapter XLIV.
Sometimes pain occurs in the back from many causes, either from a fall, or from a blow, or from evacuation of excess, and those similar things, from the infusion of cold and moist matter: and cauterization does not apply, except in this single kind, which is produced from the infusion of cold matter.
Therefore, after the evacuation of the sick person, with bitter pills and similar ones, let three lines be made on the back where there is pain, according to the width of the wound itself, after having marked signs with encaustic on each line five cauterizations, or more according to the quantity which comes from the endurance of the patient's strength: and let the cauterization be done with a cautery point.
And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauteries, with a medium-sized clamp cautery, according to this form.
On the manner of cauterizing in an unhealed gibbosity.
Chapter XLV.
This illness often happens to small children.
And the sign of its beginning in boys is that which occurs upon him constriction in breathing when elevated and in motion; and you find it in the last vertebra of the back and its knots, which has already begun to protrude above the remaining vertebrae.
When therefore you see that and wish to make that, then cauterize it with a cautery which is a circle according to this form.
And let him take the cautery over every part of the vertebra equally: and if you wish to cauterize around the vertebra with a cautery point two lines, or three: and let the points be close together in sequence.
Then take care of the place until it heals with what we said.
And beware, lest you apply a cautery to the hump that occurs in a nerve spasm.
On the method of cauterization in gout, and joint pain. Chapter XLVII.
When pains in the joints are from cold moisture which flows to any limb of the body, then when pains occur in the feet, it is customary for physicians to call that Podagra properly.
When therefore gout is treated with cold causes and methods of treatment, and the pains are not removed, then cautery will remove them.
And it is, that you cauterize him after evacuation at the juncture of the feet, with many cauteries: and let the cautery be Oil-bearing.
This is its form.
And if you need to make points on the face of the foot, then make them with a cautery.
If the pain rises as far as the knees or other joints, and this often happens, then cauterize the area above each knee with three or four cauterizations from every part, using the same cautery as Claudius. If you need more of this cauterization, then cauterize it. And do not submerge your hand with the cautery, but let it be about the thickness of the skin only.
If however pains ascend to the knees and back, then administer what we said from cauterization in its chapter.
If the pains are in the hands only, then points on the circumference of the focus, as if two lines were revolving, .
If pain remains in the fingers, then prick them, above every node and on the palm of the hand.
If pains should rise after days to the armpits, or to the shoulders, then cauterize both from every part.
And do not evacuate the sick from good regimen, from the reception of medicines.
If a good regimen is followed and phlegm is evacuated, he will be healed with the help of God and this cautery.
On the mode of cauterizing in ruptures.
Chapter XLVII.
When a rupture occurs in the groin and intestine or part of the bowel descends to the testicle, and it is beginning to approach close: then it is necessary that you order the sick person to abstain from eating on his day.
And let him use soothing things so that feces may descend from his belly.
Then let him sit between your hands on his back; and command him to hold his breath until it comes out, or the appendix appears, or the intestine.
Then reduce it with your fingers, and mark with encaustic above the rupture on the bone of the breastbone, with a mark whose extremity is similar to half a circle towards the upper part of the body.
Then the fire cauterizer, whose this form is, until it comes white and throws sparks.
Then reduce the intestine, or rectum, to its cavity.
Then the assistant places his hand over the place so that the intestine does not escape: and you have already opened between the legs of the infirm, and placed a pillow under him, and one servant on his legs, and another on his chest who holds his hands.
Then place the cautery over that mark, with your hand holding the cautery straight.
And hold it so until you obtain the bone with it; or if you have not succeeded with it in the first attempt, use another tool with it until you reach the bone.
And carefully observe from the exit of the intestine at the hour of your cauterization, lest you burn it, and through it there may come over the weak either death or great evil.
And know that when you do not achieve the bone with the cautery, your operation is of no use.
And it is necessary that the cautery for infants be fine, according to their measure.
Then care with the rest of the ointment, until it is healed.
And let the sick person lie on his back for forty days until the wound is sealed.
And it is necessary that you put nourishment to him according to the length of time of his healing, which will soothe his stomach; so that it does not go out of the intestine at defecation.
Then when he wishes to have surgery after forty days, then administer a bandage made correctly and let him keep it for another forty days.
For when this treatment is used, it heals with complete healing.
When ruptures occur in the rest of the abdomen and are beginning and you wish them not to increase, then cauterize the rupture with a rounded cautery according to its size; and let that which is burned from then be like one-third of it.
Then care for it as we have said: and nothing more shall be added.
And now some of the first said that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery, according to this form.
After it is marked with wax and a line is placed which is across the width on the upper side of the rupture, and another line below. And lay your hand in the middle with the cautery closed.
But a cautery is first easier and better. On the manner of cauterization for pains caused by a fall, or a blow.
Chapter XLVIII.
When pain occurs in certain limbs by chance or percussion, and that pain persists for a long time, and there is no help with medicine in it: then it should be cauterized with the point cautery.
And let the cautery for every member be a cautery according to its size, and its suitability, and its weakness, and its power, and the location of the twisting, and the pain from it.
If therefore it is healed from the first cautery, it is well.
If not, then repeat cauterization over it.
Because of the custom of these pains, it is that they are changed from limb to that which is near it.
Therefore it is necessary that you follow them with a cautery until the sick person is healed.
On the way of cauterizing in leprosy.
Chapter XLIX.
Sometimes leprosy is helped with cauterization, to great benefit.
And especially the kind of leprosy, which comes from the rotting of phlegm and black bile: therefore when you wish to cauterize it consider this.
If therefore leprosy is unrelenting, and you have treated it with that which we said in the division, and it has not descended, nor stood still; and you fear above the infirmity, that corruption may encompass the entire complexion of him: then cauterize him upon the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head noted, and a second below towards the forehead at the end of the hairs, and two upon the two horns, and one behind upon the nape of the neck.
And last your hand with a cautery briefly, until it imprints in the bone a small impression, and the cortices are separated from it: so that the expelling of vapors gross may be alleviated from it, and cauterize also the spleen above it, as preceding.
If leprosy has already spread over the infirm person and is manifest: then it is necessary that you cauterize with these cauteries which we have said in the beginning, and one cautery on the extremity of the nose, and two cauteries on the two maxillae, and two cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck, and six on the vertebrae of the back, and one large one on the buttocks near the great tail and one above it, in the very middle: and two on the flanks; namely on every flank one, and two on the knees; one on every knee, and two on the shoulders, and two on the forearms, and two on the tender parts of his chest: and cauterize him on every joint, from the joints of the fingers of his hands, and feet of his. And cauterize on every heel of his feet, and the palms of his hands.
And beware of the nerves that are on top of the heel bone, so that you do not burn them. And sometimes it is cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the breastbone, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the hip.
And know that the more you add cauterium, it is more helpful and more effective.
And know that the sick person does not find pain in cauterization as do those who are healthy, because the body of the former is already numb.
And it is necessary that they be cauteries in size and shape according to the members and joints; according to what has preceded from the kinds of instruments.
Chapter L.
When a certain limb is numb and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and does not heal, then cauterize that numbed limb with cautery irons, according to what the size of the limb or its smallness merits.
And let your cautery penetrate into the thickness of the skin a little.
Then care for it with ointment until it heals.
And sometimes it is cauterized to some kind of numbness that happens to the hand and foot, in the vertebrae of the back at the exit of the nerves that move that limb: and the numbness is removed.
But he should not presume upon it, unless he is wise in the anatomy of the limbs, and the egress of the moving nerves of the body.
On the manner of cauterization in Albaras.
Chapter LXI.
When Albucasis treats a wound and finds nothing of the medical arts in it; then he cauterizes over it with deep cautery for a short time, according to the quantity of thickness of skin, until the whiteness is removed, and its color is changed.
Then treat the wound with flour of herbs, and lentils with rose oil, and arnoglossa leaves, and dove blood, and swallow blood: let there be one part of each; mix all these things, and spread them on cloth, and attach them to the place until it heals.
On the method of cauterization in cancer.
Chapter LII.
When cancer is beginning, and you wish to stop it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around it, as it revolves.
Wise men have said that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle.
It does not seem right to me, because I fear that it would become an ulcer, and I have already seen this happen several times. And it is better that it be cauterized around it with a circle, as we said; or with many cauteries. On the mode of cauterization in Adubelati.
Chapter LIII.
When someone has an abscess and it is delayed in ripening, either because of an excess of matter forming it, or because of the age of the patient, when he is old and has little blood, or because of time, and the desire to hasten the ripening of the abscess, then cauterize around it with small, many cauteries, puncturing.
Then release it.
For it itself will hasten with ripening.
If you wish to make a perforation of it with a cautery, then heat the cautery, which has this form.
And lay him down in the middle of Abulati, until it penetrates the skin; and let the cautery be from that which follows weak, so that the flow may be relieved by the pure.
Then take care of it until it is healed.
On the method of cauterizing in a bad corrosive. Chapter LIII.
A gnawing is nothing except for corruption in a moving limb, and it gnaws at itself, just as fire consumes dry wood.
If therefore you see a corrosion in a place which can bear cautery with fire, then cauterize with much fire, small and large clamps, according to what is convenient for the place in which the corrosion is.
Then cauterize it from every part until you eradicate the whole corruption, and let nothing of it remain at all. Then release him after three days, and place sulfur rubbed with oil on the cauterized areas until all scabs are eradicated, and all corruption is gone.
Then care for him with ointments that generate flesh.
If therefore you see that after three days flesh is born healthy in its birth, in which there is no corruption, it is good.
And if not: then apply cauterization again over that which remains from the places corrupted.
And it is sometimes treated with a sharp medicine when corroding.
For it rises in place of cauterization.
Nevertheless, cautery with fire is quicker healing; and I have already said cauterization of it with sharp medicine in the division: therefore take it there when it needs it.
On the mode of cauterizing in claws and warts. Chapter LVIII.
This pain often occurs in the lower parts of the feet; and it is a thick, purulent matter that hurts the foot. And indeed a cautery among them is according to two modes: a cautery with fire, and a cautery with hot water.
As much as it is with fire, let the cautery be concave like a feather of an eagle; that it be made of iron, according to the quantity that it contains of nail from every part; and let it have a fine edge.
Then place the heated piece above the stake. Then turn the hand with a cautery around the nail until the cautery reaches the depth of the nail; and let it alone for three days until it begins to discharge pus. Then apply a poultice of willow leaves, crushed with salt, and leave the poultice on it at night. It will be removed from its roots.
Then care for the place with a generative ointment of flesh until it heals.
If they are not converted, and often happen on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet: then administer cauterium with hot water in them: and it is, that you take a tube from copper, or iron, or from the feather of an owl: and lay it upon a nail, or awl.
Then pour a small amount of hot water into the tube: hold your hand, and roll it with the pressure of your hand for a short time, so that the edge of the tube is impressed on the root of the nail, and the hot water finds its way deep, to the root of the nail: and let the patient wait for an hour over the mordication of the hot water.
Then release it, for a claw is removed with its roots.
Thus do with them one after another, until you come over all who are in the body from among these.
Then care for them after they are eradicated, with that which produces flesh from ointment.
On the mode of cauterization in tremor.
Chapter LVI.
When someone has a tremor from cold in the nerve, or from quartan fever, or from another cause: then it is necessary to cauterize it with four cauteries, or five over the vertebrae of the back, and between every vertebra with cauterization, and in his chest with cauterization, and over his stomach with cauterization.
For tremor rests with a cautery of olive oil, and the health of coldness hastens. On the manner of cauterizing Albathir.
Chapter LVII.
Sometimes foul matter, that is, pustules, are expelled from the body of Albashir, which are made from corrupted thick materials.
Therefore, first of all, when they appear, let them be cauterized over the whole head of the pustule with a fine cauterizing iron made of myrtle wood, whose end has been set alight with fire.
Or with the root of long asarone.
Or with a lens-shaped cautery. And sometimes the bowels are cauterized at the beginning of their expulsion in this way: and they do not increase; and the excess is broken, making them whole, and they are healed from them.
Nonetheless, it ought to be done after evacuation with bloodletting.
On the manner of cauterization in the flow of blood from an artery in a wound.
Chapter LVIII. Often blood flow occurs from an artery that has been cut at a wound, which happens externally or at the incision of a boil, or cauterization of a limb, and similar to these: and it becomes difficult to stop it.
When therefore this happens to someone, then hasten with your hand to the opening of the artery, and place upon it your index finger: and press it very much, until blood is stopped under your finger, and nothing goes out from it. Then place in the fire a small oil lamp burner and several of them in large numbers; and blow over them until they become well alight.
Then take one, or a small piece, or a large piece, according to the wound and the place where the artery is broken, and lay the cautery upon the very vein, after which you remove your finger hastily: and hold the cautery until the blood is cut off.
If it is expelled with a finger from the artery's opening, and the fire is extinguished, then receive another cautery more quickly, from the cauteries which are prepared in fire. Therefore, do not cease doing this one after another until the blood is cut off.
And beware, lest you burn the nerve which is there, and that evil may happen upon the sick one. And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to cut it off, especially when the artery is large, except with one of four methods.
Or with a cauterizing iron, as we have said.
Or when it is not extracted, with the extraction. For when it is extracted, its extremities contract, and blood is cut off.
For when it is extracted, its extremities contract, and blood is cut off. Or it may be tied with strong ligature thread.
Or they may be placed upon it with medicines of property, which are to separate blood, and it is tightened with a poultice compression decent.
But he who administers the excision of it with a bandage, and constriction with cloth, or position of burning things, and similar things, does not apply it entirely to him, except rarely.
If this happens to someone and there is no physician present, nor medicine: then he should begin with the position of the index finger over the opening of his vein, as we have narrated, and constriction of it strongly, until blood is stopped from the upper part of the wound, and over the artery.
And the finger shall not be moved, from above it with cold water of vehement coldness always, until the blood freezes and thickens, and is cut off. And meanwhile, let him consider what is needed from cautery, or from medicine.
The End of the First Part.
The Surgical Book of Albucasis Part II. On Incision, Puncture, and Phlebotomy in Wounds, and Similar Matters.
We have said in the First Chapter, all sickness in which it is convenient with fire cauterization and burning medicine, and its occasions, its causes, and its instruments, and the forms of cauterization. And I placed there heads from the crown to the foot.
And I shall proceed in this chapter along the same way: that the one seeking may have relief from his inquiry. And before I begin this, it is necessary that you learn, oh sons, that in this chapter is found the thing which is in the first chapter on cauterization.
And therefore it is necessary that greater caution be exercised in this, because in the operation which is in this chapter, many times evacuation occurs with blood, with which life stands at the opening of a vein, or incision above an abscess, or opening of a fistula, or healing of a wound, or extraction of an arrow, or incision above a stone, and similar things: from all of these tremor and fear are associated, and death falls in many of them.
And I warn you, let not that fall upon you in which there is hesitation, for sometimes modes of men with modes of illnesses come to you in this art.
From these is one who becomes angry with his sickness and death is light to him because of the vehemence which he finds from his infirmity and length of his malice.
And with pain comes fear that signifies death.
And among these there is one who gives his tibia and nourishes you with it, hoping for health, and his sickness is harmful. Therefore, it is not right that you agree with him who comes to you from those, whose manner is such.
Let your caution be greater than your greed and avarice.
And do not presume about anything from that, unless after certain knowledge, which verifies among you that to which it arrives, a praiseworthy succession.
And take care in the healing of all your sick people, with prognosis and indication of what is appropriate for health.
Therein, indeed, is aid for you over the acquiring of fame and glory, and memory and praise.
May God inspire you, sons, with his understanding, and may he not take away from you guidance and inspiration; for it is in his hand.
And I indeed have arranged this Chapter by distinguishing it into chapters, according to what preceded in the chapter on cautery, from the neck to the feet: that your search for what you want from it may be eased, and for what you need.
On the treatment of water that collects in the heads of children.
Chapter I.
Know that this ailment often happens to children at birth; or when a midwife tightens the child's head without ease.
And whenever it happens also from a hidden cause that is unknown.
And I indeed did not see this illness in others than in children: and to every one whom of them I saw it hastened death: therefore it seemed good to me to dismiss the operation on it.
And I myself saw of these a boy whose head was filled with water, and his head swelled every day until he could not sit upon himself because of the size of his head; and the moisture increased until he died.
And this humidity indeed is either gathered between the skin and bone: or is gathered under the bone over the fascia.
And the operation on that one, if there is moisture between skin and bone, and the abscess is small, then it is necessary to make a fissure in the middle of the head in width: and let the length of the fissure be like two knots, until the moisture runs out.
And this is the form of the spatula.
If therefore humidity is increased, and the abscess is greater, then place these two incisions, according to this form.
And if humidity is under the bone, and the sign of it is that you see the sutures of the head open from every part; and water is depressed when you press it with your hand to the interior, and it does not hide from you; then you must make three fissures in the middle of the head, in this way.
And after the incision remove all the moisture.
Then embroider it from above with wine and oil until the fifth day.
Then loosen the ligament, and care for the wound with a bandage, and ointment.
And do not let go of tightening the head with equality.
And give the sick person every dry food with little moisture, until the limb is restored and healed.
And another way of making an incision is that you consider where the magnitude of the abscess appears and the collection of water.
Because sometimes it is on the back of the head, or on the forehead, or on the right, or on the left.
Therefore ascend with an incision where the abscess and filling of water appear to you: and cut it according to what is possible for you.
And observe, that you do not cut the artery, and that there does not occur a flow of blood, and that the sick person may die from that flow with the evacuation of humidity.
On the incision of arteries which are behind the ears.
Chapter II.
When cataracts occur to someone's eyes or chest, and it becomes old, and medicine does not help: then the last cure in this is the incision of these two arteries.
Therefore, when you wish to cut them, let the sick man shave his head.
Then rub the place with a rough cloth, so that the arteries may appear.
Then let the weak person bind his neck with any of his cloths.
Then consider where the vein pulses.
And these places are places which are behind the ears depressed: and rarely it is hidden, except in some men.
Then signs with a coating on both sides: and cut both with a spatula on both sides, the incision coming to the bone: and let it be across the width of the head.
And if you wish, introduce a spatula under the artery, and cut into it upwards with the incision.
And let the length of the incision be as two fingers joined together.
For when a vein is wounded, blood flows out with a pulsating outflow, which leaps inwards with frequent jumps.
If, however, the artery does not appear to the sense, then it is necessary that measures from the ear quantify the amount of space three fingers' width.
Then with a cauterizing iron, and follow up to the bone.
And that which ought to be emitted from the blood is six ounces and perhaps you emit more from it, or less. The whole thing according to the quantity that appears to you from the strength of the sick person and repletion of his artery.
Then consider the wound.
Then if something remains by the bone from the cutting, then cut it, so that a hot abscess does not happen; then tighten the wound with linen bandages.
Then care for it with ointment until it heals.
On the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
Chapter III.
When it happens to a man an old headache, or acute catarrh because of acrid humors, and heat in the temples, or an old, violent sore, and similar things: and he is treated with the ways of medical treatment, and it does not help; then we have experimented in these ailments extraction of the arteries from the temples, or cauterization of them, as we have narrated.
And the mode of operation in extracting them is that the infirm one shaves the hairs which are on the temples, and applies to the artery appearing in the temple.
For indeed it is shown to you by its pulse, and rarely is it hidden except in a few men, or extreme cold.
If it is hidden from you, then let the sick person wrap their head with any cloth of theirs; then rub the place with a rough cloth.
Or place the vapor with hot water until its appearance becomes manifest to you. Then take the spatula which I formed a little while ago. Then skin the flesh with it and ease until you reach the artery.
Then throw a hook into it, and draw it upwards until you have extracted it from the skin and made it emerge from the tissues beneath it on every side.
If, however, the artery is fine, then wrap it with the point of a hook.
Then cut from that part according to the amount that the extremities of it extend and contract, so that there is no flow of blood.
For if it is not struck and if it is not cut away, blood does not rise completely. Then evacuate from blood six drachms, up to three.
If the artery is large, then it is necessary to tie it in two places with a double, strong thread, of silk: or with cords of al-hohod, so that it does not quickly proceed to its own putrefaction before the consolidation of the wound, and that blood flow occurs.
Then cut away the excess which is between the two ligaments.
Do this at that hour, or after another hour. And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery up to the bone, with a knife-like cautery: until its ends are cut, and it will stand in place of that same work.
It is better to operate, unless if the sick person has a fever, or a heated complexion.
Because cautery is one of those things that help to end moistness.
Therefore, it is better healing.
And after the extraction of the arteries it is necessary that the place be filled with old cloth, and on top of this put little balls made neatly.
After the dissolving it is to be treated with dry medicines which make flesh grow and with liniments until it heals.
If while you are operating blood flow occurs from an artery, then hasten to cut it off with a cautery, or as to fill the place with wax; and tighten your hand until the blood is stopped.
If none of those things are present for you, then place your finger on the location until the blood clots.
And embrocate the place with water of vehement cold until the sharpness subsides, and be bound according as is necessary.
And because it is lighter and easier to extract the artery, it is, that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two blades: and let the sharpness of the two blades be similar to an almond.
Nevertheless, they are much less sharp than two knives.
If they are sharp, like two knives, apply cold to both; and they do not cut flesh with speed.
When therefore there is a certain amount of thickness in them, heat of fire is applied to them, and flesh is cut quickly: with this therefore the work is better, lighter, and easier.
And let the space that is between the two knives be the quantity of thickness of a finger, after you have marked two places with encaustrum: and lay both burning ones down, until they arrive at the bone, and cut the vein in two places: so that the distance between its extremities may be lengthened.
For these are not entirely consolidated with this cautery.
And this is the form of cautery.
On the treatment of acute and frequent flow of tears from the eyes.
Chapter IV.
When there are continual tears and a flow of them from the veins which are above the skull externally, and nothing of medicinal treatment helps with medicines, and you see the face of the sick person already red, and he feels in his forehead a crawling like that of ants: and his eyes are weakened, humid, so that even the hairs of them are corroded with corrosion; and his eyelids have been heated from the sharpness of the tears; then the ancients devised a treatment for them with this operation, and they named that treatment with the Sword.
And it is, as you instruct the sick person to shave the hair that is on their forehead.
Then make three incisions on the forehead equidistant according to the length of the forehead: and let the length of the incision be as two fingers' width, and one incision be equidistant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length a little shorter than the movement of the arms, and the third from the other part: and beware of the incision of the arteries which are on both sides. And extend your hand from the continuation of the two jaws, and let the space of all the incisions be the quantity of three fingers joined together: and let there be a piece of sponge prepared for you, or many dried cloths, with which you will dry the blood.
Then introduce a spatula of two sharp extremities, whose following is the form.
From an incision which is from the side of the temple, up to the second incision: and skin with it, the whole skin which is between two incisions, with the fascia, which is over the bone. Then do likewise from the middle incision to the second incision.
Then extract this spatula, and introduce into the first incision again another instrument, which is called a pointed scalpel, blunt on one side, sharp on the other.
And this is its form.
And place its sharp side against the attached flesh with skin, and its blunt side towards the bone: and drive it until it reaches the middle fissure: and cut with it all vessels that descend from the head to the eyes: except that the incision shall continue until that which appears of the skin.
Then do this in the middle fissure up to another fissure.
And after an equal quantity of blood has run out, express the places from clots of congealed blood. Then place in every fissure of the incision a piece from boiled sheep's gut, and place over them pellets soaked in wine, oil, or vinegar.
And see that a hot abscess does not occur.
And on the third day, dissolve the ligament, and administer a plentiful infusion with warm water.
Then care for it with ointment of basilica, and other things that heal wounds, until it is healed.
On the treatment of acute tears and catarrhs of the eyes from the interior parts of the head.
Chapter V.
When it happens to someone that acute, sharp, persistent catarrhs occur: and you see their eyes exhausted, small, and already weakened in appearance: and the eyelids are ulcerated, and hairs fall out of them, and there is a sharp, painful pain deep in the head, and a following sneeze: then take from these occurrences, that these matters and catarrhs do not come unless from many veins.
And better treatment in them is this.
And it is, as you instruct the sick person to shave their forehead.
Then make an incision in the middle of the forehead, or elsewhere somewhat across its width, and begin with the incision from the left temple to the right: and let the incision be up to the bone; and extend your hand from the temples which move during chewing: until when the bone is revealed; and you shall dry all blood with sponges.
Then separate between the two lips of the fissure with a cauterized cow's gut, or with liniments from linen.
Then bind it from above with poultices: and soak the poultices in wine and oil, so that a hot abscess may not occur.
And when you have dissolved it, and see that the hot abscess has already diminished: then it is necessary to cover the bone until flesh begins to grow in it.
Then care for it with a drying regimen that causes flesh to be born: as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony: and prepare a plaster from them, and administer it to the birth of flesh in these wounds.
On the treatment of that which falls into the ear. Chapter VI. Anything that falls into the ear is one of four kinds: either a mineral stone, or something like a stone, such as iron and glass; or it is from a plant, such as chickpeas and beans; or it is a fluid thing, such as water, vinegar, and things like them; or some kind of animal.
When therefore a stone falls into the ear, or a kind of stone from those which do not grow in the ear, expose the ear to the sun; if therefore you see the stone, then distill into the ear something from bruised oil, or sesame.
Then administer the extraction of it, and make him sneeze with condiment, and plug his nostrils at the entrance of sneezing, after which you place around the ear fragments from cloth, or wool, and extend the ear upward.
For this reason he often comes out with this cure.
If it does not come out, then administer its extraction with Gesti, that is, Pizigarolis fine splinters: whose form is this.
If therefore he goes out with breathing hard, it is good.
And if not, then administer its extraction with a curved and fine hook of little duplication. If therefore it does not exit through this, then make a tube out of metal, and insert the end of the tube into the ear hole much, and fill what is around the tube with wax softened with oil, so that there be no way for the wind except through the tube; then withdraw with your breath attraction forcibly. Many times indeed it happens as we have narrated.
If this does not work this way: then take from helkalimbat, or from viscus, that is, prepared gluten with which birds are caught, a small amount: and put it at the end of the radius after you have enveloped it with a pad placed in the center: then introduce it into the ear opening easily, after you have dried the ear from humidity.
If therefore it does not come out with all that we have narrated, then hasten to cut, before a hot abscess or spasm occurs.
And the mode of incision is, that the surgeon first make an incision on the sick man's head; and draw out blood from him according to the measure of his strength.
Then make the patient sit between your hands and turn his ear upward, and find a small fissure in the root of the ear among its fat in the depressed place itself: and let the fissure be lunar shaped until you reach the stone; then remove it with whatever instruments are possible to you.
Then stitch the fissure with speed from your hour, and care for it until it heals.
If something falling into the ear is from one of the grains that grow and swell, then administer its extraction.
If it does not obey you toward the exit, then take a thin, fine spatula, according to this form.
And administer with it the removal of that kind from grains which fall into the ear, and do not do this when you think that grain has already been moistened by the vapor of the ear until you put it in many strips: then extract them with hooks, or with a subtle probe, or with suction, as we have said, for the extraction of it is eased.
In the water which enters into the ear, it is necessary that the sick person should use sneezing with a condyle at first: and already filled his ear with some cooked sheep's wool: and is lying on that ear, in which is the water.
If therefore it comes out through that, it is good.
And if not: then take many stones, according to the length of the finger, thin, soft, and heat them with fire for a short time, and let the sick person put one of them into the hole of his ear: and let him jump on one foot from that side, and strike with another stone upon the stone which is in the ear.
Therefore, do not cease doing this with stone and stone until all the water comes out.
And now water comes out so that you take from papyrus or reed one, and insert one end into the ear: and set the other end on fire until it is burned as much as possible.
Then take another hook and do this many times until all the water comes out; and remove it with a tube as was previously said in the stone.
In the extraction of an animal that has entered it, if it is small in body, such as a flea, and similar to it, care for it as I said in the division.
But if it is a large body that appears to the sense: then administer its extraction with forceps and hooks: and its business is easier than all those held in the ear.
In the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you care for it with what we said in the division, and in the treatment of distillations, and your treatment does not help: then it is necessary that you look at the ear in the sun.
If therefore something appears there from worms, then remove it with tweezers or with fine hooks.
If however nothing appears there, then take a cannula, which has this shape, narrow below, wide above: and introduce the slender end into the ear according to the quantity that the weak one tolerates it; then suck with it strong suction.
Do this many times until all worms come out.
If they do not obey you for an exit, then wrap a tube with wax, as I said on the stone.
If they do not come out with what we have said: then administer distillations which ancient men have already experimented with in the destruction of worms: and you will find this in the treatise on distillations.
And let your pouring of oil and medicine into the ear be with this instrument, whose shape is depicted here.
As you see, make it of silver or copper, narrow below, with a small hole, wide above.
Therefore let it be that which is driving in the cavity of the cannula, be made of well-centered bronze.
And if you wish, take a ray and wrap its end in a cloth with a decent wrapping; then project oil, or juice, or whatever you wish of these medicines into a tube; and let it be in the ear; then introduce the ray with the cloth from above, and express it with your hand moderate compression until the oil is driven into the cavity of the hearing, and the sick person feels it inside; and what is poured into the ear, should already have been heated with fire for a short time; and beware that it does not become something very cold which distills into it; for medicines do not tolerate this.
On the treatment of an accident of the ear.
Chapter VII.
Sometimes some infants come out of their mothers' wombs unperforated.
And it also happens to some people that an obstruction occurs in the passage of the ear from a wound, or flesh born in it.
And this suppuration sometimes occurs deep in the ear's foramen, which is not reached by sight; and sometimes it happens to the external opening of the foramen a little, and sight reaches it.
Therefore that which happens in the deep ear and which is not comprehended by sight, is in many dispositions difficult to heal.
And in that which follows the sight, it is necessary for you to place the ear of the sick person in the sun, and look at it; then if you see apparent suppuration, open it with a delicate spatula, whose form is this which follows, let its end be in which there is a small breadth, whose part is sharp: and the rest of the spatula be smooth on two sides: so that it does not injure the ear.
If therefore an abscess is born of flesh in the ear passage: then hold it with a fine hook and cut into it gently, until all the flesh is removed.
If the matter is deep in the ear, then take a thin, soft rod and heat it with fire for a short time; then put it into the ear canal.
If therefore you feel an obstruction with that which the sick person finds with heaviness of hearing, try to open it with ease; and beware, lest you wound the nerves of the ear.
Then place licorice in the ear according to the quantity of the size of the opening which you have covered with Egyptian ointment; do this for several days until you are certain of the wound's healing.
Or take licorice and infuse it in rose water, and pulverize it with ground ginger on top of it, and use it.
If you see an ear already suppurating, then it is necessary that you extract the pus, and allow it with another linen cloth, which is wrapped in a cerate made with rose oil, until the abscess sits hot; then take care of it until it heals.
If blood flow should occur, then immerse a sponge, or cloths in cold water, and place it over the ear; and use the rest of the cure which cuts off the aforementioned blood flow in the treatise on distillations.
On the treatment of eyelid tumors.
Chapter VIII. The injuries to the eyelids that happen to the eye are sometimes moist and sometimes dry.
Therefore, you ought to hold them with forceps: or with a hook, and cut them with a spatula from their roots.
Then place over the spots a grinding (or pulverized) zege.
If blood flows from them, then cauterize them with a subtle lenticular cautery.
And to cauterize them is better after incision.
For many times they return when something remains from their roots.
And when they are cauterized with fire, those roots burn up, and do not return.
On the treatment of a granuloma of the eyelid.
Chapter IX.
Many times there happens in the eyelids something which is similar to a Cranium in its strength and hardness, and because of this it is called Granuloma: and it is an accumulation of gross humidity in the upper eyelid, and the lower eyelid.
The operation therefore is, that you should then consider, if there is a swelling proceeding in it, which appears from the eyelid, and moves to every part, and the thing of it is easy.
Therefore, find a fissure across its width.
Then scrape it from every part with ease until it flows out.
Then suspend it with a hook, and cut it off.
If, however, you do not prepare the incision for it, but only after you have penetrated the eyelid with a small incision, then it will harm the sick person in some way.
If the fissure is large, then gather it together with a suture: and care for it until it heals.
And if it is small, no harm will come to you from it.
For the ointment restores it itself, and makes flesh.
And if the granulation is large and slopes towards the inner surface of the ear, then invert the eyelid, and suspend the granulation with a hook: besides which you will need an incision, and press it from every side.
If the eyelid is lengthened through an incision, it does not harm anything at all.
Then wash the eye after cutting the cataract with salt water: and care for the place until it heals.
On the treatment of an ulcer of the eyelids.
Chapter X.
A kind of fat is produced in the tunic of the upper eyelid; and it happens most often to children; and it weighs down their eyes, and catarrh occurs to them in the mornings, and they cannot look at the light of the sun, because tears flow to them, and therefore you see them lying on their faces always, and sleeping there, and their eyelids are under their brows moist, which already the swelling has covered; and the prominence of Axirnath appears to the eye, and when you press the place with your fingers, you feel Axirnath between them.
And the manner of his operating is, that he puts the head of the sick person into your bosom.
Then take a linen cloth and prepare a groove in it, and make a circle from that groove according to the quantity which contains Axirnath from every part.
Then place him upon it, and press with your fingers from every part, so that it may be gathered together as a circle's midpoint.
Then find in the middle of that humidity with a spatula cut incisions across, and let not the incision be greater than that which is made in phlebotomy in depth.
Or it is necessary that you cut through the whole skin until you reach Axirnath, for in many arrangements Axirnath proceeds from the fissure according to the form of a white, fleshy twig.
Therefore, remove it with the cloth which you have soaked between your fingers to the outside; and you will turn your hand to the right and left until it is dispersed; and be careful not to add it into the fissure so that you do not arrive with the spatula at the eye and injure it.
If, however, Axirnath does not appear to you at the beginning of the fissure, you add into the fissure a little with ease until Axirnath proceeds.
Then extract it, as we said.
Then immerse cloths in vinegar and water, and place them over the site, and bind it with a ligature.
And some men grind salt and put it in the hollow of the fissure so that it may liquefy what remains of its moisture.
Then care for the same until it is healed.
If a hot abscess occurs in a place, then treat it with soothing plasters until it heals.
On the ways of treating a sunken eye, that is, when the eyelid softens the eye, so that it wrinkles as it should not.
Chapter XI.
When hairs grow on the eyelids besides the course of natural hairs, and age: then they harm the eye, and cause types of illness, such as frequent tearing, and softening of the eyelids, and clouding, until it becomes a cause of destruction of the eye.
And indeed the eye is cured according to four ways. Either by cautery with fire.
Or with a sharp medicine, according to what was said in the chapter on cauterization.
Or it is cured by incision and suture.
Or through tubes, as I shall say.
It is necessary that you place the head of the sick person in your bosom.
Then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand.
If therefore it is turned (over), it is good.
And if not: introduce a needle into it where the thread is from the lower part of the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate with the thread from above, and let it be near the hairs themselves, that is, near the edge of the eyelid, in which the hairs are born: and draw the thread upward with the eyelid, and turn it with a rod.
Then find in the inner part of the eyelid under the hairs added with an incision made from the larger lacrimal to the smaller lacrimal.
Then remove the thread and place a small piece under the eyelid from boiled cloth or a pad; then sign over the eyelid with encaustic wax so that it is like the shape of a myrtle leaf.
Nevertheless, it is necessary that the figure be made according to the quantity and elevation of the eyelid; because indeed it is diversified in men.
From these [kinds of incisions], there is one who needs an incision from the eyelid to be made in a quantity that is softened by the eyelid itself. Then when the spatula is placed on two lines which you have marked, and begin from the larger lacrimal gland to the lesser lacrimal gland, and let there be one fissure near the natural hairs, as is the thickness of a radius.
Then insert a hook into one of the two corners of the skin. Then scrape the whole wound. Then, gather the two lips together with a suture, with a needle and a fine wool thread: and wipe away the blood, and make adhere what is superfluous from the threads above the two eyebrows, with certain things invisible, if you wish to do this: and if not, do not bother.
Then let the suture and thread be left for three or four days, afterwards take care of it. And if you wish, leave the wound without stitches, and care for it so that it dries and contracts.
For the eyelid should be raised during the sealing and gathering of a wound; but it will be better in the future.
This mode of curing Ataxia was taught by the ancients.
Nevertheless, there is care over the weak, and it is from a good operation, and there is no fear in it.
And another method is in Atxamir also: and it is, as signs over the eyelid a figure, which is like the shape of a myrtle leaf, as we have told.
Then elevate the eyelid with three separate or grouped hooks, according to this form which follows, then cut what is superfluous with small shears, according to this form, with equality of incision.
If it is not possible for you to hold a hook, and it is not equal, then take an awl in which there is a thread, and insert it into the middle of the figure. And insert another thread near the larger tear duct, and the second thread near the smaller tear duct. And gather together between your fingers the threads with equality.
Then lift your hand with equal elevation: and lift the skin over which is marked the tumor, as we have narrated.
Then gather the two lips of the wound together with a suture: and take care of it until it heals.
If, however, an abscess occurs at your incision or fissure: treat that abscess with a cautery and similar things, from sedative ointments.
And sometimes it happens to the eyelids also, that their hairs turn.
On the treatment of ataxia with dogs.
And it is, that you convert the eyelid and cut the fissure which is inside, according to what I have narrated.
Then with skill make two canes or two slender rods, the length of which should be according to the length of the eyelid, and the width of them smaller than the width of a spatula: and you have already cut at the extremities of both parts from both sides where you hold the threads.
Then gather both together with subtlety over that which is superfluous from the eyelid of the eye, and tightly bind two tubes from both sides with strong constriction, and let it go for several days. For if the skin is tightly bound, it will die and become discolored and rot until it falls off by itself.
If therefore it delays, then cut it with shears.
Then take care of it until it heals.
When therefore it is consolidated, the eyelid is elevated; and hairs do not prick.
And this is the shape of two tubes, which you will make according to this figure, and the quantity in length and width.
On the elevation of piercing hairs in the eye with a needle.
Chapter XII.
The operation on this is, that you take a fine knife, and introduce into it a thread of silk, subtle, smooth. Then bind together the extremities of it, and knots on each side with a fine thread: and let the length of the threads be one palm.
Then lay another fine thread of flax under it in a short space, and knot its ends if you wish.
Then the sick person places his head in your bosom, and let it be near the sun so that the operation may be declared; for it is a subtle operation, or minute.
Then introduce a needle with an awl into the root of the eyelid and make it penetrate into the eyelid quickly, until you extract it from above the natural hair.
Then draw the needle up above the ligature: and introduce it into the ligature: if there is one, or two, or three, no more.
Then draw your hand with it until the hair comes out with a white thread from the eyelid along with the natural hair.
If, however, the eyelash is drawn out and the hair does not come out with it, draw the eyelash downward, with the thread which you have composed in it, until the eyelash comes out of the upper opening, and you see it with your eye: then indeed draw the eyelash and the thread, and extract both, and close the eye: and dismiss it closed for two days, or three, until the hair adheres to its place, and flesh is born above it.
If the hair is short, then either associate with it a long hair from natural hairs, and elevate it with it; or let it alone until it grows longer after a space, and then elevate it.
On the treatment of al-Xatra'ti which happens in the upper eyelid.
Chapter XIII.
When this occurs to the eye, it is called Leporina.
And this Alxa'rati is either natural or accidental.
Therefore, an accidental [wound] is made from the closing of a wound, or a cutting, or cauterization, and things similar to these.
And the mode of operation on it is, that you find that consolidation and that you separate its lips, and put in it what is between them a ligature from linen, and tie it until it heals.
And it is not right that you use in its cure things which dry and constrict; for if you do this, the Alexatrati will return worse than it was: indeed use in them things which soften, such as meadow hay: and embrocate with water, in which has been cooked marshmallow, flax seed: and ointment of dyaquilon, which is liquefied with some of the oils: and envelop with it licorice, and care for it with it.
And the treasure of your healing is that you try with every skill that it not be consolidated, according to the form which was at first.
And this operation which we have said, is nothing but a certain rectification of Alxatrati, so that it does not return to the form of the place according to what it was altogether. On the treatment of a pterygium which occurs in the lower eyelid and is a wrinkle or contraction upward to the right and left.
Chapter XIV.
This ulcer which is made lower down, is truly called an ulcer.
It is natural, and it is accidental.
And it [wound] happens from a wound, or fissure, or cautery, and those similar things.
And the way of operating on it is that you take a needle, in which there is a doubled thread, and dye it with meat, and make it penetrate from the left lachrymal duct to the right lachrymal duct until the thread reaches both extremities of the flesh.
Then extend the flesh upward with a knife, and cut it with a wide spatula.
If therefore the shape of the eyelid returns as it should, it is good.
And if not, take a ray and place it in the fissure, and turn with it the eyelid: and find two fissures in the inner side of the eyelid, and let the extremities of the two fissures be from the two angles of the incision, until they meet and make an angle: until when they are gathered together, the figure of them is made like this figure, and it is the Greek letter lambda.
Then remove that flesh by the amount, which is its pointed side below, from what follows the eyelid.
Then gather together the separated parts: sew them together with a thread of wool.
Thereafter care for them with what we have said about softening medicines and poultices until they are healed.
And if a cut should occur from a fissure, and suturing, or cautery: then it is necessary that you make the fissure flat under the hairs of the eyelids, also as previously said.
Then separate between the two lips with a linen cloth, according to what we have said.
And the summary of the discourse on the treatment of a fistula, when it is above or below, is that the operation should be carried out according to how it is prepared from the form of the fistula.
For indeed it is of many variations in form: and the prudent artificer prepares the instrument according to whatever way is possible for him, until he makes the figure return to its natural form, or nearly so, and himself also weak, according to what is fitting for him from the operation and instruments in many arrangements.
On the adherence of the eyelid to the conjunctiva, or cornea.
Chapter XV.
Sometimes this consolidation occurs in many people, so that the upper eyelid is consolidated with the white of the eye, and prevents it from its natural operations.
Therefore, you ought to insert the end of the radius under the eyelid and raise it upward: or extend it with a hook: then cut the adhesion with a spatula, subtle, which is not with the sharpness of the incision of spatulas, but rather somewhat obtuse: so that the patient may not be disturbed during the operation, and the spatula may be removed and damage the eye with its sharpness: and let your incision be as if you were excoriating the adhesion with ease, until when the eyelid returns according to its natural form, and the adhesion is completely healed.
Pour salted water into the eye, and rinse it with water; or distill into it from a sieve made of linen cloth, dissolved with water.
Then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a linen thread: and place over the eye wool soaked in [something] with albuginea of egg: and on the third day use sieve and with solids until it heals.
On the incision of the fingernail and the prominence of flesh of the tear duct.
Chapter XVI.
Know that a nail is according to two ways. Or it is a nerve: and it is like a thin tough fiber.
Or it is not a nerve, similar to the frozen moisture of white: which when touched with iron or you try to grasp it with a hook, it cuts off, and a hook does not hold fast in it.
And both kinds do not begin unless from the greater lacrimal duct, as far as it goes gradually, until it covers the desired amount, and prevents light and movement of the eye.
And the manner of operating on it is: that the patient places his head in your bosom.
Then open his eyes, and raise the eyelid with your hand.
Then collect a sponge with a hook of little thickness, and extend it upward.
Then take a needle and insert into it a thread made from horse hair, ox hair, or camel hair: and let the thread be strong, and double the end of the needle slightly, and fasten it in the middle of the nail: and pierce it with the needle, and tie the nail with the thread, and extend it upwards: and remove the skin with the hair on the side of the nail that follows the pupil, and if you bind it with hair all the way to its end.
Then make an incision in the root of the tear duct with a thin scalpel, or with small forceps: and let go of the natural tear meat, so that it does not happen from its incision continuous course of tears.
And sometimes the claw is extended with a hook, or with a thread, as we have said.
Then it should be scraped with a gentle spatula, which has this shape.
And beware, lest the knife touch the cornea, and rupture occur in it, and the pupil be pierced.
Then after the incision, throw something crushed salt into the eye, or made from sifting of zinc, and leave it until the next day.
Then care for it as is necessary until it is healed. If the nail is not fleshy and you cannot insert a needle into it, nor does a hook hold in it, then this type of nail is often cured with medicines, and heals as I have narrated in the division.
If you wish to cut it, then open the eye of the sick person, and take a spatula, fine, soft, of weak sharpness, according to this form.
And shave the ulcer from above with subtlety.
If you see that it thins and breaks, and imprints a razor in it, then distill from your hour into the eye from sief made of ziniar, or from sief rubeo, or salt rubbed: and seal the eye until the next day.
Then repeat the procedure on itself until everything is removed.
If a hot abscess is not in your eye, then let it alone, and treat the abscess until it heals. Then repeat the operation on it with reason until it heals.
The prominence of the lacrimal cartilage, if it causes great harm to the eye, should be suspended with a hook, and part of it should be cut away. And do not make the incision too deep so that there is no flow of tears.
Then instill a drop of red lachrymal fluid, or one made from zinc ointment, until it heals. On the incision of Alguardenic, and flesh born in the eye.
Chapter XVII.
Sometimes, in some human eyes, flesh of a reddish color is born, composed or superimposed, until it covers the pupil, or approaches it, or tightens over the eyelids, and perhaps turns the eyelids outwards: and it resembles the rose's balustrade.
And the operation in this also is, that the sick person puts his head in your bosom.
Then open his eyes, and collect that whole flesh with suitable hooks to it; and hold it with one forceps or a clamp.
Then cut the flesh first, until you finish the whole of it with the cutting instrument.
And beware of the eye, so that you do not injure it during the operation: and let your incision be either with a spatula, which we have narrated in the incision of the nail; or with small forceps, with which the honeycomb is collected, according to what will come after this chapter.
When therefore the incision is completed, and the whole of the pus has been removed, then fill the eye with salt ground fine; or pour into it powder red, and similar things from corrosive medicines; and place upon the eye a piece of cloth with its white membrane: so that it may be secured from hot suppuration.
If something from a cauterization remains and hot blood dominates you, and you fear a hot abscess; then dismiss the eye, and care for it with that which will settle an abscess.
Then repeat over it with the operation until it heals.
And similarly do this with flesh added which happens in the eye of this kind.
Nonetheless, it is necessary that the healing of every weak eye, through natural or accidental means, be done by operating with iron: and do not insert your hand into any of these operations until you see that that member is bearing that operation.
On the gathering of  sebel from the eye.
Chapter XVIII. There are red veins that are woven over the eye, and they prevent the sight from performing its function: and they weaken the eye as the days grow longer.
Therefore it is necessary for you first of all to consider, if the eye in which is Sebel is strong, and there is no infirmity in it other than Sebel: then collect Sebel from it.
And it is, as you should instruct the sick person, that he place his head in your bosom.
Then suspend those veins with one hook, or two according to your judgment: and let the hook be fine, doubled, according to this form, or let there be two hooks graduated in one body, according to this form.
Then collect with fine forceps those veins with subtlety, and remove the blood hour by hour, until you see those veins removed from the eye, and dissolved: and beware that you do not injure the eye with the extremities of the spatula.
And let your operation be at midday before the sun, and be firm in your operation indeed: that you may not cut except those veins.
And when you have finished, then distill into the eye a green or red sieve, so that by its sharpness it corrodes what remains of the seal.
If you are not able to collect the whole thing in that hour, then apply a plaster to the eye with something that will soothe the pain of the eye: and let it be for several days until the pain subsides: and cure it from the hot boil: then repeat over it according to the same mode, until it is healed.
And this is the form of the forceps.
On the reduction of a nose to its place.
Chapter XIX.
Physicians name the fistulous opening of Arissat, which they treat with a cautery or with a sharp, burning medicine, according to what has preceded in his account.
And if it does not heal, then there is no skill in it: unless you find a collection of pus at its birth, and extract all the moisture which is in it and pus, until the bone is revealed.
When therefore the bone is revealed and you see in it corruption or blackness, then scrape it with an instrument, whose form is this.
And it is called Aspiration of the Head.
Make a tool out of iron and let its head be round like an azure stone, which should be marked with the marking of a file or with the delicate mark of an alembic; and place it over the place where the bone is corrupted. Then roll it between your fingers, and you press your hand for a short time until you know that the corruption is now scraped away: and do this several times.
Then roll it between your fingers, and you press your hand for a short time until you know that the corruption is now scraped away: and do this several times. Then restore the place with medicines and astringent dressings.
If therefore the place is consolidated, and flesh is born in it, and the course of healing is severed: and it remains for forty days, and does not renew itself, and does not suppurate, and no accident happens to it: then know that it is now healed.
And if not, then there is no talent in him, except to reduce the fistula to the nostril opening, according to this form.
And it is, as you sever from the second bone with iron, or with a sharp medicine: and when the bone has been detected, then take a terebrum according to this form, let the iron extremity be triangular: and the wood of it be a pyramid diminished until the extremity, as you see.
Then place it over the bone itself: and let it be near the tear duct: and extend your hand from the eye a little.
Then turn your hand with a probe until it enters the nostril and feels it weak; by this he will find air coming out of it when he holds his hand over his nose.
Therefore then restore the place with astringent medicinal dressings as I have taught you.
When therefore the flesh is born, and the place hardens: then the matter which flowed outwards returns to the nose: it is therefore lighter upon the weak.
On the Reduction of the Protrusion of the Eye. Chapter XX.
When the eye protrudes with its entirety, and no harm occurs to vision, nor diminution: then it is necessary to loosen the weak; then phlebotomize him; afterwards put ventilating  ones on the neck without scarification, but with suction.
Then place over the eye a liniment made from acacia, and aloe, and frankincense, and sarcocolla.
Then tightly bind the eye from above over the plaster with many wads.
And the method of small ones is: that you receive soft cloths, many, and every cloth shall be doubled from them over four: make many from them; then put one on top of another, according to the quantity which the Eye needs; then bind over these with a hard cloth with strong binding.
And repeat punctures with suction without incision.
Then remove the windbags, and let the eye remain closed day and night.
If, however, the ligament softens again, then it must be tightened very much; then remove the ligament after a day and night, as we said.
If therefore you see the eye already returning to its white tunic, it is good; and if not, then repeat the plaster, and pellets, and constriction, and ventouses, until it heals.
On the incision of the bladder tunic.
Chapter XXI.
When a rupture occurs in the tunic of the eye, then it protrudes and proceeds outside the eyelids like a grain of wheat, and it defaces the form of man because of it, and one wishes to cut it: then the operation on it is, according to what I narrate: and it is, that you introduce an awl into the root of the eye from the lower to the upper part.
Then insert another needle into which there is a thread double from the lacrimal side, and make it penetrate; and release the first needle according to its position.
Then cut the place double thread, and tie with it the part of the uva around a needle's circumference: and tighten it much.
Then remove the needle and place wool soaked in vinegar on the white of the eye: and let him go until the thread falls with a thud.
Then care for the eye with that which comforts it until the wound heals.
And sometimes the eye is bound with a circle of cloth from every side until it gives great prominence.
Then it is pierced with a fine spatula so that it reaches the depth of the eye, and moistens the white of the eye, and the eye descends, and enters immediately; then tighten it until it heals.
On the Treatment of Anus Problems.
Chapter XXII.
This sickness called Alcomnati is nothing but pus which gathers in the eye, similar to water descending, and is not itself.
And the manner of operation in this is, that you make the sick person sit upon a prepared seat, either straight or bent.
Then take the head in your hands from two parts, and move it until you see the pus arrive at the lower part with your eyes.
Then it is bound and not allowed to descend, and the opening is closed: and may the sick person see things as he was seeing: and if it does not descend below, know that it is water.
If the descent of the healthy part is not prepared with what we said, then make the sick person sit between your hands. Then take a fine spatula and find it with it above the skin layer for a short distance at the junction with the corneal tunic in the crown, until pus emerges.
When therefore he goes out, then distill into the eye hot water in which you have mixed honey: or water in which you have already boiled hay and honey; then take care of him with the rest of the treatment, until it heals.
On the treatment of water that flows into the eye, or cataract.
Chapter XXIII.
We have now spoken of the kinds of water in division, and which is suitable for piercing, the speech declaring and explaining it, then take that same thing according to health.
Therefore you must make the infirm person sit between your hands, square to the light, near the sun: and bind his healthy eye, and tighten him well: then with your right hand, if the eye in which is water is the left eye; or with your left hand, if the eye is the right.
Then take with your right hand almond, if the eye is left: or with your left hand, if the eye is right.
Then place the tip of the almond near the crown through the thickness of the radius in the white of the eye appearing lesser lacrimal; then drive the almond with force; and you will roll with it your hand until it penetrates into the white of the eye; and feel that the almond has already arrived at the empty space.
And it is necessary that the measure of the journey from the almond to the depth be, the measure of the space which is from the pupil to the end of blackness: and this is the crown of the eye.
You will see this very thing in the pupil of the eye itself, because of the clarity of the cornea.
Then place the almond until it reaches the place where the water is.
Then press it downward with one finger after another.
If therefore water descends, then the infirm person sees it above which he opens his sight immediately, and the almond in his eye.
Then rest for a little while.
If therefore water descends, then lay it down second, except that it may flow out of the almond.
When therefore it is set, and does not ascend: then draw out the almond with facility: and you turn your hand gradually. Then dissolve something from clear salt in water: and wash the eye inside with it.
Then put a whole wad of cotton wool or wool soaked in rose oil and white of egg over the eye, and tie the sound eye to it.
We, and those of our time, place upon it pounded cinchona with egg white.
If the almond does not yield to your entrance into the eye because of its hardness, because it is from men whose eyes are very hard; then you must take a spatula, which is called Alberid, whose shape is this.
Therefore, pierce with it that very junction only, and do not push your hand into the hole; and there is no need but to make a way to the almond-shaped place under it.
Then introduce the almond, as we have said.
And in the completion of your work, a decent sickroom should be prepared for the infirm, where he shall sleep on his back in a darkened house: and let him be prohibited from all movements, and from coughing; and place his food that which soothes his nature; and let him not move his head right or left at all.
And let the ligature be according to its arrangement up to the third day. Then dissolve it in that dark house, and test its appearance: and make him see things.
Then reduce the ligament up to the seventh day.
And one should not do this at the hour of healing, or immediately after the incision: rather one should, let another do it; because water rises quickly through vehement aspect.
If a hot abscess occurs: then it is necessary that you loosen the eye before the seventh day: and correct it with what will settle the abscess, until it is settled: then loosen its vision, and place upon its surface an oral which regulates its vision under those few days, the eye being in that darkened house.
Then he should leave his house gradually, and return to his affairs.
And know that in surgery a pupil is not excused from viewing often; then indeed may he dare to operate.
And now indeed there has come to us someone from those who are from Al-Layrarch, who said that a large drain was made in Al-Layrarch, by which water is drawn.
Therefore, I did not see anyone in your land who has done that; nor did I read it in any of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that it is new.
And these are the forms of things from the book, so that he who knows them not may stand upon them.
Let them be made of copper, and let their ends be triangular with this same fineness, and the pointed end.
Magda's Forms.
On the treatment of flesh born in the nose.
Chapter XXIV.
Sometimes growths of different flesh are born in the nose, of which some resemble the feet of many scorpions: and from this is cancerous flesh, stony, dusky in color: and from this also is that which is soft flesh, not dusky in color.
In those things therefore which are from these meats gentle, not deceitful, and not cancerous, it is necessary that you make the infirm sit between your hands opposite to the ground, and open his nostrils, and project the hook into those meats; then draw them to the outside, and cut what you have grasped from them with a spatula subtle and sharp on one part, until you know that the whole flesh has been removed.
If anything remained of it whose removal is not possible: then carefully remove it with one fine instrument easily, until nothing remains of it.
If blood rules over you, or a hot abscess occurs; then oppose it with what is necessary; or if it is from malignant abscesses, then hasten to cauterize it until the blood is severed and all flesh is removed.
Then vinegar, water, or wine is thrown into the nose after the incision.
If, however, the nose is opened and moisture proceeds from it up to the palate, then you shall know that it is now healed.
If moisture does not penetrate as it should, then know that within it is flesh born in the upper bones of the nose, to which the instrument does not reach with the incision.
Therefore, it is necessary that you insert a linen thread which has some thickness, and many knots on it. And place between each knot the amount of a finger, or less.  And instruct the weak person, so that he may put one end of the thread into the nose with a rod, or with whatever possible to him after he has made himself a similar Azer: and draw his own scented [substance] until it reaches the cavity and emerges above his throat.
And many times indeed boys similar to this Attomi do in schools; and it is a thing easy to him, who wants to.
Then put two ends of a thread, one end which emerges above the nose, and the other which remains in the nose.
Then and minister a lock of flesh with knots which are on the thread. Do this until you know that the flesh is already with knots of thread.
Then extract the thread: and put it in the nose after the blood has been wiped away, using the licinium which you have soaked in Egyptian ointment. Do this for three days, or more, until the ointment corrodes all that remains of the flesh.
Then place at the end of the matter a lead pipe into the nose for several days until it is healed.
If a cure is needed that will dry it out, use this.
To make a head fumigator, with which olive oil and other medicines are distilled into the nose, make it of silver or copper: that it be like a small lamp, open like a shell: and its passage similarly.
And if you wish to make a closed tube, like a reed.
And the shell of the instrument for making a cautery should be full and open: which has a handle at its end, with which you hold it when you heat oil in it, or whatever you wish from juices and flowing things.
And this is the form of the instrument. On the cure of a nose-bleed.
Chapter XXV.
Many times a tumor is born at the tip of the nose, and it magnifies itself and increases with days until its appearance becomes foul.
And for this reason it is necessary that at the beginning of its appearance and roots, you eradicate the whole of it.
Then place over the location either a cautery or a burning medicine which stands in its place.
If therefore the incision is delayed until it has increased in size, then consider if it is stony, hard, dusky colored, and with few senses; then do not touch it with iron, because it is a cancerous abscess.
Many times indeed I have seen one who incurred a blood-filled abscess, and from it great wickedness befell him who had it.
And if the abscess is mild to the touch, not dark in color, and you see that incision is possible throughout its entirety, then evacuate the sick person, and make an incision into it without fear or hesitation.  Care for the place with something that dries and constricts until it heals.
On the suture of the nose, and lip, and ear.
Chapter XXVI.
Know that when a rupture occurs in one of these cartilages, little is done in it, except in some people.
Therefore, when something like this happens to someone, you must consider if it is a recent wound with its own blood; and then gather the edges of the wound with sutures; then care for it until it heals.
And if the lips of the continuity have already been separated, and each part has been made whole; then it is necessary that one scrape all parts with its own knife until they bleed.
Then gather together the two lips with a suture, and tighten them, and pulverize upon it dragon's blood powder, and frankincense ground: and place above the powders a piece of diaphana plaster, and some other kind of solidifying plaster: and leave him bound for two or three days.
Then loosen it and change the medication: and let it be until the threads are cut by themselves. Then care for it with ointment until it is healed.
The method of suture is to join the parts of a severed continuity, either with needles as we have recounted in suturing the abdomen; or to join the parts with thread, as I have made known to you.
On the extraction of lip nodules.
Chapter XXVII. Many people indeed suffer from abscesses in their inner lips, hard and similar to grains of herbs; and some are smaller, and some larger.
Therefore it is necessary that you convert the lip, and find its nodes above all, and suspend it with a hook, and cut it from every part.
Then fill the place after incision with pounded ziziphus, until the blood is stopped.
Then it shall be covered with vinegar, and the place where there is coagulation shall be treated with it until the wounds are healed.
On cutting flesh born above the gum.
Chapter XXVIII. Often there is born on the gum flesh that the ancients call an abulus.
Therefore it is necessary that you suspend it with a hook: or hold it with forceps, and cut it at its root, and let the pus flow, or blood.
Then place over the rubbed place, or other sticking powders, drying ones.
If that flesh returns after healing, for it often returns, then cut it again and cauterize it; for it does not return after cauterization.
On the extraction of teeth with iron.
Chapter XXIX.
Sometimes they gather on the surfaces of teeth from the inner and outer part, and between the gums cortices rough, unsightly, and sometimes become yellowed, and greenish, until corruption comes from it to the gum, and the teeth become foul through it.
Therefore, you ought to make the sick person sit between your hands, and his head in your bosom, and scrape the callous and tooth, where it appears to you as if there were bark and something like sand: until nothing remains of them, and similarly do for the blackness, and greenness, and yellowness, and others until they are cleansed.
If therefore what is in them is removed from the beginning of the reason, it is good: and if not, then repeat over them the reason on another day, second, and third, until the last study arrives in that which you wish.
And know that a tooth needs razors of different shapes and forms, according to how it is prepared for your operation: therefore, the razor with which a tooth is shaved from the lower part is different from the razor with which a tooth is shaved between teeth, according to other forms.
And these forms of razors be prepared for you, which you see.
On the Extraction of Tooth Pain.
Chapter XXX.
It is necessary that one treat a tooth with pain with all skill and delay in its extraction.
For there is nothing that can replace it when it is removed; because it is a sublime substance: so that when there is no excuse for its removal, then when the sick person is compelled to remove it, he must make firm and be certain with you about the aching tooth.
For often pain deceives the sick person, and he thinks that it is in the tooth shaft and extracts it: then the pain does not depart until the diseased tooth is extracted.
For we have already seen that from the operation of bloodletting.
When therefore it is certified to you that a tooth aches itself, then it is necessary that you scarify in the circumference of the tooth with a spatula, in which there is some virtue, until the gums are loosened from every part; then move it with your fingers, or with subtle forceps at first gradually, until you shake it.
Then place the large forceps in that place, and the head of the patient between your knees: which you have already held well, so that it does not move; then draw the tooth according to a straight line, so that you do not break it.
If therefore it does not come out, then take some one of those instruments and introduce it under it from every part with ease, and attempt its motion, as you did at first.
If however the tooth is perforated or corroded: then it is necessary that you fill that hole with cloth: and bind it with the extremity of a fine thread, so that it does not break at the hour of your tightening upon it with forceps.
And it is necessary that you act with exquisite care when making a cut around the gum on every part very much.
And keep your strength so that you will not break it, and let its part remain, and return upon the weak from that evil which is greater pain of his first.
And beware, lest you do what ignorant phlebotomists do in their haste and audacity in the removal of it, besides administering what we have recounted.
Many times indeed they make great illnesses happen to men, of which the more difficult are that they be broken, and that all or some of their roots remain; or that they extract it with some bones of the jawbone: as we have testified many times this. Then it should be filled after its removal with wine, or with vinegar and salt. If it should happen that there is a flow of blood from these places (for this often happens), then fill that place with something from the bandage, and if not, cauterize it if you do not have a bandage.
The shapes of the fine forceps which move a tooth primarily, should be long at the extremities, short at the handle, thick so that they do not double when pressed upon a tooth; like those of thick handles, so that when you tighten them, they do not bend themselves or double; short at the extremities, and made of iron well-wrought, or of steel skillfully crafted, with straight ends. And at their ends let there be teeth which some enter into others, and bind by a decent, strong constriction.
And sometimes limbs become like the shape of the beak of a bird called a stork, and are of strong constriction.
On the removal of teeth and the extraction of fractured jawbones.
Chapter XXXI.
When something remains at the site of a broken tooth's extraction, then it is necessary to place butter on the spot for one or two days until the place softens; then introduce a probe or forceps, the ends of which resemble the beak of a stork bird.
The shape of this is a forceps.
Let the extremities be made like a file inwards: or like an awl.
If therefore it does not obey you in its exit with these forceps, then it is necessary that you dig above the root, and uncover the whole flesh, and insert the instrument which is called a Small Lever, whose form is this.
Let the short end of the limb be somewhat thick and not soaked so that it does not break.
If therefore it emerges through that, it is good; and if not, it is necessary to help with these other instruments whose forms are these.
Shape of the first triangular extremity, in which there is some thickness.
Shape of a slender pointed extremity.
It is also used with this instrument having two branches, whose shape is this. And with other instruments and tools which preceded in the extraction of teeth.
Also let there be an instrument with this one which resembles a large hook, of this form, triangular in shape at the end, twisted, and having some thickness so that it does not break; and let it not be soaked.
And know that instruments for teeth are many: and similarly the other instruments are not numbered, and a wise artificer, subtle in his art finds for himself by himself the instrument, according to what the operation and the pains themselves signify to him.
Since these are from regions where ancient people did not mention instruments because of the diversity of their kinds.
If, however, a bone is broken from the jawbone, or from other bones of the mouth, or if it rots: then examine it carefully in its place with that which is suitable to it from instruments and forceps which I have said in the extraction of roots, and help with a clamp, whose form is this.
Let there be something of a certain thickness gradually, so that it may tighten or hold with the bone, and not escape and bleed until the bone emerges; and restore the place with appropriate medicines to it.
If there is a small amount of rot in the bone, then scrape it away from its rot, and care for it until it heals.
On the Locking of Teeth Which Are Projecting Over Others.
Chapter XXXII.
When teeth protrude beyond their natural course, a foul form arises from it, and especially when this happens to women and girls, namely the vulva.
If a tooth is born after another tooth and does not fit, or it is possible to serrate it, nor file it; then eradicate it: and if it is attached with another tooth, then cut it with this instrument, whose shape is this.
It is similar to a small beak, and it is made of iron, with a very sharp tip.
And let your incision be made in many days, and because of the hardness of the tooth, so that it may not move another from the teeth.
If it is prominent, exposed from its rasping, then rasp it with a rasp from within, whose shape is this.
Let the entire thing be from wood, and the handle of it have small holes, like a file used to make needles; with which the tooth is gradually limed over many days with ease, so that it does not move the tooth and causes it to fall: then soften it, at the end file it with some rasps.
If it is a tooth that has fractured and injures the tongue, then it is necessary to file it until the roughness of its fracture is removed, and it is made level; and flattened, so that it does not injure the tongue, nor corrupt speech.
On extracting teeth with gold wires.
Chapter XXXIII.
When the front teeth are shaken and bruised by a blow or accident: and the infirm cannot hold what he eats upon it so that it does not fall: and you have treated them with medicinal astringents, and the treatment did not benefit: then the ingenuity is in them to be tied together with gold thread: because silver becomes green and rots after days: but gold never changes.
And let the thread be medium in fineness and thickness according to the quantity which it takes between the teeth.
And the form of the ligation is that you take a thread and insert twice its length between two healthy teeth: then weave with both ends of the thread between the moving teeth, whether one there is or more, until you reach with the cloth up to the healthy tooth of the other part.
Then repeat the texture until you reach the part from which you began: and grasp your hand with subtlety and wisdom, until it is no longer moved: and let your constriction, as you tighten the thread, at the roots of the teeth, be such that it does not leak out.
Then cut the superfluous ends of the thread with forceps: and bring together both sides, and turn them with a twist: and conceal them between the sound tooth and the moved tooth, so that it does not injure the tongue: then let it be left thus tight until it remains.
If it is loosened, or cut, bind them together with another thread, and it will stand firm with it throughout the whole time.
And this is the form of Teeth, and the figure of the rotation of two sound teeth, and two mobile teeth, as you see.
And sometimes it happens that one tooth, or two, return after injury to their places and remain as we have narrated, and this is done only by an artisan, prudent and experienced.
And sometimes a piece of bone from the jaw is fitted, and it is shaped like a tooth and placed in the space, from which the tooth is protected and tightened, as we have said: and it remains, and serves with it for a long time.
On the incision of the ligament which occurs under the tongue and prevents speech.
Chapter XXXIV.
If there is something hard and knotted in it, and it is from the consolidation of a wound, then throw a hook into it, and pull it sideways until you cut the ligament and the knot is loosened.
If blood flow should occur, then place on the place a bit of crushed wool. If blood overcomes you, then cauterize the place with a sluggish cautery, which is suitable for it; then take care of it with the rest of the cure until it heals. On the extraction of a ranula which is found under the tongue.
Chapter XXXV.
Sometimes a boil occurs under the tongue that resembles a small frog, preventing the tongue from performing its natural function; and perhaps it becomes so large that it fills the mouth.
If therefore you see it of a dusky color, or black, hard, to which the sick person does not find feeling; then do not touch it, for it is cancer.
And if it is inclined towards the bladder, and in which there is moisture, then throw into it the hook, and cut into it with a spatula finely, and free it from every part.
If blood overcomes you in the hour of your operation, then place on it pounded zegi until the blood is stopped; then return to your operation until you have extracted it with its entirety.
Then it should be covered with vinegar and salt: and care for it with the rest of the appropriate treatment until it heals.
On the cure of an abscess of the two tonsils.
Chapter XXXVI.
And then either you will pierce it, or it will rupture of itself.
And if it is white in color, round, and its root is subtle: then it ought to be cut.
And the operation on him is that before you perform your operation, consider if his hot pus has subsided and has quieted completely, or diminished by some reduction: then have the sick person sit down in front of the sun, and his head be in your lap: and open his mouth, and let a servant receive between his hands, and press his tongue downwards with an instrument, whose form is this. Let it be made from silver or copper, as fine as a knife.
When therefore you have pressed upon it with him, and the abscess is shown to you, and it falls upon it by your sight: then take a hook, and fix it in the tonsil, and draw it out to the exterior as much as you can, except that you draw along with it something from the coats.
Then cut it with an instrument, whose form follows.
It is similar to scissors; however, its extremities are curved so that the opening of each is directly opposite the sharp point of the other; therefore, care should be taken that it is made from iron or imbued with lead.
If this instrument is not present, then cut it with a spatula, which has this form.
Be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other.
And after you have cut one tonsil, cut the other following this same kind of incision.
Then after the incision the sick man should gargle with cold water, or with vinegar and water.
If blood flow should occur to him, let him gargle with water in which the husks of grains have been boiled, or myrtle leaves, and similar things from astringents, until the blood flow is stopped; then take care of him until he is healed.
And sometimes abscesses are born in the throat, other than the two tonsils.
Therefore, cut it as I said, in the incision of two tonsils equally.
And I myself had treated a woman from an abscess which had formed between her throat and was drawing towards the chest, with few sensations, as it almost completely closed the throat; and the woman breathed through a narrow passage, and it had already prevented her from eating and drinking water; and she had already advanced to death, if she had remained for one day or two days.
And the abscess had grown so much that it had sent out two branches until they emerged above the two nostrils.
I therefore hastened and fixed one of them in place.
Then I pulled it out, and a large portion was extracted from it.
Then cut it where it is grasped from the nostril opening.
Then I did that which had proceeded from the other nostril opening.
Then I opened his mouth and pressed his tongue: and afterwards I fixed a hook in the abscess: then I cut away part of it, and there flowed out from it only a little blood: therefore the woman's throat was cleansed, and she immediately began to drink water, then she took some food.
Therefore I did not stop cutting from that abscess many times over a long period; and an abscess would succeed the place where I cut, until it was extended too much and along with it that.
Therefore I devised and cauterized an abscess between the throat.
Therefore I stood after the addition: then I walked away from the part, and I did not know what God did with it after me.
On the incision of a vulval abscess.
Chapter XXXVII.
When catarrh descends to the womb and suppurates and is long, then it is called a perpendicular; and if it is in the lower part, thick, round, then it is called a womb.
When it is treated with what we said in the division, and the cure does not help: and you see that the hot abscess has calmed from it, and is subtle: then it is necessary that you cut into it.
And which is a round aggregate from it, and has no length to it, and is bloody, or brownish in color, or black, and has no feeling: then it is necessary to cut into it.
Therein lies fear over the weak.
Therefore, when you see it according to the manner which I have said, and its width, and length, let you make the infirm one sit facing the sun: and press his tongue with the instrument, of which the previous account was made; then fix the hook in the uvula, and draw it downward: and cut it with one of the two instruments which I have said in the incision of the two tonsils.
And it is necessary that you not cut from it except what is added above the natural boundary without addition.
If you cut deeper from that, you injure voice and speech.
Then after the incision, use that which we have narrated in the incision of two tonsils: and take care of it until it heals.
If the patient fears incisions, then it is necessary that you use your skill in cauterization without fear and trembling.
And the way of cauterizing in it is not unless with sharp water; and it is, as you put the head of the sick person in your bosom.
Then press down on his tongue with the instrument that we said.
Then take from the water that I have told you about in the chapter on cauterization, and mix it with unquenched lime, and put it not thick, nor thin, and fill the concavity of this instrument with it, whose shape is this.
Let the extremity to which the medicine is applied be concave, like the concavity of a spoon's handle.
And place the instrument with medicine upon the wound itself: and let the sick person lie on his side, so that saliva from his mouth may flow from the inner medicine, so that nothing may descend from it to his throat, and harm him.
Then hold your hand with the medicine.
And you will apply the first of these ointments to the ulcer for a half hour's time, until you see it diminished and calmed by the medicinal medication.
And if you wish to receive the lint, and wrap it over the end of the radius, and fill the lint with medicine, and introduce the radius with the lint into the tube from above, until the lint adheres to the vessel. Do this many times until you achieve what you desire from the cauterization of the vein.
Then let it be removed; for it will dry up and fall off after three days, or four.
If you wish to repeat the medicine, repeat it; and after cauterization wipe around the wound with a cloth soaked in butter, and purify with that which is around it from the medicine; and cover it with cold water.
And it should be treated externally with poultices, and internally with gargles, until it heals.
Therefore this kind of treatment is healthier with incision and farther from fear.
And sometimes a wound is treated even when it is more delicate than cauterization and incision: for it is cured by fumigation, according to this method.
Take a cloth and hyssop and oregano and rue and sage and chamomile and wormwood and similar herbs: and gather all these, or some of them, in a pot, and immerse them with vinegar, and let them boil: and let the pot be lined with clay properly: and let there be a hole in the middle of the pot, on which an instrument is placed concave according to this way.
Let it be made of silver or bronze, and let the extremity, in which is the grain, be inserted into the bone of the infirm, until vapor ascends to the bladder above the tube, until the bladder becomes greatly darkened.
Then repeatedly over it many times until it stops.
And beware, lest you perform this cure at the beginning of the coming of an abscess.
Usually he adds this to a boil, and you should not do it unless the decline of the boil is hot.
If this instrument is not present to you, then take a tube and place cork at its end so that the bone of the infirm does not burn; because cork prevents steam from burning the bone; and this is from good care with health.
On the extraction of thorns, and bones from the throat.
Chapter XXXVIII.
Many times a fish bone or other thing adheres in the throat.
Therefore it is necessary that you remove what appears from them which falls upon the sight, after you have pressed the tongue with an instrument at the sun, and it has been made clear to you what is in the throat.
And if it does not appear to you and is hidden in the throat, it is necessary for you to make a vomiting before food is digested in the stomach.
Perhaps, indeed, the thing attached will come out through vomiting.
Or let the sick person swallow a piece of barley, or lettuce root, or a mouthful of dry bread; or take a piece of dried sea sponge, gentle, and bind it with thread, then swallow it.
When therefore it comes to the place where the spines, or bones are, and is extracted, then it exits. If therefore it does not exit with what we have said, then use an instrument of lead according to this form.
Let it be thicker than the radius a little, and at its end let there be a curvature, so that it may enter its throat with ease; and let it itself have its head elevated upwards.
And let him beware of touching his epiglottis, lest he have a cough, and drive it in with his mouth or spine, or insert it himself with his hand.
It is indeed better if the infirm person inserts it; because of his knowledge of the place of the annexed thing: and he pushes down below, or pulls his hand with the instrument upwards, the whole of it according to the quantity that is prepared for him, until it emerges.
On the removal of leeches.
Chapter XXXIX.
When a leech is applied with what I said in the division on healing with medicines, and it does not help, then consider in the throat of the sick person in front of the sun, or in the sun after you have pressed their tongue with the instrument that I told you about.
If therefore your sight falls upon a leech, extract it with a small hook, or with fine tweezers.
If it is not possible with these things: then take a concave tube and insert it into the throat of the sick person up to near the throat; then insert into the concavity of the tube iron heated with fire.
Do this many times: and let the sick person abstain from water all day.
Then let him take a full mouthful of cold water and open his mouth in it; and let him fill his mouth with it, and not swallow any of it; and move the water every hour with his hand.
For the leech, when it feels water, immediately falls down.
If it does not come out as we have narrated, then smoke the sick person with lice, or with asa and the instrument I have narrated in the fumigation of the vulva.
Do this many times, for it will fall of itself.
And the method of operation in fumigation is that you take a pot in which are live plums with fire: and let the pot be covered with a cover, in the middle of which there is a hole: and let the end of the instrument be placed in that hole.
Then throw the fumigation, and let the sick person put their mouth at the end of the tube, and close their mouth so that the fumigation does not escape until you know that the fumigation has already reached the bloodletting area.
For the leech will immediately fall off.
If it does not fall, then repeat fumigation many times.
And let the weak one bear thirst, and eat salted foods, and others, and not drink water. Therefore it is necessary that he depart with this regimen.
And this is the form of the instrument with which bloodsucker is extracted from the throat when it falls upon itself by sight.
It is similar to forceps, as you see: except that it has this curvature which goes into the throat.
And its extremity is like the beak of a stork, which has the roughness of a file: when it grasps something, it does not let go of it at all.
On the incision of abscesses and their cutting, and care in general.
Chapter XL.
There are many kinds of boils, and many ways, according to how they are remembered, namely one, and one in this book: and they are different in their piercing, and cutting them in two ways.
One of these is a kind of abscess within itself, and that which it contains from humidities.
And the second method is because of the places where it happens from the body.
Because a boil occurring in the head is different from a boil occurring in the anus: and a boil occurring in a fleshy place is different from a boil occurring in the joints: and to each of these their own judgment by operation.
And from boils there are some which ought not to be pierced unless after the ripening of the healing in them, and its completion: and from these there are some which ought to be pierced while they are raw, and do not ripen according to the completion.
As abscesses that are near the joints.
Because an abscess when it happens near a joint and it is prolonged until it rots what is around it, perhaps the ligaments or nerves of that joint will be corrupted: therefore it is the proximate cause of contraction of that limb.
Or it is an abscess at a main limb: for if you delay its piercing until it ripens, it will harm either him or through that main limb.
If it is near the anus, pierce it when immature: and it should not be pierced if it is a raw abscess, not yet fully digested, except if it is near the anus so that it does not rot deeply and extend to the interior of the anus, and become a fistula, or form at its end that which does not heal. You ought to know the hour of perforation of a boil that has matured according to its completion: and it is in the sedation of pain, recession of fever, and diminution of redness, and pulse, and sharpness of the head of the boil: and the rest of the signs. And it is necessary that you make the same perforation in the lower place of the abscess and the more prominent eminence: and let the perforation be sharp in the length of the body, if the abscesses are in the parts of the hands and feet, and places of the lacerations, and cords, and nerves, and arteries, and ultimately in all equal places, where there is no reflection.
In those which are reflected, go with a piercing according to that limb.
When a boil is in fleshy places: then it is better to let the opening of it discharge, until its digestion has been confirmed, as we have said according to the completion.
For if you pierce it before that point, the course of the virus is prolonged from it, and there is much dirt and filth, and perhaps the lips of it will endure, and its depth.
And certain abscesses are pierced according to the width of the body, as necessity demands; or according to what limb needs it.
And it is necessary that you administer in small abscesses a small perforation, and in large abscesses a wide perforation; or many incisions according to the likeness of the magnitude of the abscess.
And there are abscesses, in which it is necessary that the skin be scooped out; and it should be cut when it has become like a cloth, and has come to an end, that is, when it has died: such as happens in many cases, so that it may burst, and buboes.
And among these are those which are cut with a three-angled incision.
And of these is one which occurs like the figure of a myrtle leaf.
Like an abscess in the groin.
And of these there are those in which a round incision and a lunar incision are administered, and similar incisions to these.
As for those who lack a head, as in superficial, soft boils, it is necessary to pierce them with a superficial or only flat perforation.
And it is necessary when the abscess is large and has already gathered much pus, that you pierce it, so that you do not hurry and extract all the pus in that hour; rather, extract part of it.
Then let it be treated with poultices and an abscess until another day.
Then remove something from the pus again.
Do this many times according to gradation, until it comes out: especially if the patient is weak in virtue, or a pregnant woman, or a small boy, or an old decrepit man: for the animal spirit is much resolved from the animal with the expulsion of phlegm: and perhaps the patient dies, and you do not perceive.
Therefore, take great care with this chapter.
And after you have perforated it, through which you pierce the abscesses, it is necessary that you cleanse the wound; and consider.
If therefore is a wound of small abscess, or is a flat section, then administer lint from linen, or old cotment.
And if it is a large abscess, and there are many fissures of the opening, then you must introduce into every fissure a liniment until they reach each other.
And if in an abscess you have cut away a part of the skin, or hollowed it out on its edge: then it is necessary that you fill it with old dung, or as when a cloth is used to cover it, or wool is applied without moisture; and bind it up until the third day.
Then throw it away, and take care of it with what is necessary ointment, until it heals.
If it happens that there is bleeding during your operation, then administer cold water and vinegar after a cloth has been soaked in them: and place it over the place of bleeding many times.
If, however, bleeding persisted, then it is necessary that you administer a regimen and treatment and powders, which I have recounted in many places in this book of ours, and from the division.
If it is in wintertime, and the place of the abscess is of many nerves, then it is necessary that you pour poultices with wine and hot oil, and place them over the places.
And if it is in summer and the places are fleshy: then you ought to put little sponges soaked in water, and oil, or him with wine and oil, and the whole thing cold.
Until the third day, as we have said, then it is necessary that you should loosen the abscess and cleanse it, and administer to its cure what is fitting for it, until it is healed.
This therefore is what is necessary from the knowledge of healing boils universally.
According to the method of distinction, I have already said about every kind of abscess, how the way to its cure is taken individually chapter by chapter.
On the incision of boils that occur in the skin of the head.
Chapter XLIX.
Small boils occur in the scalp skin and are of the kind of nodules, which contain sacks, like small bags of chicken's blood.
And their kinds are many.
Of these there are fatty ones; and there are those which contain moisture like slime; and those which contain moisture like gruel and porridge; and the like; and there are also those which are hard and stony.
And in the sectioning of all and their extraction there is no fear, as long as it does not oppose the artery during the sectioning of them.
And the operation on their section is that you should experience it with an instrument, whose form comes after this, which is called Intromissum, until you know what it contains.
If it is that which contains moisture, then dry it with a cut along its length by a superficial cut: according to this form.
And begin with a cut from line b to line g. When therefore the humidity is evacuated, then scrape the cyst which contains that humidity, and do not allow anything to be taken out of it completely.
Often indeed it returns, if anything remains of it. Then immerse a wad in Egyptian ointment, if it is present: and if not, in water and salt: and fill the wound with it, and leave it until the next day.
For it will corrode that which remains from the cyst. Then repeat the operation on the same tumor with an Egyptian second and third time, and if you do not digest it with this, until you are confident that nothing remains of the cyst, then treat the wound with ointment until it heals.
If it contains a fatty node, then cut it according to this form, with the incision having the shape of a cross: and throw hooks between the two lips of the incision, and scrape it from every part: and try your strength in extracting the tunic that contains it.
If however the artery acts against you, then do that which I shall tell you after.
And similarly do in an abscess, if it is stony, from incision, and cure the same, according to what we have said. And the incision over a stone abscess is easier because there is little blood and moisture.
And sometimes there are certain of these abscesses which are in the head in some men, with which there is no moisture at all.
Or place the perforation of them always from the lower part of them, that the course of healing may be relieved downwards.
Then care for him as is convenient in his cure.
On the cutting of strangulated veins in the neck.
Chapter XLII.
These abscesses often occur in the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin: and sometimes they occur in the rest of the body.
And over those which happen from them in the neck, there are one and many: and they are generated from each other: and every strophula from these is inside its own tunic, as it is in nodes and boils of the head, as we have narrated.
And there are many kinds of these Strophulaes.
And from these there are stones; and from these there are those which contain moistures; and from these there are malignant ones, which do not obey treatment.
In that one therefore which you see of good disposition in touch, whose manifest color is near to the skin, and it moves to every part, and is not attached with nerves of the neck, nor with the guidegi, nor with the artery, nor is it deep: it is necessary to cut it by a superficial section from the upper part to the lower part of the body along the line, b. to the line, g., and to scrape it from every part: and extend the two lips of the skin with a hook, or with many hooks if you need it, as we said in abscesses of the head, and extract it gradually.
And it is a matter of great care that one not wound a vein, or nerve.
And let the spatula be not too sharp: so that it does not add your hand with the incision, or trouble the sick person, and you cut what is not necessary.
If, however, you cut a vein, or artery, or something prevents you from operating, then place in the wound ground zegi, or some powders that stop blood, and bind the wound, and leave it until the sharpness of the abscess has subsided, and the wound has softened: or it begins and wants to rot.
For blood is cut off, tunic. So go back to your operation until you have finished it.
Then care for it itself.
If the strophulus is cut entirely, then it is necessary to bring together the two lips of the wound: and its own, immediately after you see that there remains not at all superfluous matter.
If you see that there is excess remaining because of the size of the Stropha, then it is necessary to extend it to cut its root and remove it, and administer the suture which we have said.
And that which contains moisture from the strophulus, pierce it with a superficial perforation, so that the place of its maturity may appear to you; and place the perforation below that which follows in the lower part of the body, as we have said.
Then after perforation administer a plaster with ointment, and similar things, so that it corrodes what remains from corruption until when you see the wound already clean: then care for it with an ointment of flesh generation, until it heals.
On the incision of the epiglottis from an abscess in the throat.
Chapter XLIII.
The ancients said this incision is in the epiglottis, and I did not see anyone in our land who has done it: and this is the writing of their words.
In those having a synanchia, it is necessary that the section of the Epiglottis be made; when this is not helpful, because all veins and lung are weak.
In those who have a hot abscess in the mouth, or throat, or both tonsils, when there is no pain in the canal, it is necessary to use the section of the Epiglottis, to avoid destruction that occurs from pre-inflammation. Therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, it should be done under three or four circles of the epiglottis with a small incision across its width, in that which is between two circles, so that the section be in the soft tissue and not in the cartilage; and this place is convenient for cutting because it is devoid of flesh, and the blood vessels are distant from it.
If a surgeon is fearful, then it is necessary that he extend the skin of the throat with a hook.
Then he must lay open the skin until he reaches the vessel; if he sees anything coming from them, let him remove it.
Then he cuts the incision as we have narrated; and it signifies on the cutting of the canal from the pus that comes out of it, with what is broken apart, and the severance of the voice.
And leave an open wound for some time.
When therefore it is removed at the hour when fear of inflammation, bring together the two lips of the wound of skin, and suture itself alone without cartilage.
Then administer medicines that make flesh grow, until it is healed.
Says Albucasis.
The summary of what we have narrated, is not an exposition, unless when they see that some of these abscesses have already opened the throat of the sick person; and the sick person has been raised above death, and wants to be cut open so that he breathes, and is saved from death; therefore they go to cut the Epiglottis, so that the sick person may breathe over the place of the wound with some respiration, and be saved from death; and for this reason they ordered to leave the wound open until the evil of the illness has been consumed, and it is three days in nature, then they ordered to sew up the wound, and take care of it until it heals.
And that which I saw with my own eyes was that one maidservant took a knife and sent it into her throat, and it struck the part of the windpipe.
And I was called to care for him, and I found him mooing, as is the mooing of the dead.
I discovered therefore from the wound, and I found blood which had gone out of the wound small.
Therefore, I am confused that she did not cut off the vein or artery, and wind was coming out of the wound.
I therefore attended to his wound and cared for it until it was healed; and nothing happened to the handmaid except a hoarseness of voice; and after days she returned to better disposition of her affairs.
Therefore, I say: that in the cutting of the epiglottis there is no fear.
On the incision of an inguinal hernia.
Chapter XLIV.
This abscess called Hernia gutturis is a large abscess, according to the color of the body: and it is much in women.
And it is according to two modes: either it is natural; or it is accidental. Certainly it is not natural talent.
An accident is according to two modes: one of which is similar to fatty knots.
And another way is similar to an abscess that arises from the tying of an artery.
And in itself there is fear, and it ought not to be presumed against it with a sword unless in that which is small; and you try it, and investigate it with an introduction.
If therefore you find a similar lump to the one described, and it is not suspended with any veins: then cut it, just as knots are cut; and extract it along with what it contains from the cyst, if it is in a cyst: and if not, then examine the whole of it.
Then care for the place as is necessary until it heals.
On cutting above the species of Nodes.
Chapter XLV. There are many kinds of nodes, and I have already said all their kinds in the division: and it is necessary that I tell here the difference between a Node, and an Fistula: when there is doubt-making. Therefore I say, that when the heat, fever, and violent pains have subsided until the boiling of superfluity is calmed and putrefaction is complete: then indeed the fever and heat will cease.
When a node is not hot, nor feverish, nor painful, and it contains them with its own bag called sifachin, which is according to the color of the body: and its beginning is like a chickpea, and it becomes like a lentil, and larger and smaller.
And they are according to two kinds: either fatty or containing moisture.
And the colors of humidity are many, according to what I said in the division. Therefore, when you come to the treatment of a Node, it is necessary that you examine it and inquire about it first with an instrument called Intromissum, according to what its form will be in the chapter which follows after this.
And the way to inquire about abscesses and all nodes is, that you take this instrument and insert it into the more humid place which you find in the abscess: and you revolve your fingers with it gradually until you know that the instrument has already pierced the skin.
Then your last hand according to the measure of the size of the abscess.
Then draw out what was inserted, and consider that which comes out in its track.
If therefore a running wetness emerges, whatever color it may be: then dry it with a superficial incision, according to what I said in the rest of abscesses.
And if the moisture does not exit in the path of introduction, then know that it is fat: therefore make a dry incision over it having the form of a cross, according to this form, as I have taught you; and suspend it with hooks, and scrape the skin from every part with ease; and guard the cyst if you can over it, so that you may extract it sound with the node.
If however the bladder bursts during the operation, and it is not possible to remove it whole, since this often happens, then remove it in pieces until nothing remains of it.
For if anything is left from it, a little or much, a Knot will return according to the greatest amount.
If it overcomes you and there remains a little of it, then fill the wound at your completion with some corrosive powders, and tighten the wound, and place above it that which sits hot abscess, and care for it with the rest of the cure, until it heals.
If therefore a knot is large, then suture its two lips, and care for it with that which is conjoined. If however the pulsating vein or non-pulsating vein is against you: then hasten, and fill the place with triturated zege and let it be loose for two or three days until the wound putrefies and the boiling of blood subsides: then return to cutting what remains from the Node.
Concerning instruments for cutting and piercing the mouth.
Chapter XLVI.
There are forms of instruments introduced, and they are of three kinds.
From these there is a great one, and from these there is a medium one, and from these there is a small one.
Let there be made from iron lancets of the squares' extremities centered, that they may hasten the entrance into the abscess.
And these are the forms of Experiences, and no, that is to say, piercing: and one of them is named beris, that is, piercing: and they are of three kinds.
Of these there is a great, and a middle, and a small one.
It is necessary that these abscesses, and discharges, and fistula, and swellings be investigated from what exists between them from the bones.
And others are made round, smooth, and soft, like large needles which they insert under the skin, out of yellow metal, or copper, or iron, or silver. And better ones are made from citron.
Experience is also made with black lead, which is useful to try out fistula tubes, whose concavity reflects back so that they are reflected gently with those reflections.
And they are again of three kinds. Because some are long, some medium, and some short, according to the quantity of width of the fistula and its constriction. The form of hooks, and there are many kinds. Because they are simple ones, that is, those with one care: and they are of three kinds as you see, Great, Medium, and Small.
And of these there are blind pouches: and they are of three kinds.
And of these there are hooks having two curves, and they are of three kinds: and of these there are hooks having three curves, and they are of three kinds: and all these are necessary in their place.
And these are the forms of scalpels with which knots and abscesses are cut and scraped: and there are three kinds: because among them is a large one, a medium one, and a small one.
The extremities that are cut are sharp, the other extremities are not sharp; and they are not placed in this way unless that help is given to them with a scraping of nodules out of fear of incision of the vein, or nerve; and that the weak one may be healed through them, and find a little peace from burning as he finds in the scraping of an abscess.
These are Magda, and there are three kinds of them.
They are made of metal, and are similar to a Still used for making alcohol: and at the wide end there is a small point hidden called Spatula; and through this it flows inwards and outwards when you wish, as you see.
The shape of pus pockets that are hidden between the fingers at the site of a wound abscess: and the sick do not feel these, and they come in three types, large, medium, and small.
Wounds of the winds with which the flow of blood is cut off; and they are three kinds, great, medium, and small.
Let them be made of copper or citrine, round, a little lengthways, as you see: and let them be fine.
And it is necessary that these kinds of  wind instruments be with you both great and small: so that you may cut off blood with them quickly when it is necessary, and then when medicine is not present to you.
However, you do not use them for cutting blood in every place of the body, but only in fleshy places: such as the armpits of the legs, and hips, and armpits of the arms, and nipples, and belly, and groin, and the like, from fleshy, moist wounds.
And sometimes they are made from them small instruments similar to the bark of a fist, according to their form: with which blood is cut when it flows from the place of phlebotomy, or near the incision of a vein, or artery: and sometimes they are made from them round, according to this form.
On the treatment of the nipples of men which resemble the nipples of women.
Chapter XLVII.
Sometimes the breasts of some men swell at the time of sleep (that is, when they begin to dream) until they resemble the breasts of women, and they remain festering with pus.
Whoever avoids this, it is necessary that he cut above the nipples with a lunar section, according to this form from the line, b, to the line, g. Then scrape off all the fat.
Then fill the wound with a medicine of incorporated [ingredients].
Then gather together the two lips of the wound with a suture, and take care of it until it heals.
If, however, the nipple is inclined downwards and softens because of its size, as happens to women: then it must be cut in two sections on its upper sides, similar in shape to the moon, each containing the other at the edges of both, until a larger line contains a smaller one, according to this form from line b to line g. Afterwards scrape the skin which is between the two lips and remove the fat, and administer what we have said about sutures and powders, which are necessary for healing, until it heals.
If however you are not able to make the incision as is required of you because of the restlessness of the sick person, or because of the flow of blood: then it is necessary that you fill the wound with a thick ointment submerged with corrosive substance, and leave it so, until it corrodes that which remains from fat.
Then take care of him until he is healed.
On the incision of a boil that happens under the nipple.
Chapter XLVIII. These abscesses which occur under the nipple are of kinds of hard  Strophula, which contain cysts, and from these are those which contain humors.
Therefore, those which contain moisture should be cut with a lunar section, according to this form, from line b to line g. And when everything that is in the abscess from pus has been evacuated, then fill it with old stool, and leave it until the next day.
Then the clot is removed, and it is treated with ointment suitable for it until it heals.
If an abscess be of the kind of Strophula knots, then cut above it, as we said in the section about cutting into Strophulae equally.
If, however, a wound is extended so that it emits pus, then administer to it cautery, according to what we have said before.
On the incision of an abscess that occurs because of an artery and vein.
Chapter XLVII.
When an artery is ruptured and the skin above it is healed, often a boil occurs from there, and similarly with veins, that a boil and swelling occur in them.
And the signs by which it is known that an abscess and inflammation are due to an artery and a vein are: because when an abscess is due to an artery, it is long, gathered deep in the body: and when you press the abscess with your fingers, you feel as if there were a crackling sound.
And that which is because of the Vein, is round on the manifest body.
And a section above this abscess is an error, and especially that which is under the armpits, and groins, and neck, and in many places of the body: and it is very great.
Therefore it is necessary that his care be performed with iron, and what from them is also in the extremities, or in the head, it is necessary that it be performed.
Therefore, about that which is from them by inflation of the artery's opening, make a cut in the skin lengthwise.
Then open the section with hooks, afterward the Artery: and free it from its coverings until it is revealed.
Then introduce the point under it, and make it penetrate to the other side, and bind the Artery with a double thread in two places, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the two Arteries that are in the temples.
Then prick the place that is between two ligaments with a lancet until all the blood that is in it comes out and the abscess breaks up.
Then administer a cure that generates pus until the ligaments fall away; afterwards care for it with ointments suitable to it, until it heals.
If it is an abscess due to the cutting of a vein, then you ought to hold with your hand as much as you can from the abscess with skin.
Then introduce a needle under the place you held with your hand, and make it penetrate; and let there be a double thread in it until you extract it from the other side.
Then tie the band with the abscess with a good ligature: according to what I told you about the ligament of the vein, from two parts with two extremities of thread. If you fear that the thread will be pulled out, then introduce another needle with a different thread under the entire abscess at the incision; press and tighten your threads in four places.
Then dry the abscess in the middle of itself until it brings forth what is in it; then cut away the excess skin, and release what is tied from it.
Then place upon it the little bit that you submerged in wine and oil.
Then administer treatment which is done with liniments and ointment until it heals.
On an abscess that occurs from a twisting of the nerves.
Chapter L.
As an abscess occurs in an artery and vein, so also does it occur in a nerve; which occurs in them by percussion, or by excessive labor, and the like: and it is most frequent in those places of the helpers, or heel, and in every place where joints are moved: and it is a serious abscess. Its color resembles that of the rest of the body, and it is in many dispositions without pain: and when it is squeezed with force, it feels in it weak like a kind of stupor.
And it is not an abscess collected deep in the body, but rather under the skin, and it moves to every part, and does not go to the front parts, or forward, nor backward to the back parts.
Therefore, what is among those things in the joints, it ought not to be entered with iron.
Perhaps contraction may occur.
In that which is from them in the head, or on the forehead, cut the skin with a scalpel.
If therefore it is a small abscess, then hold it with forceps and cut it from its root.
And if it is large, then suspend it with a hook, and scrape it; then remove it, and close the wound with suture; and care for it until it heals.
On the incision of an abscess that occurs in the abdomen.
Chapter LXI. There happen to some men many times in their bellies, and in the rest of their bodies, growths which are called Fungalia, by similarity of them with mushrooms.
The root of which is fine, and their head is thick, and their lips are reversed.
And it is small of these: and it is much magnified of these.
And I myself have seen a man, and in his belly were two swellings which were more like fungi than anything else: there was no difference between them, white, small roots, and their lips were turned inward and they ended, and moisture always flowed from them.
Therefore, cut them and I found in one a weight of almost X and VIII ounces and in the other almost VI ounces. And the operation in their incision is, that you consider then, if the infirm is moist, and the color thelil is white, moist, subtle root: then cut it with a wide spatula, and let cauteries be present in your fire.
For often much blood is expelled during its cutting; therefore if you are overcome by blood, then cauterize it.
If you see a weak and fearful patient from the cutting with iron, then take a lead thread made properly, and bind it with it athleul: whose way is which we have said, and release him in two days.
Then add lead to the constriction.
Therefore do not cease pulling on the lead until it is imprinted into the tile, until it breaks off and falls by itself without labor.
If however the root is of great size, then in its incision there is some fear and anxiety, especially because it is in the belly.
Nevertheless it is possible that you cut its half.
Then cauterize it so that it does not return.
Then care for the wound until it heals.
And beware that you do not presume to cut into the thing that is dusky in color, with few senses, and foul appearance: for this is a cancerous abscess; and I will come back with a remembrance of Cancer after this.
On the treatment of the eminence of the umbilicus.
Chapter LI.
A protrusion of the umbilicus arises from many causes.
Or from fissures which are above the belly and it exits from there either the large intestine or the small intestine, according to what happens in other ruptures.
Either from the blood that flows from a Vein, or from an Artery, according to what has been said before.
Or contracted by a wind therein.
If it is due to a fissure of the skin and the discharge of pus: then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body: and it is soft, without pain: and it appears in various locations.
And if it is because of the protrusion of the intestines, then its location is, with that which we have narrated, of greater variety.
When therefore you press it with your fingers, it disappears; then it returns, and perhaps there is a sound with it; and it becomes much larger at the entrance of the bath, and labor is felt.
If it is because of moisture, it is soft, then it is not hidden when you press it with your hand, nor is a constriction added.
If it is because of blood, then with these signs the pus appears black from the ulcer.
If it is due to flesh being born: then it is a serious, large, hard abscess, and it forms according to the amount of one.
If it is because of windiness, then its touch is gentle. And the operation on this is that you should consider then if the prominence of the navel is because of blood from the Artery, or Vein, or windiness; then it is necessary that you prevent its cure.
For there is fear and dread, as I taught you in the chapter, in which I said abscesses because of the artery and vein.
If the prominence of the navel is due to intestine or a tumor: then it is necessary that you instruct the sick person so that he holds his breath and stands standing extended.
Then signs with a cautery around the whole navel.
Then command him to lie down between your hands upon his back.
Then surround with a spatula wide around the navel above the place which you have marked with encrustation.
Afterwards, extend the middle of the abscess upwards with a large hook.
Then bind him around with a strong thread, or with a silk cord of firm ligament: and let the knot of the ligament be untied.
Then open the center of the abscess extended above the ligament.
If therefore you find it already caught by the ligament: then extract it with an instrument, and introduce into it your index finger, and drive the intestine into the interior of the belly: and if you find a hernia, then take it with a hook, and cut away its superfluity.
If, however, the artery or vein is opposite you, then wind around it much.
Then return to your operation.
Take two needles and insert into them two strong threads: and insert two needles around the circumference which you have made around the abscess in the form of a cross, which you make penetrate.
Then bind the abscess in four places above the needle: and if you wish, remove the needle, and leave the place, until the extended flesh rots: and falls by itself: or cut it yourself when it becomes subtle and rots.
Then care for him with what is necessary from ointment until he heals.
If the prominence of the umbilicus is from flesh or a hernia, or from moisture, then it is necessary to concave the abscess as we have said.
And you shall draw out blood, or moisture, which you find in it.
Then care for it with that which solidifies the place.
On the treatment of cancer. Chapter LIII.
For I could not heal anyone from it; nor did I see anyone before me who has ever cured it.
And the operation in this case, when it is situated as we have said, is, as before, to open the patient from black bile several times.
Then if you find the lancet filled with blood that is clearly visible.
Then prepare the sick person for the preparation, in which he will be operated on.
Then throw into the ulcer hooks that fit it.
Afterward, hollow out the entire thing with skin, according to examination, until nothing remains of its roots: and let blood flow, and do not cut it quickly, rather squeeze the places, and wipe away all the gross blood with your hand, or with whatever instrument is possible there.
If a flow of thick blood from an incision in an artery or vein causes you trouble, then cauterize the vein until the blood is cut off.
Then care for it with the rest of the treatment, until it heals.
On the Treatment of Dropsy.
Chapter LIII.
Now we speak in the division of the kinds of dropsy, and how the gathering of water is made: and the signs of every kind, and its cure with medicines.
And that which is cured with iron is only a species of abscess alone; and it is not approached with iron in the case of otitis, nor in the case of hydrops entirely; for this is mortal.
When you have already treated this type of Watery Swelling of the Ear with medicines, and your treatment has not helped, then consider.
For if weakness has already overtaken the sick person, or there is another infirmity besides dropsy, such as coughing, or diarrhea of the belly, and things similar to these: then beware that you do not treat him with iron; because there is fear of this.
If you see a patient with abundant strength and the only ailment is hydrops, and he is neither a child nor an old man, then the mode of operation on him is that you raise the patient standing between your hands, and a minister behind him presses his abdomen with his hand, driving water to the lower part of the chest.
Then take a pointed spatula, according to this form.
Let there be two acute parts, long and with a sharp end like a spatula.
Nevertheless, there should be something of brevity little by little so that you do not pass through it with him at the operation up to the intestines and wound him.
Then consider.
If a Hydrops is generated from the part of the intestines, then it is necessary to extend with a section from the navel three finger widths down directly above the breastbone.
If now the generation of Hydropsis is because of the sickness of the liver, then your section should be on the left from the navel three fingers' width.
And if the generation of it is because of the spleen, then let a section be made on the right side: and it ought not also to be a section on the side on which the sick person will lie, so that superfluities do not flow to that weak place.
Then pierce the skin entirely with an instrument.
Then introduce your hand into that incision, and elevate it with a spatula between the skin, and scrape, as if you were excoriating it; and let the quantity which is scraped be the quantity of a fingernail, or about that.
Then pierce the siphon until it reaches the place of emptiness: and there is the place of water.
Then extract it, and insert into the opening an instrument of this form.
And it is similar to a cannula: it is made of silver, or copper, or brass, soft and polished: which has a small hole in its lower part, and on its sides are three holes, two on one side, and one on the other: and its end is cut, according to the way a reed is cut, as you see: at the upper end of it is a ring.
For when the instrument reaches water, then it descends immediately upon the instrument, therefore it evacuates from the water in one hour a medium quantity.
For if you evacuate from it more than is necessary, perhaps the sick person will die within an hour through the dissolution of his animal spirit; or he may be seized with fainting which is close to death.
Truly evacuate from it according to the quantity of its power, and according to what the dispositions of the sick person signify to you from the power of his pulse, and from its goodness.
Then remove the instrument and retain water.
This is because it is held immediately because of the skin which retains the opening that is above the sica: about which I have told you, so that you pierce it according to that mode.
Then on the second day, if you see the patient able to tolerate it, repeat the instrument and also withdraw a small amount of water. Do this for several days without fear, and keep yourself from error, until there remains little water.
If, however, you have brought forth from the water a great deal of infirmity, then take care of him with burial in hot sand, and much sweat in the bath and sun, and let him expect thirst. And take care of him with drying medicines until he is healed: and cauterize over the stomach, and spleen, after the extraction of water: according to what I have narrated before.
On the care of infants who are born with their urinary passages unperforated.
Chapter LVIII. When someone emerges from the womb of his mother and his head is not open, or the opening is narrow, or it is not in its proper place.
Therefore it is necessary to assist with its perforation immediately when it is born with a spatula subtle and fine, according to this form.
Then place a slender lead pin in the hole, and tie it: and hold it for three or four days.
When therefore he wishes to pass urine, he should remove it, and micturate.
Then reduce it.
And if you do not put lead, it is now possible that the urine which flows over the place, will not allow it to close.
He who has a narrow opening is treated with lead, as we have said, for many days until it is widened.
Those who have an opening in a place not their own are harmed.
That is because those who are born have an opening at the end of the member: therefore he cannot urinate forward until he elevates the member with his hand upward. Therefore, it has no generation because semen cannot reach the womb in a straight line; and it is a foul and terrible suffering.
And the method of operation on this is that the sick person be laid upon his back.
Then extend the head of the rod with your left hand forcefully, and cut off the head of the rod from the place of the priapus, with a sharp point, or a sharp spatula: as is the incision of a reed, or as you would cut something with a radish, so that its middle comes similar to the head of the rod: and so that a hole falls in the middle as it should.
And take care of yourself during your operation from the flow of blood.
It happens often indeed.
Therefore oppose him with that which cuts blood, and take care of the wound until it heals.
Of Albucasis concerning things that happen in the prepuce and head of the penis, and corruption, blackness, and adhesion.
Chapter LVI.
These things often happen to Albucasis on the stick, and it is a prominence of foul flesh.
And from it another is malignant, and another not malignant.
Therefore, a non-malignant tumor should not be suspended with a fine hook and cut off until it is completely removed.
Then place upon it a poultice submerged in Egyptian ointment. Then care for him afterwards with diacynon ointment until it is healed.
If Albucasis is malignant, of foul color, then you must administer cautery to it after its incision and its root.
If however the albather is in the foreskin of a captive who has not been circumcised, and part of the albather is between the foreskin, and part of it outside: then it is necessary that you remove the albather which is inside first, until when it solidifies, then care for the one outside: because when you care for it at the same time, the foreskin does not heal but is pierced.
And sometimes blackening and corruption also occur in the testicles and foreskin.
Therefore, you must hollow out everything that has been blackened and which wants to be corrupted, or that is already corrupted.
Then a line on top of it after that with honey which has already been mixed with flour and the cortex of pomegranate seeds, and the herb called cribellum.
Then care for it with the rest of the treatment, until it heals.
If, however, bleeding occurs, then administer cautery with lunar cautery, according to this form.
For cautery is a help for two dispositions at once, namely for the flow of blood, and for a wound when it is corrupted.
If the head of the vine is cut and destroyed in an hour, then it is necessary to insert a lead tube into the urethra so that the sick person may urinate over it.
In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis, and this adhesion does not occur unless in him whose foreskin is healthy, and circumcision is not required on it: and sometimes adhesion occurs because of a wound, or an abscess: therefore it is necessary to excise it with a blunt Spatula until the ligament is loosened, and the head of the penis is freed from all parts.
If it is difficult to distinguish these delicate things, then it is necessary to scrape something from the head of the penis and from the prepuce.
That is, because when the prepuce is thin, it may be pierced because of its thinness quickly.
Then separate between the prepuce and the head of the penis with a thin linen cloth, which has already been soaked in cold water so that it does not stick again.
Then it is treated with a wine compress until it solidifies. On the purification of infants, and the treatment of what happens to them by mistake.
Chapter LVII.
Circumcision is not a solution of continuity, like other wounds: however, since it is from our operation, by our will, and its use is in boys properly, it is necessary that we mark in it a better operation, and a smoother way leading to salvation.
Therefore I say, that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books; because they do not use it in their laws, and it is only what we have acquired through experience.
That is because I have found that most surgeons and bloodletters use purification by cutting around with a knife and forceps; and they use a pointed stick, and tie it up with thread, and make incisions with a nail.
And I indeed have already tested all of these methods, and I have not found a better purification with forceps and ligature with thread.
For when, in purification, with a knife, skin often escapes.
Because the foreskin has two layers of skin: therefore perhaps the upper skin is cut and the lower tunic remains: it is therefore necessary to make an incision to cut the other, and the future pain will be caused.
And when purification is made with the alfacat, that is, a finger (used) by surgeons, the incision of the extremity of the male member is not secured; because perhaps it enters into its opening.
In purification, however, when the nail possibly comes out with iron, and spoils your operation: and indeed the skin of a child is short in nature, and many times they are born like this, that they do not need purification: and already I have seen it.
Purification with forceps and a thread ligature proved to be a good experience for me because the forceps are proportional to the incision; indeed, the sharpness that is above is like the sharpness that is below.
When therefore you have laid your hand upon it, the two points are proportioned, and they cut according to the operation one at a time: and compression is made of a similar figure, containing the skin of the twig from every part, with which there falls no error whatsoever.
And the way of operating is this, that you make him, especially a boy, if he is one who understands somewhat, to think that you are doing nothing except tying a thread on his staff; and let him go until another day.
Then make him rejoice and be glad in every way possible to you because of what he receives with his understanding.
Then put your hand into its shaft and puff on the skin, and pull it upwards until the head of the shaft comes out.
Then cleanse it of the dirt that has gathered upon it.
Then bind the marked place with a double thread.
Then bind below with a little ligature secondarily. Then hold with your index finger and thumb the place of the lower ligament well, and make an incision between the two ligaments.
Then lift the skin upward quickly, and remove the head of the staff.
Then allow the blood to flow gradually (for it is better) and place powder on top: and above the powder, a cloth in which a sponge was soaked in rose water, shaken with rose oil. Recent good; and let him be laid upon it until the next day; and take care of the rest of the cure, until he is healed.
The form of the forceps for cleansing is this.
Let there be two blunt ends, and let them be applied: so that no branch of the key may go out of them: and let the length of two points be equal to the length of two manubria.
A mistake that can occur during cleansing is this: for perhaps it completely escapes the inner skin, or a part of it at the incision. Therefore it is necessary that you extend it from your hour with your finger before the suppuration of the place: and cut it according to equality.
If you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then remove it with a hook, and cut it.
If it should happen that three days have passed and the thing under the rod remains swollen, an abscess: then dismiss it until the abscess sits warm, and scrape away at it with ease, and cut into it according to what is prepared for you: and beware of the head of the rod.
It will not harm him.
Therefore care for it with that which solidifies a wound from the powders, which we have narrated in the treatise on powders: and if it is cut from the skin above measure, and goes out to higher parts, it does not harm it even then.
Therefore, treat it with what we have said until it is healed.
On the extraction of urine retained in the bladder.
Chapter LVIII.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by a blockage made from stone, or congealed blood, or pus, or flesh born, and similar things of those which we said in the modes of treatment in the division.
And if urine does not pass and you see its retention is because of a stone which is already in the neck of the bladder; then it is necessary that he be weak over his knees bent.
Then he shall place his feet upon his back, and extend his belly from the upper part of his back, and tighten his labored breathing as much as possible to him.
Therefore, when the neck of the bladder is compelled towards the posterior for the expulsion of the stone, urine is discharged.
If it is not dissolved with what we have said, and the matter is strong over the weak: then you must administer its extraction with an instrument called a syringe, whose shape is this: Let it be made of silver, and be subtle, gentle, concave like the quill of a birds feather in subtlety of radius, long in similarity to one and a half palm: let it have a subtle cannula at its head.
And the way out of Urine through it is, that you take a doubled thread, and tie wool or linen to its end, a good ligature: and introduce the end of the thread into the lower part of the Syringe: and cut with scissors if anything superfluous from the wool, but insert into the cannula with force, like alzer.
Then wet the syringe with oil or butter, and albumen of egg; and make the sick person sit on a seat, and introduce the bougie into the bladder, and its rod with moist oils, and olive oil, and lukewarm water.
Then introduce the syringe into the rod with ease until it reaches the root of the rod.
Then double it above the navel from the upper part. Then drive the syringe into it, until it reaches the bladder, and feel that it has come weak to the empty place: and this is not done in this order, unless because the passage, in which it goes, is in which there is twisting.
Then extend the thread with wool gradually.
For urine will follow wool.
Then remove it, and make the urine flow through the urethra: and repeat the syringe, and do not cease doing this until the bladder is emptied, and the sick person finds relief. On the quality of clysterizing the bladder with a clepsydra.
Chapter LIX.
It is indeed shut, that is, closed.
And in it there are three holes, two on one side, and one on the other side, as you see.
And the concave place where that which propels it is, should be according to the quantity which it requires without addition, until when it is drawn with it, it draws from humidities: and when it is pushed, with it it expels to a distance: according to what the syphon does, which projects naphtha, that is, Greek fire in the battles of Mars.
When therefore you wish to throw the humidity into the vein, introduce the end of the syringe into the humidity, and draw with it that which drives it upwards, for the humidity is drawn into the concavity of the syringe. Then introduce the extremity of it into the rod, according to what we have narrated in the syringe.
Then drive the moisture with that which drives it for that moisture comes to the vein immediately, so that the weak one feels it. The form of a thin enema for irrigating the bladder.
Then insert a strong thread into those openings, as they turn. Then gather a circle as if it were being gathered with wool; after you have placed within it what you wish of moist substances, and oils, and waters.
Then tie him in the instrument: and do with him as you did with the bladder from the expression with your hand, until moisture comes to the bladder.
On the Extraction of Stone.
Chapter LX. We have already spoken in the division of kinds of stone, and its cure with medicines: and I have said the difference between stone generated in the kidneys, and bladder, and the signs of all of it: and I have said the stone in which the operation falls with hand and section: and it is stone generated in the bladder properly: and he who is fixed on a rod: and I am narrating this with manifest exposition and abbreviation.
Therefore I say that a stone generated in the bladder most often happens to boys.
And from its signs it is that urine comes out of the bladder similar to water in its fineness: and it appears in it white sand, and the sick man rubs his rod, and labors with it, and many times it hangs down. Then it is erected and goes out with it anus in many of them.
And it is an easy healing of boys up until they reach fourteen years.
And it is difficult in the elderly.
In youths, however, it is medium, in that which is between these: and of its whose Stone is greater, healing is easier: and if small, it is reversed the care of it.
When therefore we come to the cure, it is necessary first of all that we cleanse the sick man with an enema, which will extract all the dung which is in his intestines; for this sometimes prevents the finding of the Stone during the examination. Then take the patient with his feet and jostle him, and move him downwards: so that the stone descends to the depth of the bladder, or leaps from a high place several times.
Then make him sit between your hands, and his hands be under his hips, that the whole bladder may slope downward.
Then inquire about him, and touch him externally.
If therefore you feel a stone in the space, then hasten immediately with a section upon it.
If it does not fall under your touch at all, then you ought to wipe the index finger with the oil of the left hand, if the boy is weak; or the middle finger if he is a fully grown youth; and introduce it into his anus, and inquire for the Stone until it stands under your finger; and turn it gradually towards the neck of the bladder.
Then press upon it with your finger, and drive it outwards towards the place whose section you desire; and order your assistant to press the scrotum with his hand, and order another assistant to extend the testicles with his right hand upwards: and with his other hand, to remove the skin which is under the testicles in the part where the incision is.
Then insert a spatula, whose shape is this.
And find it where it is between the anus and testicles, and not in the middle, to the side of the left hip: and let the section be above that stone, and your finger be in the anus: and let a transverse section be made, so that the outward section may be wide, and the inward one narrow, according to the quantity that it is possible for the Stone to exit from it no greater.
Perhaps the finger which is in the anus compresses a stone at the site of the incision, and it emerges without difficulty.
And know that from the stone there are those which have corners and margins, wherefore it is difficult an exit because of this.
And from that it is soft, like a gland, and round: and an easy exit is made of it.
Therefore to him who has angles and margins, add to the fissure.
If it does not come out this way, then it is necessary to make a handle over it; or bind it with a strap properly, whose end is like the Moon, which binds upon the Stone and does not run away from it; or to insert a subtle instrument under it, of curved end.
If you cannot lift it above, then enlarge the opening slightly.
If something from blood overcomes you, cut it off with a knife.
If, however, there are more than one stones, then drive the largest one first to the opening of the bladder.
Then cut upon it.
Afterward thrust a little behind it: and similarly do if there are more than two.
If it is large, then ignorance is such that a cut should not be made on it.
Because it happens to the sick one of two things, either that he will die or that there is constant dribbling of urine, because the place does not heal at all.
But administer its expulsion until it comes out; or use instruments in its fracture with forceps until you extract it piecemeal.
When therefore you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with frankincense and aloe and dragon's blood; and bind it, and place upon it a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or rose oil, and cold water, that a hot abscess may sit.
Then lay the patient flat on his back, and do not loosen the ligatures until the third day.
When therefore you have loosened it, embrocate the place with water and much oil.
Then care for it with dyacinion ointment and basilinum ointment until it is healed.
If however a hot abscess occurs in a wound, and corroded, and similar things: such as if blood clots in the bladder, and urination is prevented from it: and this is known by the egress of blood with urine.
Therefore insert your finger into the wound, and draw out the blood from it.
For if it remains, it provokes corruption of the bladder, and its decay.
Then wash the wound with vinegar, and water, and salt: and apply of every kind with that which is fitting for healing, until it heals.
And it is necessary in the course of healing the whole wound, that you lay down two thighs, and join them together, because of the medicines which are placed upon the place.
If the stone is small and is in the urethra and lodged there, and prevents the passage of urine: then take care of it with that which I have told you before you come to the incision.
For often you will be excused from making incisions through this cure, for I have now proved that. And it is, that you receive a perforator from iron alferic, whose this is the shape, of triangular extremity, acute, fixed in wood.
Then take a thread and tie it with a stick under a stone so that it does not return to the wound.
Then insert the piercing iron into the rod with ease until the perforator reaches the stone; and revolve the perforator in the stone with your hand gradually; and try the perforation of it until you make it penetrate from the other side.
Urine is indeed completed immediately.
Then press your hand upon that which remains of the stone from the outer part of the staff.
He himself breaks and comes out with urine, and the sick man is healed.
If this treatment is not prepared for you, because of something that prevents it: then bind a thread under the stone, and another thread above the stone. Then dry over a stone in the very stick between two ligatures.
Then remove it.
Afterwards, dissolve the ligament, and cleanse the coagulated blood that forms in the wound.
And it is not necessary to tie a thread under the stone, except that it may not return to the vessel: and another thread from above, except that when the thread is loosened after the removal of the stone, the skin may return to its place, and cover the wound: and for this reason it is necessary for you when you tie the upper thread, that you raise the skin upwards, that it may return to its proper place, and cover the wound, as we have said.
On the extraction of the stone from women.
Chapter LXIX.
Stone is produced rarely in women.
If someone should suffer from one of these stones, then it is a difficult cure and is forbidden because of many ways.
One of these is: that a woman may perhaps be a virgin. And the second is because you do not find a woman who will unveil herself to a physician when she is chaste, or among those who have husbands.
The third reason is that you don't find a woman who knows this art well, especially the operation with her hand.
And the fourth is the distance from the stone's place: therefore, a deep incision is needed, and there is fear in it.
If necessity compels one to this, then it is necessary to take a female physician, well-knowing; and few are found.
If you do this first, then seek a chaste, subtle physician and present the woman to an experienced midwife who is well-versed in women's affairs, or a woman who acknowledges having some knowledge of this art: do this, and especially instruct her to perform everything that you prescribe to her based on the examination of the stone. First of all, it is necessary to see if the woman is a virgin. Then it is necessary for him to insert his finger into her anus and search for the stone.
If therefore he finds it, he shall constrict it under his finger, and then command the midwife to insert her finger into the womb of the weak one, and inquire about the stone after she has placed her left hand upon the abdomen, and compresses it with good pressure. If therefore he finds the stone, then it is necessary that he gradually move it from the opening of the bladder to the lower regions with the utmost skill until he comes to the root of the hip.
Then he cuts above it at the opposition of the middle of the vulva at the root of the hip, from whatever part it is prepared, and feels for the stone in that part: and his finger does not move away from the stone, pressing under it: and let the section be small at first.
Then he inserts a probe above that incision.
If therefore he feels a stone, then he should add into the section according to the quantity proportionate to how much the stone comes out from it.
And know that there are many kinds of stone. From these it is small and large, smooth and rough, long and round, having branches.
Therefore, know its kind, as it will be signified to you by this above that which you see.
If therefore blood conquers you, then add to the place of the wound crushed (something), and hold it for one hour until the blood stops.
If you are defeated by a flow of blood, and you know that the expulsion of blood is from an artery that has been cut: then put powder on the place, and bind it with small strips of constriction adequately: and do not move it: and let go the stone, and do not extract it.
Perhaps the weak woman will die.
Then care for the wound.
When therefore the sharpness of blood has subsided after days, and the place has decayed, then return to your operation until the stone comes out.
On the cutting of an aquatic hernia.
Chapter LXII.
The ramex is not watery, but a collection of moisture in the white sifac, which is under the skin containing the testicle: and it is called sifac. And sometimes there is in the fold of its own skin which nature has prepared for it in that part until it is thought to be: which is another egg, and is the skin of the testicle between the white surface, which we have said: and this is not done except rarely.
And this generation of these branches is from weakness which happens to the testicles: therefore this matter is poured out unto them.
And sometimes it happens from a blow upon the testicles.
And this moisture has many colors. Either its color slopes towards yellowness, or it is bloody red, or it is foul, black, or it is watery white, and this is the most common.
If there is in the white discharge what we said, then the abscess is round to a short length like the figure of an egg: and the testicle does not appear, because moisture contains it on every side.
And if there is moisture in the own cloth, then the abscess is round with a part like an egg, and therefore a man thinks that it is another egg.
And if moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white fascia, then it falls under sensation.
When therefore you wish knowledge of the color of humidity, then experiment with the color of humidity in an abscess with a square introduced, whose form preceded.
According to that which emerges in the track of introduction, judge of that which is between it and itself.
When therefore we come to treatment with iron, then it is necessary that you instruct the sick person to be bled if possible and see his body full.
Then it is placed on its back, high up a little, and cloths are put under it behind.
Then sit you on his left side, and bid the minister to sit on his right, that he may extend his rod to one of the two sides of the skin of the testicles, and to the part of the miraculous belly.
Then take a wide spatula and dry the skin of the testicles from the middle along its length, up to near the pubis bone: and let a section be made according to the straight line that divides the skin of the testicles, until it reaches the white membrane enclosing it; and scrape this and observe, or carefully avoid cutting into this, so as not to cut into it: and let your scraping be from the part which hangs with the egg more: and carefully examine with the scraping according to the quantity that is possible to you.
Then pierce a syringe full of water with a wide perforation, and draw out all the water. Then separate between the two lips of the incision with hooks, and extend the scalpel upwards, and do not touch the skin encompassing the testicles: and cut the scrotum as you are able to cut it, either with its entirety or in parts, especially the subtle side of it.
For if you do not carefully examine it, there will be no safety in its incision, but water will return.
If however a foreign object proceeds from its cutting edge during the hour of your operation: then when you have completed the section of the knife, reduce it.
Then gather together the two lips of the skin of the testicles with a suture.
Then care for it like other wounds until it heals.
If you find a corrupted egg from another blackness, then it is necessary that you tie the vessels which are suspensory, fearing the flow of blood.
Then cut away the testicle with its suspension ligament, and extract the sperm; afterwards take care of it as we have said.
If water is gathered in two parts, then you know that there are two branches: therefore dry the other part according to what you did in the other, equally.
And if it seems right to you that there should be one operation, then do so; then wipe away the blood.
And introduce into the incisions wool immersed in oil, or in roseated oil: and place before the opening another wool which you have immersed in wine and oil, and expand it over the two testicles, and the miracle of the belly: and place above double cloths, and they are pouches: and tie them from above with a bandage, which has six according to this form.
Then two cloths are taken and sewn together and filled with a carminative plaster according to this likeness: and the ends which press are made of wool or wet wool: and they are gathered with the bandage in the loin cloth: and one end receives over the anus up to the back, and the second receives at the side of the breast: and the two ends above the two lower hips, and the two other ends above the two groins, and the whole bandage is gathered together in the loincloth.
And sometimes this ramus is treated artificially with a cautery at the site of the incision with an iron; and it is, that you take a subtle cauterizing knife, and cut with it the skin of the testicles; and it is ignited, according to what we have narrated: until when it reveals a white sifac containing water; then take the cautery, according to this form.
It is like the Greek letter.
Then pierce it with that, and ignite it until all the moisture comes out.
Then extend the scalpel with hooks and scrape with a fine burning cautery, and cut into it as far as you are able until you have eradicated the whole of it.
And beware from egg, lest it touch fire.
And know that this operation is healthier and further from blood flow, and better than the operation with cutting.
If, however, it causes you opposition during the time of incision or cauterization, a hot abscess, or bleeding, or something else: then it is necessary that you cure what causes opposition to you from that with the care which is suitable for it, according to what has been said before.
If however the patient is fearful and does not wait for this operation because of its horror: then administer the perforation according to what I narrate it: and it is.
When it is made certain to you by that which we have said about the significations, that a branch is watery: then it is necessary that you make the sick person sit upon an elevated seat.
Then pierce the abscess in its lower part with a broad spatula: and place the perforation according to the length of the body, and let the opening be wide until water runs entirely through it.
Then place a pad over the usual location and tie it, and allow it to run off any remaining water; then care for it until the wound heals.
If, however, the resistance is to the exit of water at the hour that you perforate it; and this is not except because the white flesh opposes resistance in the orifice of the wound, and prevents the exit of water: then you must insert a feather into the wound, or an instrument with which water from hydrops is drawn out, whose form precedes: or add a little more to the operation of the wound.
And know that water returns and gathers together after six months, or about those.
When therefore it is aggregated, then it shall be returned according to the same manner, and the sick person shall pass his days.
On the care of fleshy branches (gangrene).
Chapter LXIII.
Know that in the cutting of this branch, there is fear leading to harm in many cases.
Therefore, it seems to me his dismissal from it is salutary.
And I am remembering the operation on it, and the appearance of the abscess.
Therefore I say that many abscesses occur in bodies, of which are composed the testicles: and this is caused by many causes, namely. Either from excess of acute, or sharp, which flows down to the testicles.
Or by percussion.
And the color of an abscess is according to the color of the body, and pain is not found in it, and it is a severe abscess.
And perhaps it is a stone abscess, which is brown in color, and has no sensation.
And sometimes it happens from the tying of arteries, and their inflation: as has already been said in its recollection: or from the inflation of veins.
Therefore, what is from them from the inflation of the arteries, is known by the arrangement of the abscess, when you press it with your fingers.
And you should not touch it at all.
That which is done from the inflation of veins, does not scatter anything among the compression with fingers. And now it is possible that a section may be made on this kind and on the remaining flesh; and it is as if one were to cut the skin of the testicles.
Then stretch the ovary upward and remove it with a white cloth; and free the ligament from the vessels, and tie the vessels; and cut the ligament after you have freed it from all parts of the ovary.
If therefore the egg has become consolidated with those fleshy parts born, then it is necessary that you draw out the egg and cut into it. And if adherence is between something from the siphon, or in that which is between vessels: then it is necessary that you free all of that adherence, and cut it with a round incision.
If, however, the birth of flesh is in the place of adherence which is behind: then it is necessary that you cut all of it and extract the egg, as we have said. When therefore your operation is completed, then fill the wound with wool steeped in rose oil, and wine; then take care of it with the rest of the cure until it heals.
On the care of branches, which is with the vine.
Chapter LXIV.
A boil is an abscess wrapped in some kind of wrapping, similar to a bottle gourd, with the softening of the testicles: and it becomes difficult for the weak person to move and exercise, and to walk.
And in the cure of this illness there is fear, on account of the recollection of what preceded it.
Truly it is necessary, that we say the operation in this according to what the first did. Therefore I say that it is necessary that you make the sick person sit on a raised seat.
Then make an incision with a broad, sharp spatula, transversely across the direct vessels until they are revealed.
Then scrape from every part, as we have told you in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples.
Then dry that in the middle section straight according to the length of the body, and remove what is gathered from moist, foul, rotten excretions.
Then care for a wound as with the treatment of other wounds, in which the desire to generate healthy tissue is so that the vessels that nourish one of the testicles may fall away.
It is not bad for that reason.
If it happens that the vessels are all cut, then it is necessary that they be extracted along with the testicles; so that the egg is not deprived of nourishment because of the incision, and does not waste away or become scorched, and is not helpful with them.
On the treatment of intestinal strangulation. Chapter LXVIII.
Therefore intestines descend from that rupture to one testicle.
And this rupture is either from a hernia or an extension of it.
And these two kinds occur from many causes. Or by percussion. Or by jumping. Or with a shout. Or by elevation of a heavy thing, and the like.
And the sign, when it is from the extension of the sifach.
This is what happens gradually over a long time, and does not happen suddenly: and it is an abscess equal to the depth, because the siphon compresses the intestine.
And its sign when it is from the cutting of the sifach, because it causes a violent pain to happen suddenly from its beginning: and it is a different abscess, appearing under the skin nearby: and this is because of the exit of the intestine, and its course to the exterior sifach.
And sometimes it emerges with a loop of intestine: and this is called Intestinal Ramp, and loop: and sometimes it is done with windiness.
And sometimes feces runs into the intestines and is retained there: and this is harmful to the sick man because it causes bad pain, and especially when it is pressed.
And in the cure of these kinds of illness with iron there is fear: therefore it is necessary that one should be cautious about the case in it.
And the method of operation is, that you instruct the patient to reduce the intestine with his hand into the cavity of his body, if he obeys the return.
Then, he is laid on his back over his neck between your hands: and raise up his legs.
Then extend the skin that follows the skin upward, and cut the skin of the testicles entirely along its length.
Then fix hooks in the two lips of the incision, according to what you need to open the incision with them: and let the section be according to the quantity, as much as is possible, that an egg may come out of it.
Then scrape the skin of the testicle, and what is under the skin of the testicles, until when it reveals white, hard scrotum from every part: then insert your index finger into that which follows the testicle, into that which is between the white scrotum, which is under the skin, and the secondary scrotum, and separate with it the adhesion which is in the posterior part of the testicle.
Then move with your right hand to the inside of the skin of the testicles: and with this extend the white cloth upwards, with your left hand: and raise the testicle with the cloth to the part of the incision: and order your assistant to extend the testicle upwards: and you alone loosen the adhesion which is behind complete separation.
And feel with your fingers so that nothing is there from the intestine wound up in the hard white cloth.
If you find anything from it, then drive it toward the lower belly.
Then take a needle with a coarse thread made of ten threads; and introduce it into the last sifach, that is, the tunic which is under the skin of the testicles following the section: then cut the ends which protrude from the thread until there are four strands.
Then arrange some of them over others with a shape in the form of a cross; and tie them with alsifac, of which we have spoken, because it is under the skin ligament of the testicles, until it can not allow any of the vessels that nourish them to send anything to them: so that there will not be a hot abscess.
And place again the ligament second outside the first ligament, distant from it less than two fingers.
And after these two ligaments are released from the siphons, which is under the skin of the testicles, the quantity of the size of a finger: and cut the rest entirely according to its roundness, and take out from it the egg.
Then dry the lower part of the skin of the scrotum with a section from which blood and pus flow, as we have narrated previously.
Then administer wool soaked in oil, and place it in the wound: and administer the ligature which we have narrated.
And sometimes the white sifach, which we have said, is cauterized after its incision, fearing a flow of blood.
It happens often indeed.
And let the ligament go, until it falls by itself.
If, however, the case of him is delayed, then it shall be embrocated with hot water: and place upon it that which we said, until it falls.
Then care for the wound with the rest of the wound care, until it is healed.
On a windswept branch.
Chapter LXVI.
In this text no one has dared to treat it with iron.
And first they said that it is done as we narrated in the branch which is with the Vine.
That is, as you cut the bowel after sectioning, bring it down easily; then dry it in the middle, and finally take care of it with what opens it until the bowels fall out. And take care of the wound, according to what we said, until it heals.
Of the rupture that occurs in the groin.
Chapter LXVII.
When a rupture occurs in the groin, as we have said, and the place protrudes, and nothing from the intestines descends to the testicles: and if it descends, it is small, and returns every hour; but if time is prolonged with it, a fissure is added in the siphash, until the intestines descend into the siphash.
And this happens from the extension of the siphon, which is in the groin, as we said.
This is because it extends, ifach; then it softens, and the place suppurates, and swells.
And its treatment is with a cautery, as his narrative preceding this has stated.
And sometimes it is cured with a knife, in this way: and let the sick person lie on his back between your hands.
Then dry the place of the rupture and abscess and prominent, by a cut across, according to the quantity of three fingers.
Then tighten the forceps and those that are under the skin until when the white sifach is revealed, which is under the skin that follows it.
Then take a probe, and place it over the prominent location from the sifach, and press it deep into the abdomen.
Then suture two prominent places above the end of the radius from the shaft, and connect one with the other with a suture; then remove the end of the radius.
And do not cut the intestines at all, nor pull out the bowel, nor anything else, just as I have taught you in the treatment of a rupture in the intestines. Then take care of wounds.
When therefore you cut threads, cleanse it, and restore the wound until it is consolidated.
If the incision is contracted, and no prominence is added.
And a cautery is better in this place; because it is nearer to health.
On the softening of the skin of the testicles.
Chapter LXVIII.
Often the skin of the testicles becomes soft in some men, because of which the flesh that is between them softens and its appearance is defiled.
Therefore it is necessary for him who is asked about the cure of this, that he make the one lying on his back, and cut the whole skin which has been softened over the natural skin. Then he will bring together the two lips with a suture: and if you wish, sew in the first excess of softened skin with three or four sutures, and make a firm suture.
Then care for the healing of the remaining wounds, until they heal and the threads fall away.
On Castration.
Chapter LXIX.
Know that castration is forbidden in our law: and for this reason it was permitted to me that I not remember it in this my book: and it is not necessary to remember it, except for two ways.
One of these is that it should be in the knowledge of a physician when he is asked about it; and that he may know the cure for him who has it.
And another way is, that we often need the castration of some animals, for our benefit through it, such as rams, goats, and cats, and similar animals.
Therefore I say that castration is done in two ways. Or by rubbing.
Either through incision and cutting.
In that which is done by friction, the way of operation is: that we make the animal sit in warm water until its testicles soften and relax and hang down; then rub them with your hand until they dissolve and do not appear under touch.
In castration by incision and section, it is necessary that you hold the animal and press the skin of its testicles with your left hand.
And this method of castration is better because it is done by attrition: for perhaps attrition leaves something of the testicles, wherefore the animal desires copulation.
Then care for the wound until it heals.
On the treatment of hermaphrodites in two ways.
Chapter LXX.
A hermaphrodite is from men in two ways.
One of these is because it appears where the following space is, or in the skin of the testicles, in that which is between two testicles, a figure like the vulva of a woman, in which there are hairs: and sometimes urine runs out from that which is in the skin of the testicles.
In women there is one kind, and it is the vulva of the woman above the comb like the testicles of a man small entirely, protruding to the outside: one of which is like the penis of a man, and two like two testicles.
And the treatment of three kinds, two from men, and one kind from women, is: because it is necessary that you cut the added flesh until the impression of it flees.
Then take care of the treatment of the remaining wounds.
In the second kind of men, from which urine exits, which is in the skin of the testicles, there is no operation, nor is there any cure at all.
On the incision of the labia and prominent flesh in women.
Chapter LXXI.
Perhaps a growth is added above the natural thing, until its appearance becomes foul and ugly: and sometimes it is magnified in certain women so much that it expands like that in men, and comes even to intercourse.
Therefore, you ought to hold the superfluity of Tentiginis with your hand, or with a hook, and cut into it; and do not cut to the end, especially in the deep part of the root: so that there does not happen a flow of blood.
Then care for the wound itself until it heals.
Flesh that has grown is flesh which is born in the opening of the womb until it fills it; and perhaps it emerges to the outside according to the likeness of a tail; and because of this some first call the ailment taillessness.
Therefore it is necessary that we should cut into it as we cut into a hernia and treat it until it heals.
Concerning the treatment of an ulcus al raticum, which is a non-perforated female ulcer.
Chapter LXXII.
The vulva of a woman should be unperforated, or have a small hole.
And it is either natural or accidental.
It is an illness which precedes that pain; and it happens either from flesh added (to the body) or from something fine and thin, or thick: and it happens either in the depth of the womb, or in its sides, or in the upper part of it, or in the lower part of it; and it prohibits intercourse and impregnation, and childbirth, and perhaps it also prohibits menstruation.
And knowledge of it is obtained by the appearance of the midwife, if the labor pains are apparent and near.
If it is not appearing, then seek it with your fingers, or with a rod.
If however the abscess is from a fine fistula and is near the two lips; then hasten, and break it open.
And it is, as you place small wads over the two lips.
Then place your index fingers of both hands together, and let the woman lie on her back with her legs spread.
Then extend the two lips with force until the subtle siphon is ruptured and the opening is revealed.
Then take wool and soak it in oil, and place it on the site: and let the woman every day apply it so that the site does not congeal with another.
If, however, the sifeh is large and thick, then it is necessary that one cut it with a spatula wide like a myrtle leaf.
If the boil is born from flesh, then suspend it with hooks and cut it open. And let there be with you medicinal agents that will stop the flow of blood without biting, such as acacia, and dragon's blood, and also a mass mixed with egg white.
Then administer a lead pipe wide so that the wound does not close quickly, hold it for several days; and administer a lint from dry linen, then cure the rest as usual until it heals.
And sometimes birth occurs in the womb of other flesh: it is therefore necessary that they be cut according to this mode: while there is no cancerous abscess, for a cancerous abscess which is in the womb, let there be no opposition with iron at all.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids, Athahel, and red boils in all women.
Chapter LXXIII.
Hemorrhoids indeed are openings of veins, until much blood runs continuously from them.
When hemorrhoids become old, they become boils: and I have already said in the division of their kinds, and signs of them: and I will say here what they receive from their cure, and what not.
Therefore I say that hemorrhoids which are in the opening of the womb, and do not appear to the sense, then there is no cure for them with iron.
Those which are from them in the opening of the womb upon which sense falls are those which are cured.
Therefore it is necessary that you introduce a woman into a cold house.
Then extend the atheroma with forceps, or with a rough cloth, and cut it from its roots.
Then pulverize over them at the flow of blood from one powder of incisions without corruption: such as acacia, and dragon's blood, and so on, and similar things to these.
Then he drives his feet against the wall for one hour.
Afterward place it in cold water.
If the blood flow persisted, then make her sit in a decoction of sumac, and the rind of pomegranate, and roosters, and similar things.
Then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster with it over his back.
If blood is cut with it, that is good: and if not, make it adhere to the back with winds and nipples, without incision.
Then take wool and immerse it in the juice of tarathit, or the juice of arnoglossa, or the juice of alaulat branches, that is aglaster, Pontic wine, and make it adhere to the lion's [wound].
When therefore the abscess rests, then care for the place with ointment until it is healed.
The barth is also like the head of an alhaasse, and it has a rough appearance.
Therefore, it is necessary that you cut what appears from it, according to what I said in the beginning equally: and take care of it until it heals.
On the perforation of the uterus which occurs in pregnancy.
Chapter LXXIV.
Many kinds of abscesses occur in the womb, such as cancer, and stone abscess, and ulcers, and inflamed spots, and blisters, that is, herpes, aestiomemus, and fistulas, and hemorrhoids, and ragadiae, and thelil, and hot abscess.
And indeed I have already said all these ailments and their kinds, and their signs, and their cures in the division: it is necessary that I say in this treatise about an abscess that occurs in the womb when it is from abscesses which collect pus, and you will want to know how its opening with a knife is done.
Therefore, you ought to consider.
Then if the pain of an abscess at its beginning is acute with percussion, and with heat, and fever; and you see it red: if sensation falls upon it, then do not hurry with its perforation: but care for it with that which helps on maturation, until when the sharpness of accidents rests.
Then it is necessary that you make the woman sit upon a seat which leans on two seats, and reclines, or rests on her back, and brings her feet to the lower part of the abdomen: and let her hips be expanded, and place her arms under her knees, and bind each with a suitable ligature.
Then let the midwife sit on the right side and administer the instrument that opens the opening of the womb.
Whose shape comes in those that are after.
And it is necessary when you wish to administer this instrument, that you fasten it with a rod deep into the matrix of the woman; so that what enters from the instrument is not more than the depth of the matrix, and does not harm the weak one.
If, however, the instrument is more than deep, then it is necessary to put little pellets on the roof of the deep womb: so that the entry of the whole instrument into the deep womb may be prevented; and it is necessary for him to place a whorl, which runs in the instrument, from the upper side; and so that he may hold the instrument, and so that the minister may turn the whorl until the deep womb opens.
When therefore it appears Exitura, and is touched by hand, and is soft and yielding: then it is necessary to cut the same at its head with a wide spatula.
When therefore the pus is evacuated, then it is necessary that you place in the wound a linen cloth submerged in rose oil: or green oil, in which there is some astringency: and place the linen cloth, and draw out the incision deep in the matrix.
And place the outer part over the mattress, and over the wool comb submerged in water, in which malvae have been boiled.
Then it is treated after two days with an ointment that is suitable for it, until it heals.
And sometimes the womb and wound are washed, so that it is enemaed with water and honey; then with water in which the root of lily or long asarone has been boiled; then return to ointment.
If a wound has hidden itself within the uterus, then it is necessary to prohibit healing of it with iron, indeed care for it with that which we said in the division.
Obstetrical Doctrine, how embryos that are living are treated, according to the form not natural produced.
Chapter LXXVI.
It is necessary for an obstetrician to know first of all the shape of a natural birth.
Therefore, the signs of this are that when you see a woman being compressed to the lower parts, and she desires to smell the air, and is lifted up by what is above her from childbirth, and hastens the exit of the embryo: then know that this birth is according to the natural form, and its exit is above its head, and secondary with it; or suspended, or hanging from the navel. When therefore you see these signs, then it is necessary that the belly be compressed, so that the embryo descends quickly.
Whoever is beyond this birth, is unnatural, blameworthy.
Because sometimes the fetus emerges on its feet, and its body emerges before its head, and its feet, and one of its hands, or one of its feet: or it emerges with its head and hands: or it emerges with its belly: and perhaps it turns over on its neck, and similar things from these admirable figures.
Therefore it is necessary for the obstetrician to be prudent, subtle in all these things, and to beware of error and deception: and I am showing every figure from them, and how the mind is in each, and it is signified by that, and stands upon it.
When the fetus emerges from its head during its natural birth, and it becomes violent against the woman, and childbirth becomes difficult for her, and you see the strength of it already weakened: then make her sit upon a seat, or let women hold her; and vapors of willow with fennel boiled, and with humid oils.
Then the midwife inserts a small spatula between her fingers, and finds with it the second one, and cuts it with her nail until it runs which is in it of moisture; and presses the womans belly until the fetus descends.
If it does not descend, then a woman should be administered an enema of fenugreek mucilage with sesame oil.
Then command him after the enema that he be compressed: and make him sneeze with the ointment, and hold his mouth and nose for one hour.
The fetus will immediately emerge.
If two hands of the fetus protrude first, it is necessary to join them so that you may reduce them gradually with ease.
If it does not yield upon entry, then place the woman upon a seat and elevate her feet upward; then strike the seat against the ground: and let the woman be held so that she does not fall during the impact.
If therefore the hands do not emerge, and the fetus dies: then cut them open, and remove the residue of the fetus: and bind the hand of it with cloth, and remove it with equality: for itself will emerge.
The exit of the fetus upon its feet.
When the fetus emerges on its feet, it is necessary to push them upwards; then turn the fetus gradually; afterwards level it.
Then he shall take one of his feet and stretch it gradually.
When therefore they proceed as far as the hips, then order him to be compressed and make him sneeze with a condition; for he will emerge, if God wills.
And if it does not exit as we have described, then gradually reduce the fetus until you place it according to its natural form.
For he will then exit by an easy passage.
If this be prohibited with all that we have narrated: then take from the mucilage of aloe, and sesame oil, and gum dissolved: and beat all in a mortar with good percussion; then apply it with linen to the belly of a woman, and below her navel.
Then make her sit in warm water until she feels a sensation of heat below the navel.
When therefore you see that the lower parts are now heated, then make a cataplasm of myrrh for him and apply it.
When therefore one holds it for an hour, then make him sit upon a seat.
Then make him sneeze: and close his mouth and nose: and press the lower part of the abdomen with easy compression.
For the pus will come out immediately.
The exit of the fetus over the knees and hands.
When it comes out in this form, then he will apply his hands little by little while introducing them.
Then she is turned over onto her neck, and her feet hang down below; and she lies on a bed, and folds her hands.
Then press upon his belly gradually.
Then remove what is under his feet from the dust and debris until it is prepared on the lower part.
If the fetus does not emerge, then take its feet and move them with a forceful motion.
Then press what is above the hypogastrium gradually until the fetus ascends upwards.
Then he shall put his hands in, and gently bring forth the fetus; and bid the woman to compress until the fetus comes out.
The exit of the fetus hanging lengthwise from the hands.
He will be skilled in the setting of a hand.
If, however, he cannot reduce it, then raise the woman up, and make her walk.
If he cannot walk, then have him lie on a bed: and beat his legs with violent shaking.
Then administer the liniment which you have prepared from poultices.
If she receives it in childbirth, then make her sit upon a seat.
Then study in the reduction of the hand, and equal fetuses according to the natural figure: and make a woman sneeze, and order her to compress herself until it comes out.
The fetus came out on its neck, with outstretched hands, and its face was towards the back of its mother.
The midwife should hold the fetus in her hand and then turn it gradually, and make it even with ease.
When therefore it is made equal, then place on top of its surface that which we have narrated from oil and mucus.
Then command him to move gradually.
When you have done this, then make her sit upon a seat, and command her to incline to the right side.
Then command him to be compressed: and make him sneeze with it.
The prepared fetus is laid on its side.
When it descends to the opening of the womb in this way with the second instrument, then split the second instrument with your finger until it is evacuated from moisture.
If therefore it is suspended over the face of the fetus, and its neck, then cut it from the navel: so that it may not be retained, and die.
Then drive the fetus inward until you place it as is necessary; and command the woman to compress herself several times; for he will then come out by a light exit.
Exitus of twins, or many fetuses.
Know that twins are born many times; and sometimes three, and four.
Nevertheless, this is foreign and rarely happens.
There are five things outside of nature and they do not live at all: and it contains them, even if they multiply, according to one: and they are separated by a siphon, distinguishing among them the ligament in the navel of each of them.
And sometimes they emerge as a fetus emerges from the natural exit, easily; and they emerge from the praiseworthy exit, as we have narrated. If some of these are difficult during childbirth and they come to what we said from unnatural figures, then care for them as we narrated: and let the midwife be subtle, and do what she does with ease and slowness, and devise according to every figure with that which is prepared for her from skillful guidance to safety.
Sometimes one, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and more than ten are formed in the womb: and it has already been verified to me that a woman, aborting, emitted seven, and another fifteen, all formed.
What was done by the measurement of the glorious wise man.
Therefore, all of this ought to be in the knowledge of Obstetrics. Perhaps it will come to him as similar to that one: therefore let him oppose it to it as is necessary.
On the extraction of a dead fetus.
When you treat a dead fetus with what I said in the division of medicine, and it does not come out, and you are forced to use surgery with your hand, then you must consider.
If therefore the woman is of sound constitution and is not afflicted with any of those things from which perdition may be feared upon her: then it is necessary that the woman be laid upon a bed on her back, and her head be inclined downwards, and her legs elevated: and let the minister hold her by two parts, or be fastened to the bed, so that her body may not be drawn out during the extraction of the fetus.
Then moisten the maternal bone with oily moisture along with marshmallow and flaxseed. Then let the midwife anoint her hand with these oils and pastes; then let her introduce it into the womb with ease.
Then he will seek out with it a place where he will put hooks from the fetus, and suitable places for that.
Consider therefore then, if the fetus is prepared to descend upon its head: then fix hooks in its eyes, or in its neck, or in its mouth, or in its palate, or under its beard, or in its collarbone, or in places near the ribs, and under the pubic bone.
If, however, the descent is upon his feet, then in the hip bone and ribs of his middle.
And it is necessary that he hold the hook with his right hand and place its curve in that which is between the fingers of his left hand and introduce it with his hand easily and fix the hook in one of those places which we have said, until it comes to the empty thing.
Then it should be extended with an equal extension, and not be an extension according to straightness only, but rather be moved to every part, so that its exit is relieved; just as it is done when a tooth is removed.
And it is necessary that what is between them be softened in extension.
If a part is held from it, then the midwife must anoint some fingers with oil and introduce them from the side so that she may turn what is held with them.
If therefore a part of the fetus emerges, then let the hooks be changed to a higher place; do this until the entire fetus emerges.
If therefore the hand goes out before other things, and it is not possible to reduce it, because of its constriction: then it is necessary that a cloth be wrapped over it.
Then withdraw it until the whole thing comes out, cut it either at the joint of the foot or at the elbow: and thus you ought to do with the other hand and both feet.
If, however, the fetal head is large, or it is constricted in its exit, or there is water gathered in its head: then it is necessary that he put a Spatula between his fingers, and find with it the head, and extract the water; or break it open with an instrument called Almisdac: whose shape comes with the shapes of other instruments in the chapter which is after this.
Likewise, if the fetus has a large head, then it is necessary to cut through the soft tissues; or extract it with forceps, as we have said.
Then draw out the bones with forceps.
If the head should protrude and be bound at the fork: then it should be found until the moisture which is in the chest is discharged.
If it does not become complicated, nor yield to an outcome: then cut the head piecemeal, as far as is possible for you.
If a boil or hydrops is in the lower abdomen, then it must be lanced until the moisture flows out of it.
If, however, the fetus is on its feet, then its extraction is easy, and its direction to the mouth of the womb is slight.
If it is constricted near the abdomen or chest: then you must extract it with the cloth which you have wrapped around your hand: and press upon the abdomen, or chest, until that which is within them heals.
If, however, the other limbs are removed and the head returns, then the midwife shall insert her left hand. If therefore the birth canal is open, then he shall insert his hand into the depth of the womb, and with it seek out the head, and draw it up with his fingers to the opening of the birth canal; then he shall insert into it one hook, or two hooks, and draw it up with it.
If the womb is contracted because of a hot abscess that has occurred to it: then it is not necessary to labor over it, rather it is necessary at that time to administer an effusion of humid and fatty things: and apply poultices: and let her sit in waters which soften and moisten.
If the fetus is on its side, then it is possible for it to be made level: then what we said about a live fetus should be administered.
If that is not possible, then cut in pieces and remove it.
And it is necessary that you do not let anything from the second cavity inside at all.
When therefore you have completed your operation, then administer what we said about hot abscesses which happen in the womb.
If it happens that there is a flow of blood, then let it descend into water and styptics, and administer the rest of the cure.
And I myself once saw a woman who had a fetus that was dead in her womb; then she became pregnant again over it, and afterward another fetus died as well.
Therefore, after a long time, an abscess occurred for him at his navel, and it became swollen until it opened; and it began to discharge pus.
Therefore I was called upon to treat him, and I treated him for a long time: and the wound did not close.
Therefore I placed upon it of certain plasters of strong attraction: and it came out from the place of the bone.
Then after some days another bone came out.
I was amazed then, since there is no mouth in the belly.
Therefore I thought, because they were from the bones of a dead fetus.
Therefore I inquired about the wound and extracted many bones, with a woman being in better dispositions of herself. And now she has lived thus for a long time, and sends out a little pus from the place.
And I have not included this foreign work here unless because there is knowledge in it and aid for that which the skillful physician administers with his hand from healing.
On the forms of instruments necessary in extracting a fetus.
Chapter LXXVII.
Here is the form of the Squeezer, with which books are aligned, having two whirls on each extremity of two pieces of wood.
Nevertheless this vertigo ought to be of a more subtle constriction, and it should be made either from ebony or from boxwood.
And let the width of all the wood be like two fingers: and the margin of each of the two is like one finger, and the length of each of them is a palm and a half: and in the middle of the two pieces of wood there are two additions of the same kind of wood, which are already fixed on both sides, the length of which is a half palm and a little more: and the width of each of them is like two fingers, or a little more.
And these two additions are inserted into the mouth of the womb, so that it may be opened with them when you turn two whirls.
The form of dizziness which opens the womb.
Another form similar to that one, more subtle, and lighter.
Let it be made of ebony wood, or boxwood, according to the likeness of forceps.
However, at the end of it there should be two additions, as you see here above; and the length of the whole addition from these is like a palm: and the width of both is, two fingers.
When therefore you wish to open the uterus with him, then do make the woman sit upon a bed, with her feet hanging down, with that which is between her legs open.
Then introduce these two adjuncts joined into the matrix: and you are holding the lower end of the instrument between his hips.
Then open your hand with an instrument, just as you do with forceps, evenly according to the amount that you wish from the opening of the mouth of the womb, until the midwife does what she wants.
Form of Vertigo another which the ancients called Form of the Driving Force by which the fetus is driven.
The form of a small millstone used to crush the head. Shape of a wound having one spine.
The shape of tongs having two spines.
The form of forceps with serrated teeth, with which the head of a fetus is crushed.
The form of a spatula has two extremities for cutting off the head.
Form of two spatulas also sides.
These instruments are all practiced, and the more they multiply in kind and are prepared by the craftsman, the swifter it is to their operation, and the higher it is among men, because of their quantity.
Therefore, you should not despise from them an instrument, unless it is prepared for you.
Their need is inexcusable.
On the Extraction of the Second Tooth.
Chapter LXXVIII.
When the second birth is retained, then it is necessary for you to order the weak one, that she may retain her breath.
Then make him sneeze with the condice: and grasp your hand over his mouth and nose.
If therefore it comes out through this, it is good.
If not, then take a pot and pierce a hole in the lid; and put inside it herbs that open the matrix, such as calamentum, rue, and anise, and chamomile, and sage, and cassia wood, and centaury: take all these herbs, or some of them, and submerge them with water, and put them on fire.
Then place a bundle of reeds over the opening of the pot's cover and the other end in the womb; and hold it until steam reaches the womb's cavity.
Then make her sneeze, as we have said.
Secondly, it will come out easily.
If however it remains after this cure and does not come out: then order the Midwife, that she may submerge her hand in sesame oil, or fig sap. Then he inserts into the wound and seeks with it the Second [region].
When therefore he finds it, then let him take it and extend it gradually.
If it is attached deep within the womb, then he shall insert his hand, according to what we have narrated, until when he finds the Secundina, and draws it out gradually according to straightness, so that the womb does not fall down at vehement traction: indeed it ought to be turned with ease to the right and left sides; then add in the quantity of traction.
For it then obeys, and is kept, and departs from adhesion.
If the uterine bone is constricted, as we have already recounted: cure it with sneezing and from medicine of the pot with herbs.
If it does not come out with all that we have narrated, then beware of tiring yourself in repetition of extraction.
Indeed it is necessary that what issues from the mouth of the womb be brought up to the hip of the woman.
Then administer an enema with a tetrapharmakon ointment.
For indeed it will rot it after days, and dissolve, and it will go out.
Nevertheless, when it putrifies, a bad smell rises from it to the stomach and head, and harms the weak.
Therefore, it is necessary that suitable fumigations be administered to it.
Some ancients already tested fumigation with nasturtium and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument for fumigation used for a woman during retention of the Second (menstruation) and monthly flow.
Make a mold like alum from glass or from clay: and put the broad end over fire: and let fumigation be placed over prunes: hold it until that fumigation is consumed: and repeat another.
On the treatment of an unperforated anus.
Chapter LXXIX.
Many boys are born with their anuses unperforated, whom already a subtle hand has repaired.
Therefore, let the midwife perforate that siphon with her finger; and if she cannot, let her perforate it with a sharp spatula; and let her beware of the blade, so that it does not touch it.
Then place upon it a cloth soaked in wine and oil.
Then care for it with ointment until it is healed.
If however you fear that it should be filled with pus, then put a lead tube in the opening for many days and remove it when the boy wants to heal.
And now it happens that suppuration of the anus also occurs from the healing of a wound, or from an abscess.
Therefore it is necessary that the consolidation be cut, then it be treated with that which we said from the cure and lead. On the treatment of fistulas that occur in the lower part.
Chapter LXXX.
Fistulas which occur in the lower region are Knots and Lumps that happen near the anus externally: or in the space of one part: and there is one fistula, or more.
When therefore that knot becomes obsolete, it is opened, and a white watery humidity or a subtle pus runs out of it.
And sometimes there are fistulas penetrating from these.
And there are of these fistulas when they are in space penetrating as far as the bladder and as far as the male organ's urethra.
And they penetrate up to the hip joint and up to the tailbone.
From this it is known that a fistula penetrates to the anus, even a non-penetrating one, is, as you insert your index finger into the anus: and you insert a fine probe into the fistula from bronze, or iron: when there is no twisting.
If there is a twisting in it, then introduce into it a thin leaden probe or a horsehair needle until you feel the probe or needle with your finger.
If you do not feel it fully, and nothing proceeds from the hole through excretion, nor windiness, nor worm as I said; then know that it is not penetrating. Therefore hasten to treatment.
And when a fistula penetrates to the bladder or to the urethra, then its significance is the exit of urine from it, and the prohibition of this so that the place may be consolidated with medicines.
If it is penetrating up to the hip joint, or to the hip bone: then its sign is that it reaches by touch up to there, if there is no crookedness up to the bone; and the finding of pain around the area, and that pus always flows from it; and that medication does not help it, nor does it solidify with ointment.
And in these fistulas penetrating every thing there is no cure at all: and the treatment of them is labor and vanity to him, from foolish physicians, upon whom it is formed. In that one which is not penetrating and not old, healing is hoped for with a clamp, according to what I tell you, and I have already proven it: and it is, that the sick person lie between your hands on his back: and elevate his legs up to his hips, and let his hips be inclined to his belly.
Then they introduce a probe of lead, or of iron, if there is a winding in the fistula, until you know where it reaches.
If he feels it weak near the anus, then you should insert your index finger into the anus.
If therefore you feel in your finger a wound that has already penetrated itself, besides which you feel between your finger and the skin, or flesh; then therefore know certainly, that it is penetrating: do not therefore labor on it, because it is not its healing, as we have said.
They said, however, that flesh is healed in some people and from the medicine which is expected to help it, it is to burn a subtle cauterium fire according to the width of the fistula, as it preceded, and introduce it burning into the fistula until it reaches around the anus.
Then repeat this twice, or thrice, until you know that all those added, filtered meats, which are like the quill of a birds feather, have been burned.
Then care for it with linens wrapped in butter, until those burnt flesh parts have come out; then care for it with ointments that generate and consolidate flesh.
If therefore it is healed, it is good.
And if not, then it is never healed with any other cure.
And if it proceeds forth the probe, and does not reach to your finger, which is in the anus, and there is between it and the probe a thick veil of flesh, or sifac: and you see a fistula in that which follows the skin's surface, then dry the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and you go cutting with the probe which is in the fistula, until the incision reaches where the probe's extremity arrives, and the probe is freed and falls.
Then cleanse those filtered flesh pieces, which resemble the quill of a bird's feather, so that nothing remains from them.
If blood overcomes you, and loosens between you and your operation so that you cut those flesh: then it is better that which is done, and more rapid help, to cauterize it with fire, or with medicine sharp.
Because cautery with fire gathers good properties, the burning of those added flesh, and the cutting off of blood, and the drying of moistures.
Then care for it by wrapping it with licenses in butter, or crushed cabbage, until the place emits pus and those burnt flesh parts come out into the pus.
Then the wound is treated with ointments that are hardening and flesh-producing; and there are medicines which contain astringency and drying properties.
For when it is restored, then it is already healed: and do not fear repetition. If however fistula has already arrived as deep into the anus, and lengthens from the superfluity of the body: then introduce your finger into the anus, and inquire with it.
If therefore you feel a wound, and between you and it is a veil of linen, or flesh, and it is close to penetration: then there is no operation on it, unless according to the way of trust and hope.
That is, because it is administered in one of three ways: either that you cauterize it, as we said; or that you cut it, until you reach its concavity, so that it is possible for you to insert a ligature, and treatment from next.
And do not proceed too much with the incision, so that you do not cut the ligament containing the anus, and it happens over the weak exit of excretion without volition. Then take care of it as we have said. Perhaps it will heal: or lengthen the wound itself, and clean it after drying it almost to the anus, as we have said, either with a probe, or with another instrument of sharp extremity.
Then cleanse those filtered flesh that are in the incision, as far as you can with examination.
Then attempt the restoration of the entire wound with a section and an upper opening where it is healed, and let the fistula remain open on the inner part of the anus, and be lighter above the weak.
And sometimes a fistula is treated in this way: and it is when you insert a probe into the fistula. And it is on the side of the anus near the surface of the body with the skin and edge of the anus: then take a probe with a perforated end, which is like an awl, that is, a prepared hide, according to this form.
And introduce into it a thread wrapped from five threads, and about it.
Then introduce a probe with a thread into the fistula until it reaches its cavity.
If therefore it is penetrating into the margin of the anus inwardly near, then withdraw the thread from that opening: so that you introduce your finger into the anus and withdraw the end of the thread, and gather together the two ends together: and tighten both, and release it on one day, or two days: and the more the thread sinks into the flesh, tighten it well, until those fleshes which are between the two ends of the thread sink in, and fall: then take care of the wound, until it consolidates, and heals.
For you should not do that for a wound so that you do not cut it.
Then do with it as we have said, until it is healed.
The shape of a knife used to make an incision for a fistula, the sharpness of which is very acute on one side and not acute on the other so that it does not cut what is not necessary, as you see.
On the suture of hemorrhoids, from which blood flows out upon their incision: and the care of fissures.
Chapter Eighty-One.
There are hemorrhoids in two ways.
Or they are inside the rectum, similar to bundles of charcoal, or like plums; or as if they were grains of wheat.
And of these there are small ones and large ones: and blood runs from them always, and it is one, and there are many.
And they are outside the anus, and at its extremities.
However, those that are outside the anus are, for the most part, few in moisture, from which flows yellow water, or a small amount of blood with constant flow: and they are according to the color of the body.
And the cure of it which is inside the anus is that you order the sick person to strain, and let it be expelled until it comes out of the anus, and appear before you.
Therefore also suspend them with hooks: or hold them with your finger.
Then cut them at their roots.
If they are not held by the hooks because of their moisture and softening: then take them with a rough cloth, or with a swab from double wool, and remove them with your fingers.
Then cut them open and pulverize upon them after the incision some hot powders so that they may stand in their place as cautery.
Or cauterize them according to what preceded in the chapter on cauterization.
Then care for them with the rest of the cure, until they are healed.
If the old woman does not obey the evacuation, then administer to the sick person a clyster with a small opening so that it may be washed with what is in the anus, and it will obey evacuation quickly when the sick person expels it.
If however they are external from the anus, then their matter is light, easy: and it is as if you would take them with your fingernail, or take them with a hook, and cut them.
Then care for them with what we have said until they are healed.
And if he shuns cutting with iron, then it is necessary that you administer a suture of them according to this mode.
Take a thread wrapped up, and introduce it into the point.
Then draw out the athelil upward, and make it penetrate with a point into its root from the other side: and involve both extremities of the thread, at the lower part of the point, and let them be laterally: and tighten the athelil tightly with a strong constriction.
Then tie the thread, and withdraw the point.
Do this with all atheriel, and let go from them one: nor its own, so that it may run out of it superfluity of blood.
Then place upon the anus a cloth soaked in rose oil, or cedar oil, and place it upon the anus: and command the sick person to rest.
Then let him go until it falls.
When therefore they fall (atheletic), care for them with ointment, and the rest of treatment, until they are healed.
On the treatment of fissures.
For often such things happen from the drying up of feces and the constraint of nature.
When therefore they become ancient and medicine does not work on them, then it is necessary that you scrape them with the point of a spatula, or with your fingernail, until they become moist, and remove from them the upper skin which prevents their consolidation.
Then care for them until they are consolidated as is necessary.
If they do not solidify: then treat them again with more intense heat than the first, until they bleed much, and are then scraped, and take care of them until they heal.
On the treatment of inversions of the Almirmar, both inverted and not inverted: and of Athil's scissors, and of Ants.
Then care for that, and if you wish cauterize it according to what preceded in its chapter.
From a certain type of smooth, hard substance there is one small eminence, rough and filtered, round upon the surface of the body.
And many times happen in children's hands.
And its cure is that you extend the atheril and cut it: or bind it with silk thread: or with hair until it falls off.
And if you wish, cauterize it according to what has been said with fire, or with a sharp medicine; and now the athelil are eradicated, both inverted and not inverted with the instrument which I shall say. An ant's hill is also a small elevation, coarse, on the surface of the body, penetrating deep inward; and when it finds cold, it feels like an ant bite in it, and it happens throughout the body; and most of it happens in the hands.
And its cure is, that you take a tube from the feather of a goose, or a strong vulture's feather: and place that tube over the Ant, until it contains a circle of the tube from its parts.
Then turn your hand with a probe until you cut what is around the ant hill; and place it in the deep flesh, and root out the ant from its root. And if you wish, make it with a tube of air, or iron, according to this form.
Let the upper part of the tube be drawn upward with a covering that is silent, so that the grip on the finger is relieved and its rotation.
And if you wish to cauterize a Formica according to what was said previously about the cauterizing of Athelil in the chapter on cautery.
Concerning the shapes of instruments that are administered to the womb in diseases of the anus, and the solution of the belly, and colic.
Chapter LXXXIII.
Sometimes a clyster is made from silver, or from brass, or from melted copper, or hammered copper.
And sometimes these instruments are made small and large, according to those in which they are administered.
Therefore what is administered in the healing of young children should be small, and those whose anuses are weak or painful, so too their perinea.
Large enema.
Small bladder.
The tube of it, that is, the upper part in which the uterus is bound, should be wide according to this measure: and let there be a distinction so that the uterus may be tied as you see, and its lower end which goes into the anus, be closed, that is, not open, smooth, soft, gently drawing to subtlety: and on one side of it there shall be two holes, and on the other side one hole.
And let the width of the opening be according to the thickness of the rays, and a little thicker, and let it be in which medicines are placed from the bladder of an animal; or from sheep's gut, which is according to the shape of a small asophragmus: whose root is one palm.
When therefore it is placed in the uterus, it is tightened at the head with a clamp between two distinguishable constrictions with strong pressure.
Then administer an enema with it.
And this is the form of the circle of the womb here depicted, and the hole. The quality of the clyster is this: that you fill the rectum or bladder with medicine, which shall be heated according to the quantity tolerated by the patient; and beware lest it be too hot, or too cold.
Then the patient is laid on his back, and his legs are raised to the upper part; and underneath him a cushion, that is, leather upon which men lie, or linen.
Then anoint the extremity with oil, or with albumen of egg, or with the mucus of fenugreek, or something similar.
Then introduce it into the anus with ease.
Then let the attendant take the rectum with both his hands and press it with force until he expels everything that is in the clyster into the intestine. Then remove the clyster and let the sick person elevate his legs against the wall. If medicine compels him to an outcome, then he should hold as much as possible.
And if he sleeps with it all night, it is more ultimate in healing.
If you give him enemas in ailments of the stomach, and his death hastens: then repeat the enema until he is healed.
If there are hemorrhoids or painful boils in the anus, then a gentle and fine enema should be used, such as those with which children are given enemas.
And this is the form of enemas for a strict skin.
On the cure of wounds of the head without fracture of bone.
Chapter LXXXIV.
I have said in the division of wound care as was fitting for the book, and I will say here treatment of them with hand and with medicines according to completion.
Therefore I say, that wounds differ according to how they are made, and according to the place upon which the wound falls.
Therefore, the things by which wounds are made very often are such as: throwing of a stone; or cutting with a sword or knife; or striking with a spear, or wood, or arrow; and similar things from many other things.
Wounds which are made according to the places of the body are such as a wound that falls upon the head, or neck, or chest, or belly, or leg: and similar ones from those limbs.
And I am telling about the treatments of certain wounds, so that I may set forth that reasoning and rule over the rest of the wounds.
And I begin with simple wounds of the head: for the recollection of compositions will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore I say.
When a wound occurs on the head that is simple and there is no bone fracture: consider then if it is from a stone throw, or something similar, and already has broken only the skin; and it is a large wound, and fear the bad outcome of a hot abscess: then hasten, and perform cephalic phlebotomy immediately: and do not delay this: and draw out of the blood according to the quantity of its virtue: if nothing forbids phlebotomy, especially if it is the blood that flows from the wound little.
And let bloodletting be from the opposite side of the wounded part.
And let the sick one beware of repletion, and wine, and heavy foods.
If something prevents diminution, then it should be reduced from food and not approach meats or wine.
And place over the wound if it happens to have a hot abscess, rose oil infusion alone, or with wine that has astringency.
If you are sure about a hot abscess, then place on the wound, if it is fresh with its blood, and has not changed the air, the powder which I will tell you about shortly; and if it has already changed the air, then place some ointment on it until it heals.
If however the wound is large, or is from a sword cut, and similar things: and its lips do not come together by their own accord, then gather them together with suture, according to what I will tell in wounds of the belly about the suturing of them.
If now a wound has been detected from bone, and it hangs, and there is no retention of it, except in a small suspension; then cut into it.
Then care for the wound with medicines, and restore the hardened flesh in place of the skin, and order the sick to be fed with foods that have thickness, such as heads and cooked wheat, until it is like porridge; and things similar to this.
If you find in the skin putrefaction, and it does not adhere to the bone: then cut out the entire putrefaction, and throw it away: then take care of it.
If in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood flows, and it is not severed by medicines, then inquire about the artery.
If therefore you find it not cut, then cut it with a spatula, or bind it.
If necessity demands when that which we said does not avail, then cauterize it until the blood is severed.
The Mode of Incarnate Powder.
Take one part of frankincense, two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of unburnt quicklime: mix all together well, and sift it; and fill the wound with it, and bind it with a good constriction until it adheres well on top of it, and clots with the blood.
Then bind it above with pads and let it go, and do not loosen it until it remains, so that it does not burst out.
For the medicine is not eradicated from it until it heals.
Then care for the rest of the cure, until they are healed.
On wounds of the neck.
Chapter LXXXV.
If a wound occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in treatment between it and a simple wound on the head.
If a nerve of the neck or an artery has already been cut, then if it is a nerve, there is no need to treat it except with something that causes strong clotting, such as ziniar, zegi, and similar substances.
For they harm the nerves and constrict them.
And do not place anything cold upon the wound at all: because the substance of nerves is cold, and its continuation is with the brain, which is most exalted of the limbs; and let it be healed with medicines gentle, such as lime washed with sweet water several times infused with oil, or with rose oil, and myrrh, and when washed also with sweet water: and the remaining mineral stones, according to this manner, and humid ointments.
If however the wound is large, then administer a suture: or tie together its edges with splints.
Then care for it until it heals.
If, however, the depth of a wound is great, or if there has formed a pocket in the lower part of it, into which pus already gathers, then pierce it at a more depressed spot therein.
If an artery has already been cut in a wound and its blood flow has begun, then separate it, or dry it out, and tie it up; or cauterize it if necessity demands it.
If, however, a spine has already fallen into the throat, or the whole of it, and the alhaudegi have been saved: then gather together the lips of skin with suture above the throat tube, and do not touch the throat, but rather equal it, and reduce it back to its natural shape.
Then tighten the constriction gently, and let it go for several days.
Then care for it with ointment which contains astringency and drying properties, until it heals.
If now the wound has made an impression on bone, then examine it; and if there are fragments of bone in it, remove them all or as many as you can. And what cannot be prepared, leave it, until the wound putrefies and the exit of it separates and becomes easier.
If the wound is fresh, then apply the powder which I have described on top of it.
If, however, a fistula is formed in a wound and bone is visible, then care for it should be done according to the chapter pertaining to its remembrance.
Chapter LXXXVI.
If therefore from the wound there issues windiness, when he breathes out from it weakly, then know that the wound is mortal.
If it is not deep and is recent with its own blood: then do not place powder in it from the first hour, nor bind it tightly so that blood is not held in its depth, and returns to the heart, and kills the weak one: but place ointment on it, attractive, and dissolve it twice a day.
If ointment is not present to you, then put in the wound opening old wool, so that it draws out what comes forth from it of humors; and make that the sick person sleeps upon the wound, so that it may cure what is gathered in it.
If, however, three days or more have passed since the wound and no spasm has occurred to the injured person, nor any bad fluttering of the heart, nor constriction in breathing, and you see the rest of his dispositions good: then know that the wound is safe.
Therefore, care for the wound itself and with permission, and the rest of the care, until it heals.
If, however, healing is excluded and it always opens, then know that a fistula has already been made.
Therefore, care for it from its own chapter.
And if a wound is from the cut of a sword or knife, and it is simple on the surface of the chest, or back: then care for it with that which preceded regarding sutures, if it is large; or with powder, if it is small.
If it has already made an impression in the bone, and a fragment has broken out of it, then examine the wound, and quickly proceed to remove those fragments, if they are separated.
If, however, they are not separated, then let them be left alone until the wound has rotted away, for it will be easier to extract them afterwards.
The judgment in the cure of the remaining wounds, in the remaining limbs, is that which we have said.
On wounds of the abdomen, and the exit of the intestines, and their protrusion.
Chapter LXXXVII.
A rupture that happens to the belly is great, and medium, and small.
From this great sometimes a intestine exits, or number of intestines.
Therefore it is made an introduction of them, and their suture more difficult and harder.
And even a small disruption can be difficult in another way.
Therefore, it follows that the reduction is more difficult if you do not hasten in its introduction to its place immediately; because it becomes inflated, opens, and increases: therefore, its entrance becomes difficult.
Therefore, a middle disruption is better for ruptures because with it the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, as it is in these two kinds.
Know that the suture of the vulva is according to four modes.
Two common sutures are used in the suture of the abdomen and in the suture of other wounds of the body: and two other sutures are proper to other wounds.
Nevertheless, they are more proper with suture of the abdomen: and I tell you each one with an explanation and a declaration. Therefore I say, that when a wound is small and something comes out of it from the intestine, and it is difficult to reduce it: then it is because of one of two modes.
Either because of the smallness of the rupture, as we have said: Or because there is inflation in the intestine because of the coldness of the air.
When therefore this is so, then it is necessary that you heat it, so that you may submerge a sponge, or a piece of cloth, wet in lukewarm water alone.
Or boil it in water with a little squinant, and cypress, and spice, and embrocations with it, the intestine, until the swelling resolves.
Sometimes it makes a wine that has astringency; and it is better than water alone in resolving swelling.
When therefore you see the swelling already resolved, then moisten the intestine with water in which the lettuce, or mallow has been boiled.
For by that it will be relieved the entrance of it with a small thing.
If, however, his return is excused after this cure, then find in the disruption a little, with the instrument by which hemorrhoids are cut.
And the first cure is better when it is prepared than when it is cut; and there is no compulsion to cut after necessity and the lack of instrument.
Let one part of it be curved, pointed, and the other part blunt, and the slender tip not be as slender as a spatula, but rather a little more blunt: and this one that resembles a hoe, as you see.
When therefore the wound is enlarged and enters the intestine, then it is necessary that there be a reduction of it according to its natural form in its own place, if it is possible above it: because it is better.
When a rupture is wide in the lower part of the abdomen, then it is necessary that you make the sick person lie on his back, and put his legs higher than his head.
And if it is in the upper part of the belly, then place its head and chest higher than its lower parts.
And similarly if there is a rupture in one of the two parts of the belly, then place your attention and your consideration always on this, that the part in which is the wound be higher than the other part.
And so it is necessary that you administer this to large wounds and to medium wounds.
In small wounds, place it as it is prepared for you.
Then have a pious minister present between your hands, who will hold the entire disruption with his hand: and gather together its lips.
Then uncover from it something after something for him who follows the suture; and this is the manner of a common suture of one.
And it is, that you may take a knife, or number of knives according to the quantity of width of the wound.
Then release from the edge of the rupture the quantity of the ring finger, that is, the surgeon's: and fix a needle aside from which you insert a thread in the two ends of the skin, with the two ends of the sifac which is under the skin from the interior, until you make it penetrate from the other side, and you have already gathered together the two ends of the skin, and the two ends of the sifac: and four orders are made.
Then bind with a doubled thread around the wound's edge several times from two parts together, until the two lips of the wound are joined by a decent union.
Then release the thickness of the finger also, and place another point in them; afterwards sew it with a thread, just as you did with the first point.
Therefore, do not cease doing this with him who needs it from the points, until you complete the tightening of the wound completely.
And let the needles be of medium size between thickness and thinness: because very fine needles pierce flesh quickly; and thick ones are difficult to introduce into the skin. Therefore, they ought to be of medium size in both thinness and thickness.
And it is not necessary that a needle be fastened in the two extremities of skin close together so that flesh may not be cut quickly and the wound may not open before its clotting, and also so that they are not elongated with suture so that the wound is prevented from clotting.
Then cut the end of the bandage so that it does not harm the sick one in his sleep: and put on them pads from cloths from every part, which hold the ends of the bandages: and let them go until you know that the wound is already consolidated.
And this kind of suture with needles is more suitable for small wounds.
For it suffices in sewing them one needle, or two, or about as many.
The second kind of suture is common, as it joins the edges with four sutures: two edges of skin and two edges of fascia in one place, with a needle on which is wound thread equal in fineness and thickness.
Then when you have pierced with the point these four extremities, withdraw the point from the part where you began, so that the thread may fall from the upper part of the wound: so that it may be a suture, like a suture of cloth which is tightened on cloth, and put between each suture the quantity of thickness of less than one finger.
These sutures are known to people.
And with this suture I sewed the wound that had happened to a man in his belly, who had been wounded with a knife, and the wound was a disruption of one palm's width: and about two palms had come out of the intestines from the middle intestine, and there was a disruption in the middle of the belly.
Therefore I reduced it after 24 hours when his intestine stood outside the wound.
Therefore, the wound was consolidated in a space which had been about fifteen days; and I took care of it, and it healed; and he lived after that for many years, conversed in his dispositions.
And the physicians had judged that he would not be cured.
And it was a miracle that I did not treat it with ointment.
Because I was in a place where no ointment could be found, nor anything from medicines.
I therefore placed upon the old wound a poultice twice a day, and I diligently washed it with honey water until it was healed.
I shall speak of two kinds of sutures proper according to the account of the discourse.
And it is, as you begin with a sharp suture: and introduce the point from the outer to the inner part.
When therefore a needle penetrates the skin and enters the flesh going according to the length and width of the whole body: let go the end of the needle on the side where you introduced the needle, and make it penetrate into the other end from the interior part to the exterior in the other extremity mirach.
When therefore you have made it penetrate, then make it penetrate according to this in the same extremity mirach from the external part to the interior: and let go the extremity sifac, which is in this side, and make it penetrate with a point into the other extremity from the interior part to the exterior: and make it penetrate with the penetration that you make it penetrate in the sifac extremity mirach, which is in its part, until it penetrates into the whole.
Then begin also from this same side, and sew it with the extremity which is from the other side, and extract the point from the skin that it has pierced.
Then bring it back into that skin, and suture its extremity which is on the other side with this extremity mirach. And extract it from the skin which is on its part, and make them together one, and the other: and make them together alternately, until you have brought all its exterior according to that example.
And the sum of this suture is that you should bring its sutures to the skin as if they were skins: so that you should bring one part from one end of the skin and let go of it on the other side, until you complete it.
The second kind of suture, which Galen called his own.
This discourse of his is narrated, so that he should make his according to the likeness, as some medicinal men do, so that they gather every part to its own corresponding part by nature: and apply one extremity of sifac to its other extremity, and one extremity of mirach to its other extremity.
And this is done as I tell you.
It is necessary that you insert a pointed stake into the limb close to you from the outer part and cause it to penetrate to the interior within the flesh; and let go of the two ends of the stake.
Then roll back the point and make it penetrate from the outside part to the inside in two extremities, namely on both sides.
Then roll both over, and make them penetrate both from the inside out to the two extremities called miracles which are on the opposite side.
And this method of sewing is a better sewing than the common one, and it is the sewing whose previous account has been given.
This is therefore also the saying of Galen.
And some said.
The suture of the abdomen should be repaired with two needles.
That is, to introduce into both one thread: and begin with the introduction of a needle, from that which is at your hand, and make it penetrate to the other side, according to the suture of those who sew skins equally.
And know that when a rupture is in the middle of the abdomen: then its suture is more difficult than the rest of the places of the abdomen.
The judgment of the treatment of a wound is the judgment of other wounds.
That is, because when you find a fresh wound with its blood, before the air alters it: and you reduce the intestine, and your own, and fit it: then place on top powder of incense.
If the air has already changed the wound: then put upon it some ointment that is present to you until they make pus and the threads fall away, and the wound closes and heals miraculously.
Then care for it as is the care for other wounds until it heals.
If medicines are not present to you, then place upon it immediately, from where it begins to discharge pus, a poultice of old wool: and change it twice a day, as I have taught you, until it is healed.
If you fear that the wound may communicate with the principal limbs in injury, then it is necessary to immerse a soft wool in oil tempered to moderate heat, or in rose oil; and place it around the places which are between the groin, and under the armpits.
If he feels pain, or punctures, or putrefaction in his intestines (for this often happens), then administer a clyster with warm, black spiced wine: especially if the putrefaction has already reached the intestine and made an exitus penetrating to its concavity.
And know that that which is from the large intestine is of easier healing, and that which is from those things which are fine is of more difficult healing.
The intestine called the Jejunum does not receive healing from a wound that happens in it at all; and this is because of the multitude of its veins, and their size, and because of the subtlety of its body, and proximity to the nature of nerves.
If however that which proceeds from the wound is a zizzer, and you pursue it fresh, reduce it according to your reduction, by which you reduce intestines equally.
If, however, the space has passed and it has already become green or black: then it is necessary that you tie it with a thread above the place which has darkened from it, so that blood flow does not happen.
In the wrist there are veins and arteries.
Then cut what is beyond that ligament, and place two hanging ends of thread from the lower part of the wound outside of it: so that the attraction above you will be lessened, and the extraction of it in the case of a boil, and the discharge of pus from the wound.
A remembrance of a wound that happened in the intestine.
When rupture occurs in the intestine and is small, it is possible that it can be restored in some people, because I saw one who was wounded in his belly with a lance blow, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old. And a fistula was made, and excrement and wind came out of it.
Therefore I made treatment, until I was not confident in his healing; nor did I cease to treat him carefully, until he was healed and the place had been consolidated.
After I saw that the place was already consolidated, I feared for the weak spot, that a misfortune might happen to him within his belly: and it did not happen to him from that misfortune.
And he remained in better dispositions, eating and drinking, and going to stool, and went into the bath, and exercised in his diets.
And some experimenters have said that when a wound occurs in the intestine and is small, then it ought to be ligated according to this method.
And it is, as you receive ants of large heads.
Then bring together the two lips of the wound, and place a single ant from those which have an open mouth on top of the two lips of the wound.
When therefore he seizes it above and clamps its mouth, cut off its head for it adheres and does not come loose.
Then place another ant near the first one, and do not cease doing this with an ant after each ant according to the quantity of the whole wound.
Then reduce it and sew its wound.
For those heads remain attached to the intestine until the intestine is fed and healed, and no further harm comes to the sick person. And now it is possible, that the intestine may also be ligated with a fine thread; which has been taken from the intestine of an animal, and attached to it after it has been introduced into the point (of the instrument).
And it is, that you receive the end of this thread from the intestine, and that it be thoroughly cleaned.
Then bind a thread of fine linen wrapped at its end.
Then introduce that thread into the point and sew with it the intestine.
Then put it back together again. And this method of stitching with worms and intestine is nothing but according to the way of trust and hope.
Know that a wound which is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the slender intestines, then there is no remedy except for cunning, and there is no healing at all.
On the treatment of Zuchemen and fistulae.
Chapter LXXXVIII.
Know that every wound, or abscess when it ages and becomes old, and turns into an ulcer, and does not heal, and always emits pus, and is not cut away: then it is called universally wherever it is in the body a fistula, and we call it Zuchemen.
A fistula indeed is according to truth a knot filtered, hard, white: with which there is no pain, whose concavity is that of a bird's feather: and because of this some call it Risati, that is, a feather.
And there are some hours which are moist, which discharge pus.
And perhaps moisture is split at certain hours.
And sometimes this humidity is much, and sometimes little: and it is thick, and sometimes subtle.
And I have already stated in the division, when I spoke of wounds, that every ulcer which does not heal, and no flesh is born in it, is not due to anything but one new cause.
One of these is due to the scarcity of blood in the body; or because of its evil nature; or because between it and its upper lip there is hard flesh that prevents the birth of flesh; or because there is much dirt and filth; or because the ulcer itself is putrid, and the material sent to it is of bad quality; or because the medicine is unsuitable in its cure; or because the corruption falling in the region is a kind of pestilence; or because of the property of the region, as happens in Caesaraugusta: where digestion of ailments is difficult, and the healing of abscesses is delayed by nature; or because it has one bone, or a number of bones.
And I have now shown you all these causes and signs of them, and their cures with medicines in division: and it is necessary here that I should make you know the cure of Fistula and Zuken, which is done by way of operation with the hand.
Know therefore that fistula occurs in all members of the body.
For some of these are fistulas which reach the large veins and arteries, or nerves, or siphons; or to the intestine, or bladder, or to one of the ribs; or to one of the vertebrae of the back, or to one of the joints composed: such as the hands and feet: and some of them run to the neighborhood of the principal member, and similar ones.
Therefore, these fistulas, according to this manner, are from ailments of difficult healing, and do not receive treatment, and occupation with it is labor and ignorance.
If it is from fistulas of some depth which does not reach these places which I have said: and you hope, and trust in its cure, and you wish to arrive at the knowledge of it, then take a probe made of bronze, or iron, if the fistula stretches along a straight line, and explore it with itself.
If there is a winding path in the fistula, then investigate it with a probe of thin lead.
Since lead, because of the softness of its body, is lifted and bent around curves.
If a fistula has many openings, it is not possible for you to indicate over it with your finger.
Therefore, cleanse with a clyster each opening from its openings.
For the moisture that you introduce by clyster, flows through other openings and runs out of them.
Then inquire carefully according to what way is possible for you: so that you may know whether there is a bone or a nerve, and whether the fistula's cavity is distant or near; or whether it is one fistula which has many openings, and stand over all of it with your utmost strength: with your questioning, as you question the sick person, and by finding pain upon compression with your hand over the place, and similar signs and causes of accidental abscess.
When therefore you have stood over all these things truly, then go to the cure according to confidence: and it is, that you consider then, if there is a fistula near appearing, or in a place safe far from the joint, or from a nerve, or artery, or vein, or one of the places which I have told you: then dry the fistula according to what has been said before from my narration, and remove that which is in it from filtration, and corrupted flesh, which is born at its opening from flesh, or thread, and similar things: and care for it, until it heals.
If, however, a fistula is of great depth and is straight, then it is necessary for you to cut it in the depth as far as is possible for you.
Then cleanse the same of all corrupt flesh from it.
Then administer a linen cloth rolled up in sharp medicines: and introduce it into the cavity of the fistula which you have grasped with iron: do this several times until the sharp medicine corrodes everything that remains in the cavity of the fistula from corruption.
Then restore it with ointments which generate healthy flesh, until it is healed.
If it does not heal by that means, then cauterize it according to what we have recounted.
If therefore the cause of the fistula is bone, and it is ascertained to you: then inquire into that, and dry it according to what I have told you; if nothing prevents you from a vein, or nerve, or principal limb, as we have said.
If therefore a bone is discovered by you, and there is something of corruption and blackness in it, then scrape it, until the whole corruption is removed from it.
Then care for it with that which has enveloped it, until it heals.
If it does not heal and discharges pus as it did: then you will know that you have not arrived at the complete eradication of the corruption.
Therefore, cleanse it again with care, and make a careful dissection of it, and its purification with your utmost fortitude.
Then restore it.
If therefore it is healed, that is good: and if not, then know that that corruption is in the depth far away of the body, which you have not reached.
There is therefore no skill in you, except to let nature take its course.
If a small bone is broken and it is possible for you, draw it together with fine forceps that are suitable for it.
If there are many bones, then with great care attract them all, and release nothing from them with your strength.
If something from the moistures does harm to you and there is no fear or error in their incision, then cut those moistures and the flesh, if they are there, and free the bones.
If you do not have the preparation to remove the bones from your hour, then place over the wound so that it may rot; and dismiss it until it has rotted what is around those bones from flesh and moisture.
And keep the wound so that it does not close.
And constrict the section that you cut in your operation.
If you are afraid, place on top of this a pad soaked in sulfur rubbed with oil; or a pad soaked in Egyptian ointment, or some other medicinal ointment.
For when those moistures, namely, rot, and the bones separate from them, the removal of them is relieved, and their attraction.
If it is a large single bone, such as the femur or hip bone, and similar to these, and that which has become corrupted from it is a large part, then carefully scrape it last until the blackness and corruption are removed.
Then restore the wound.
If now that which is in it is corrupted, and the part is large, and corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to saw it through, and to cut it entirely up to the place where it reaches corruption: then care for it until it consolidates. And I tell you a wound which happened to a man in his leg: that you may put this very example and help on your operation.
There was a young man about thirty years old to whom pain came in his leg, from a cause which was moved upon him within the body, that is, from the insides, until the matter went to the leg, and an abscess became a large abscess: and there was no external cause for it.
Therefore, time was extended with him due to the error of the doctors, until the abscess opened and many substances gathered around it.
And after treatment had been applied to him, until the leg became ulcerated, and many openings were made in it: which all discharged pus, and the humors of the body.
Therefore, a multitude of physicians treated him for about two years, and there was no wise man in the art of the hand until I was called upon, and I saw his leg, and the materials which flowed out of those openings in great course: also the whole body of the man had become withered, and his color was yellowish.
Therefore I introduced a probe into one of the openings and it reached the mouth.
Then I carefully examined all the openings; and found that they communicated with each other from all parts of the thigh. Therefore I prepared and cut into one of the openings until I found the part of the bone: and I found it corrupted: which was already corroded, and blackened, and rotten, and perforated until it had penetrated to the marrow.
Therefore I have shown what was discovered and prepared from corrupted bone.
And I have shown that there was not in the bone anything other than that corruption which I cut out and sawed away.
And I had already removed it.
Then I placed a restoration of the wound with solidifying medicines for a long time.
And it is not united.
Then I tried restoration of it.
And it was not restored.
Then I restored him with medicines, and it was quickly consolidated and healed; and this repetition of the operation and section on him was not necessary, except because of the disposition of weakness of the sick man, and his lack of endurance, and my fear for him about death; because he used to faint in every hour from the excess of evacuation.
Therefore, he was healed completely: and in the place of the bone firm flesh grew, and a good arrangement was made in his body, and his strength returned: and he turned back to his usual ways: and it did him no harm at all in walking.
If, however, the prominent bone in the place of the body has already been broken: then it is necessary that you bind it together, according to this method: and it is: that you take a ligament, and tighten it at the end of the prominent bone: and command someone who extends it upward: and put another ligament from wool thicker than the first ligament. Then bind it over the flesh which is under the bone: and extend its extremity so that you draw the flesh to the lower part: and you will uncover the flesh over the place which you wish to suture, so that it does not harm the saw by cutting the flesh.
Place a stick, or a board under the bone below in the center; because when you do this, it does not prevent cutting rotten flesh.
And it is necessary that a clamp be placed upon the place corrupted for a short time, so that there may not be corruption in the concavity of the bone: and it may not appear in its appearance to the sense, and compel to the clamp of its vice another thing. If the bone is broken and not protruding, but its part continues with that part; and the corruption is in the middle of it, or in a part of it, then uncover the flesh from all parts altogether.
Then place the lower wood.
Afterwards, saw it on the first part, where is the corruption, until the sawing continues on the other part: and let the sawing be according to the length from the corruption a little, as we have said.
If corruption is in a joint, cut the corrupted joint itself, and saw the bone where it continues from the other part.
If however corruption is in the junction of two articulations, then there is no skill in it except abrasion.
If corruption is in the breast of the hand, or in the breast of the foot: then the matter is very difficult there.
But it is necessary that you inquire how the corruption appears to you.
And having scraped it, and cleansed it according to whatever arrangement is possible for you, and with whatever ingenuity it may be rectified for you: when it does not make opposition to you of Vein, or Nerve.
And know that the cutting tools, and saws for cutting these bones are many, according to the location of the bones, and their preparation, and their thickness, and fineness, and size, and smallness, and hardness, and their rarity.
Therefore it is necessary that instruments suitable for each kind of operation be prepared.
And know that these operations signify to you about the kind of instrument which you will need when it is a long study with you.
And knowledge of the modes of this art is a testimony to the modes of illnesses: for then indeed you will find through yourself that which is suitable for it from instruments to every infirmity.
The Form of the Saw.
Form of another saw.
The shape of another saw.
The form of another saw.
This form of the saw, as depicted, is well made. Let its arc be above, its sharpness from iron: and its handle from boxwood, and let it be pyramidal in shape, made off-center.
The form of a knife for joints.
Let the head of this razor be, according to the shape of the head of a star-shaped key: and its points be according to the shape of the points of the  elischetfegi.
And it is not fitting, unless they are rubbed with it, heads of the joints, when they are corrupted, or a wide and large bone.
Shape of the Greater Scalpel.
The form of a scalpel's middle.
Shape of a broad scalpel.
Shape of a scalpel which has a concavity.
Form of another fine razor.
Form of a lancet for another curved limb.
The form of the scalpel is small and fine blade.
The form of a chisel used for cutting bones.
The shape of the large scalpel also.
This is similar to a chisel, and its extremity is like a saw: it is shown in many places from the sawing of bones.
The shape of a scalpel which is suitable for the cutting of something that has been pierced through from the bones.
The extremity of it is triangular, and its points are acute.
It is made from India.
And similarly, it is necessary that all things which we have said be done from razors, and incisions, and saws.
On the incision of extremities, and the setting of bones.
Chapter LXXXIX.
The extremities putrify, either from an external cause, or from an internal cause.
When therefore you have medicated that corruption with medicine, and the treatment does not help; and you see the corruption to affect the limb, which is not struck by anything: then it is necessary that you should cut into that limb until where the corruption follows, so that the sick man may be delivered through it from death, or from the evil which is greater than the defect of the member.
And the sign of this is that the limb is darkened until it is thought to be burned by fire or rotting after blackening: until the rot comes down to that which follows the limb and creeps into the whole body.
Therefore, it is proper to make an incision with it, and similarly if the cause of corruption is from the sting of certain venomous things, such as a sea scorpion, and viper, and rattle snake, and similar ones.
If therefore decay or percussion is in the extremity of the finger, then cut the finger, and do not leave space for the decay, so that it may go as far as the rest of the hand.
And similarly if it happens in the hand, then cut it from the root of the finger and do not close the space for corruption until it reaches the elbow.
And if it invades in it, then cut the arm at the elbow at its joint. If however corruption passes through, and you see him about the arm: then there is death of the sick person.
And in addition to this from healing, is the quantity of virtue.
And similarly do for the foot, when corruption has invaded the finger, then cut it at one of the joints; and if it seizes on the arch of the foot, then cut the whole foot.
If it ascends to the knee, then cut the leg at the knee joint.
If corruption has already reached above the knee, then there is no remedy for it except to release and leave the weak to death.
And the manner of cutting a limb, or sewing it up is, as you would cut the ligament below, which you wish to cut; and tie another ligament above the place.
And let one minister extend a ligament downward: and let another minister extend a ligament upward.
And you separate the flesh which is between the two ligaments, with a broad spatula, until the whole flesh is uncovered.
Then it is cut, or sewn up.
And it is necessary that you put linen from all parts, and let the saw not touch the healthy place: and let the infirmity added with an abscess happen.
If it happens that there is an internal bleeding while you are operating, then cauterize the place quickly: or put some powders on top of it that stop the blood.
Then return to your treatment until it is complete.
Then bind the wounded limb with a suitable ligament, and care for it until it heals.
And I tell you what happened to a man in his foot, this same thing that I tell you.
That is because it happened in his foot, blackness, when a burning which is assimilated to the fire's burning; and that corruption first happened in his finger, until it began the whole foot.
Therefore a man made use of himself after he had seen the corruption to fall upon his limb with violence of it, which he found from the pain and burning of it: and he cut it at the joint, and was healed.
And after a long time had passed for him, the same corruption happened to his index finger of his hand. He therefore came to me, and I tried to recover that superfluity with what I had placed on his hand from medicines after the cleansing of his body: and the superfluity was not recovered, and it began to move into another finger; until corruption began in his hand.
Therefore he called me to cut his hand: and I refused it, hoping for an outcome from me beyond the repercussions of that superfluity; and I also feared for him death upon the cutting of his hand.
For his skill was superior to that of others.
After he had despaired of me, he returned to his land: and it came to pass concerning him that he hurried, and fell with his whole hand: and he was healed.
And I have not brought forward this account, except that it may be an aid concerning that which falls under the kind of this ailment: and that it may be a sign by which it is signified, and according to which it is treated.
On the care of sinuses, and the nature of clysters with medicines.
Chapter XC.
When a boil occurs in some fleshy limbs and the space of the boil is prolonged until it forms a collection of pus: then it bursts or is perforated, and what is in it comes out of the pus, and a hollow place remains like a vessel: and the skin which is over it is like a cloth which has already been finely woven: and does not reach to the last stage of corruption, nor does it imprint on the bone, nor on the nerve, nor on the ligament: it deserves to be called a Sinus: and it is not called a Fistula: but if the space of it is prolonged until the corruption imprints itself on any of these limbs, then it is called a Fistula, or zuken.
And the care of it is, that you cut that skin entirely as it turns over: and especially when it has been softened and made like cloth: and trust that it does not adhere to the place, because of its corruption.
If you hope that it will adhere to the skin and not lead to that final corruption, and if there is thickness from flesh in the skin, then care for it with a clyster, and it is, as you consider, to the Sinus.
Then if it is large, and the pus which comes forth from it is of foul smell: then clysterize it with an Egyptian remedy, which is vinegar, and oil, and ziniar, parts receiving equal, are gathered into a vessel: and they are boiled over fire until the remedy boils: and comes to the thickness of honey.
Then take from it what you need: and dissolve it with water and honey, and enema the sinus with it. And close its opening, and let the medicine remain in it for the amount of two hours.
Then extract it with expression: do this for so many days until the sinus is purified and the stench is removed.
And sometimes it is administered with water and ashes when this medicine is not present to you; and it is that you receive the ash of grape wood, or ash from holly wood; and you pour it over the water.
Then treat it with a compress and use an enema until you are confident that the sinus has been cleared.
If the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine or water of ash, then give him an enema with water and honey, to which has already been mixed something of ground zinjar.
Or cleanse him with an enema of honey and wine mixed together, because it is the property of honey to cleanse and wash, and wine makes the sinus adhere, especially when there is an abundance of astringency and dryness in the wine.
When you have done this several times and trust that the corruption of the sinus has already been removed: then irrigate it with that which causes flesh to grow there.
And it is, that you may receive from the diafinicon plaster: and dissolve it with rose oil, and stiptic wine: or clysterize it with certain medicines, and other ointments, whose properties I have written in the treatise on ointments.
If the opening of the sinus is narrow, in which a clyster cannula does not fit; then enlarge it with a small knife: or place within it a linen cloth smeared with Egyptian ointment, or with basilica ointment, until it is enlarged.
And similarly if the opening is also wide, then gather its lips together with a suture: and release from it the quantity into which the clyster will enter without addition.
And similarly if the opening from which the pus runs is elevated upwards: then dry it out in a lower place that is in it, so that it may run from there downwards; because when pus is constricted in the depth of the sinus, it prevents flesh from being generated in it.
If it is not possible for you to cut the Sinus approximately below it as you wish: then try to prepare the limb with preparation which will allow it to drain pus easily as it is being prepared for you.
Try so that nothing of the pus is retained in it at all; and take medicinal poultices which are placed over the wound, suitable to what you wish.
And spread them over linen cloth.
Let a cloth be of such size that communication of the whole sinus is made.
Then cut with forceps at the direct opening of the sinus foramen, a little wider than the opening of the sinus.
Then extend from the ointments gentle on another cloth, according to the amount of the hole: and place it above it in a position far from the opening of the sinus, so that the exit of pus from it may be eased: and do not remove the large cloth, except after some days once.
He who is over the opening of the Sinus, is he whom you remove at every hour, that what accumulates there from pus may go out; and so that you may know, whether that which runs out from it is much or little; or digested or indigested.
And again with this consider the place of the sinus itself, whether the lord feels pain in it, or whether there is no pain in it, and whether there is an abscess in it, or whether there is not an abscess in it.
When therefore your treatment is thus extended, and you see the material which comes out above the opening of the Sinus, then know that the Sinus has already adhered, or approaches adhesion: then therefore dissolve it in the morning, or on the third day: and when you have dissolved the wound, then change the other cloth, and renew the ointment. If a subtle virus emerges from the sinus after a long time, do not despair of its adhesion, for its healing is approaching, because some people delay the generation of flesh in their wounds, and there are those who act contrary to this.
If after many days undigested pus comes out of the sinus, then know that the sinus does not adhere.
If therefore the adhesion of the Sinus is delayed, and its process is prolonged: then add to the drying of the medicines, truly make the physicians so that they are medicines in their substance humid, and in their virtue dry: such as unguentum dyafinicon, when superfluity of addition from zegi is added to it.
And of the most final cure, it is, that you take ointment diyafinicum and dissolve it with rose oil, and return it upon itself old wine equal in substance.
Then make it with him and use it yourself.
And now he does something similar to this action, when you do not have dyafinicon ointment at hand, honey, when you have boiled it until it thickens, and use it.
Or take myrrh and aloes and frankincense: pound the whole thing together, and pulverize it over honey while it is on the fire.
Then a line over the very cloth, and tighten it over the sinus: and a line with honey which you have cooked, until it has thickened; and pulverize on top of it spices, and put them on top of the cloth, and tighten it.
And sometimes it is administered there, the long birthwort, and roots of celestial lily, and it is lily, and herb flour, and centaurea.
Use these simple ones, or those that are combined, rub them and the strainers themselves; and pulverize above honey as I have narrated, and use it.
If the sinus condition persists and does not heal with this treatment: then know that there is corruption in its depths; or it has already made an impression on the bones, or the other hard members, or the ligaments; then treat it with the treatment of fistulas, according to what was previously stated. On the treatment of a paronychia and an abraded nail, and on the addition of a finger digit, and on the cutting (open).
Chapter XCIX.
A pimple is an abscess that is born under the nail of the thumb of the hand, or of the foot: and perhaps it is born in the other fingers.
When therefore the matter is prolonged and its treatment is neglected, and it becomes a hot abscess: or it rots, and discharges pus until it corrodes the root of the nail; and perhaps it corrupts it entirely, and perhaps the corruption reaches the bone, until it has a foul odor: and the extremity of the finger becomes wide, and its color becomes dark.
When therefore you care for a wound and what we said in the division is not useful, and your care does not help; then it is necessary that you cut with a knife the whole superfluity which remains from the nail.
Then cauterize the wound after this.
A cautery is indeed very useful.
If the bone is healthy and the nail is also healthy, and the additions of the nail already press flesh to the inside, and begin to prick it, and harm it: then it is necessary that you put a thin radium under the angle of the nail which pricks the flesh, and drive it upward: and cut that flesh with ease, and place on top of that which remains of the flesh from burning medicines, corrosive ones, until the whole of it is removed.
Then care for it with ointments until it heals.
If corruption has already set in on the bone, then it is necessary to cut into that bone and remove it; for it is never healed while the corrupted bone remains there.
If you see decay and corruption progressing in the finger, then cut it at one of the joints, according to what has been said before about its recollection.
Then care for it until it heals.
If, however, it happens that a nail be rubbed or struck and a severe pain comes upon it, then it is necessary for the surgeon first to blood-lett the affected person.
Then dry the nail with a sharp spatula, making a transverse section from top to bottom as desired.
And guard yourself so that the incision does not reach the flesh which is under the nail, for you will cause a very violent pain to happen through it to the sick man, and it will be the cause for added flesh growth in its place.
Then care for the place with that which soothes the pains.
The finger which is born in some hands of men, perhaps is fleshy throughout; and perhaps there are bones in some of them, and perhaps there is a nail in it; and some of them are born at the root of the joint, or its birth is in some knots of the finger.
Therefore he who is born in certain knots of the finger, does not move: and he who is born at the joint of the finger, perhaps moves.
Therefore, it is easy to make an incision in that which of these is fleshy.
That is, that you cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
The healing of one whose nativity is at the root of the joint is difficult.
Therefore abstain from cutting it.
In that one who is born with a fingernail at the last node, it is necessary to cut first the flesh of it with a round incision until the bone.
Then saw with one of those saws fitting for it.
Then take care of it until it heals.
The consolidation that occurs in the fingers of adjacency, often happens either from birth, that is, it is born with it, or from the consolidation of a wound, or burning fire, and similar things.
Therefore it is necessary that you cut away that consolidation until the fingers return to their natural form.
Then place between them linen cloths, or rags soaked in rose oil: so that they do not solidify too quickly, and separate between them; or place between them a thin sheet of lead until the place has solidified as is necessary.
And similarly if it happens that a digit is fused with the palm, then cut that fusion, according to how it is prepared and convenient for the shape of the limb.
On the Incision of a Defect.
Chapter XCII.
Veins are found wrapped and large, full of superfluous melancholic substances that occur in many parts of the body; and most frequently they occur in the legs, especially in the legs of those who walk and labor, and carry things.
Therefore it is necessary that you administer an incision of the body from black bile several times with a strong incision.
Then the phlebotomist should take the patient's blood vessel.
The cure of them with iron, is according to two ways.
One of them is that they are cut and black blood is drawn out.
And another method is, that the vein be lifted and drawn out entirely.
The section of it is according to this way.
Swell the leg first with hot water until the thick, foul blood is dissolved.
Then bind the leg of the infirm from the upper part of the hip, to the lower part of the knee with a bandage.
Then dry the vein in one place, or two, or three with a wide incision.
Then dry the nail until it comes out from the blood as much as you see sufficient, and as much as the strength of the weak can bear.
Afterwards bind it, and instruct him to abstain from foods that produce black bile. And repeat evacuation and bloodletting when the veins are full, and this harms the sick person.
Its elevation is according to this manner.
If the leg is weak, and has many hairs on it.
Then introduce it into the bath: or embrocate it on his leg with warm water until it reddens, and the veins swell: or exercise him vigorously, if there is no bath present, until the limb heats up.
Then dry the skin in a direct vein incision lengthwise: or at its end near the knee, or in the lower part near the heel.
Then open the skin with hooks, and excise the vein from every part until it appears to the sense: and at its appearance, you see it red to blackness sloping.
When it comes out of the skin, you see it white like a cord.
Then introduce under it a radium until when it is raised and comes out of the skin: suspend it with a hook, gently.
Then make a dry incision near that incision with three fingers' width.
Then scrape the skin from the upper part of the vein until it appears.
Then raise it with Rays as you did before, and suspend it with another hook, as you did at first.
Then make another dry incision, or several incisions, if you need them.
Then elevate and make an incision at its last section near the heel bone.
Then draw it out to the section which is above it.
And do this until you have removed it from the incision which is higher, or all higher incisions, until when it emerges wholly; then cut into it.
If it does not obey you to extract and elevate it, then introduce a needle with a strong double thread, and tie it, and extract it; or introduce a probe under it, and revolve your hand to every part until it emerges.
And beware, lest it be struck.
For if it is cut, it will be difficult for you to remove it well, and it will enter into the weak place from it damage.
When therefore you have extracted it whole: then place upon the place of the wound wool dipped in wine and rose oil, or oil: and take care of it until it heals.
If the vein is contracted, having a winding shape whose convolution goes to parts, and is not as we said according to straightness; then it is necessary that you feel upon it on every part of its winding shape, and the places of its convolution.
Then suspend it with hooks until you have lifted the whole thing; and be careful at your incision upon it that you do not cut a vein or wound it, for it will be difficult to lift or extract it above you.
Therefore, keep your prudence.
The Method of Cutting for the Healing of a Grapevine
The shape of a blind pouch.
There is no need for it to be as fine as the other needles, nor does it have a sharp point so that it does not wound a vein; and it is of thick flexibility, gentle: because if it were fine, it would wound a vein with its fineness; indeed let its thickness be superfluous, as we said.
On the Extraction of the Vein of the Thigh. Chapter XCI.
This vein is generated in the legs in hot lands, such as those of Alizegi and Arabia, and in dry, hot lands with little tenderness, that is, in which neither grass nor tree grows.
And perhaps it is generated in other places of the body besides the legs.
And its generation is indeed from putrefaction that happens under the skin, just as it happens within bodies of snakes and worms ascarides, and worms generated between the skin and flesh.
And the sign of the beginning of this Vein's incision is that a fierce inflammation happens in the leg.
Then it is cauterized.
Then begins the vein to exit from the place of that urination, as if it were the root of a plant, or an animal.
When therefore the extremity of it appears, then it is necessary that you wrap upon itself a lead piece, whose weight be from one drachma to two drachmas and tie it; and let go the suspended lead from the leg.
Whenever therefore anything comes out of it to the outside, wrap it in lead and tie it.
If it is prolonged for a long time, then cut part of it, and wrap up the rest.
And do not cut it root and branch before it has come out entirely.
For if it cuts, it contracts and enters into flesh; and it causes an abscess to happen, and rot in the place, and a bad ulcer.
Therefore it is necessary that it be treated gently and extracted gradually until it emerges from its last part, and nothing of it remains in the body: and from this vein some men emerge which is in length five palms and ten.
And now it has come to me, because a man has emerged from twenty palms.
If you encounter this during your medical treatment: then insert a reed into its hole and pierce it with a long hole together with the body until all that is within it of matter is evacuated, and administer corruption to the place with medicines for several days. Then care for the treatment of abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot, or in the foot itself; and it happens to have many openings, and a branch emerges from every opening.
Therefore, care for it, as we said in the division, and with what was previously stated.
On the incision over worms generated under the skin, and it is called the illness of a bull.
Chapter XCI.
This illness is called among us in a certain land "bull's sickness," because it happens very often to oxen, and there is a small worm that is born between the skin and the flesh.
And it goes through the whole body, ascending and descending; and it is shown to the sense in its movement from limb to limb, until it ruptures wherever it ruptures in the skin, and exits.
And its generation is from the rot of some humors.
As worms and serpents, that is, roundworms and pinworms, happen in the belly.
And it is feared from its malice.
Because when he enters the body and is raised to the head and comes to the place: then perhaps he opens it and emerges and destroys the eye: and this happens often.
Therefore, when you wish to cure him and extract it, then this is done only when he walks about and appears to his senses.
Therefore, you must bind that which is above it and that which is below it with a strong constricting band.
Then dry over it, and take it out.
If it goes deep into the flesh and you do not find it, then place a cautery with fire over the spot until it dies.
And the greater thing to be feared is its corruption, which corrupts the eye, as we have said. If you see him having arrived near the eye on the head, then tighten under it a good constriction of the eyebrow.
Then dry him over and remove him.
And it is necessary that the sick person use the purification of his body, with medicines dissolving the bad, putrid humors.
And let him beware of foods that generate putrefaction.
On incision for disease according to Nakir.
Chapter XC.
This ailment is called Nakir in our land: and it is pain which occurs in certain limbs: then it changes from limb to limb.
And I indeed have already seen him, as I tell you.
I was summoned to a weak woman with some wounds.
And he exposed his arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm's cord.
And after I waited one hour, I saw one inflation moving with a finger, like a worm, ascending to his shoulder faster than it could: like live silver, when it runs from place to place.
Therefore pain went from that place and settled in the shoulder.
Then he sat for an hour, and it ran throughout the rest of his body until it reached the other arm.
Then he told me that he was turning over his whole body, as I saw.
I was amazed at the speed of its transfer from one member to another.
And I indeed before this had not seen this sickness with my eyes in this way according to this manner.
However, I have seen many who find pain to change from one limb to another; and I did not see it with my eyes, as I saw it in a woman.
And I do not think that this is otherwise, because the woman was from those who have veins of dry body tissue exposed; hence, it appears to the sense that lightness has been changed.
And it is necessary that they not appear according to this reason in those who are delicate and with moist bodies, of hidden veins.
When therefore you wish to cure it, and the patient feels this pain; then if it appears to your eye, as we have said, then tightly bind above it, and below it quickly: and dry above it until that windiness is expelled constrainedly: and cauterize the place.
If you do not see it with your own eyes, then treat it with a scraping of the body and with that which expels winds, and carminates them with foul pills, and pills from serpentaria, and similar ones.
On the extraction of arrows.
Chapter XCVI. Arrows are diversified according to their kinds and according to the places in which they fall from the body.
Their diversity is: because among them are those that have large points, and small: and concave, and deaf.
And there are those which have three angles.
And from those who have tongues.
And from those which have stars.
Those which are according to the limbs in which they fall, are according to two ways.
Or else the limbs are from the principal members concave, such as the brain, and the heart, and liver, and lung, and kidneys, and intestines, and bladder, and the like.
When therefore it falls into any of these members, and the signs of death appear to you which I tell you after, then it is necessary that you avoid the extraction of that arrow from them, for death follows him in whom it is, in many dispositions.
And when these signs of evil do not appear to you, and the arrow is not hidden in the depth of the limb, then draw it out, and take care of the wound.
When an arrow falls into the brain and penetrates the skull and emerges from the part above the brain, the signs are: because there occurs from it violent frothing, and scotoma, and vertigo, and redness in the eyes, and inflation, and redness of the tongue, and spasm, and confusion of the intellect, and vomiting of bile.
And perhaps blood may issue from the nose, or ears.
And perhaps speech is cut off, and the voice is destroyed.
And there comes forth from the place of the wound a white moisture like gruel.
And it comes out from there like a watery fleshiness.
If therefore these signs appear to you, then abstain from treatment, and remove the arrow if it does not exit.
The signs of an arrow when it falls into the heart are: that it is near the left nipple: and he feels as if it were fixed in a hard thing, not in an empty thing.
And perhaps the movement of an arrow is similar to the movement of a pulse; and blood runs from the wound black.
And following this comes coldness of the extremities and cold sweat and fainting spells.
Know therefore that death certainly comes.
And the sign of an arrow wound to the lung is the exit of frothy blood from the wound; and the vessels that follow the neck suppurate, and the color of the sick man changes.
And he exhales great, high spirit: and seeks the attraction of cold air.
If an arrow falls into the membrane that is in the chest: then it is near the ribs: and a great gasp with intense pain, with a sigh: and all the members of the shoulders move.
And if an arrow falls into the stomach, then perhaps something indigested will exit from the wound along with food.
And if an arrow falls into the belly and lodges in it, something of feces comes out from the wound, or a piece of intestine which is already torn.
Therefore there is no hope of healing it, nor of extracting the arrow.
If an arrow falls into the bladder and urine flows out, and something proceeds from it to the outside, and the pain is stronger over the patient: then you shall know that it is mortal.
The remaining members, such as the face, and neck, and throat, and spatula, and auxiliary tool, and dorsal vertebrae, and collarbone, and hip, and leg, and things similar to these members are healed according to various arrangements: when it does not find the artery, or nerve: and is not a poisonous arrow.
And I tell you what I have seen of these arrows, so that you may understand through this about your treatment.
That is because to a certain man an arrow fell into the lacrimal gland of his eye, at the root of his nose.
Therefore I extracted it from the other side, under the fat of his ear: and he was healed, and no harm came to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew, which had fallen into the fat of his eye under his lower eyelid: and the arrow was already hidden, and I did not extract it except for its small extremity, with which it adheres to its shaft: and the arrow was large of the arrows of the Turkish bows, with gentle iron, in which there are no ears.
The Jew was therefore healed, and no evil accident happened to his eye. And I extracted another arrow from the throat of a Christian.
And there was an Arabian arrow, and it is that which has ears.
I therefore followed it between two guides; and now it was submerged in his throat.
Therefore I worked skillfully with it until I extracted it: and Christian was healed.
And I removed another arrow from a man who had fallen into his belly: and we thought that he would die from it.
After thirty days had passed and nothing had changed in his condition, I cut along the shaft of the arrow: and I fashioned it, and extracted it: and he was healed, and no evil happened to him.
And I saw a man to whom an arrow fell on his back, and the wound had become solid over it.
After seven years, a shaft emerged from the root of his hip.
And I saw a woman to whom an arrow fell into her belly, and the wound was consolidated over her, and the arrow remained inside her: and nothing was changed from her dispositions, and the woman did not find harm to her in any of her natural operations.
And I saw another man, to whom an arrow fell upon his face: and the wound was consolidated, and remained, not finding much pain in him: and similar things like these many.
And I extracted an arrow from a man of the King's princes, which had fallen into the middle of his nose, and had already declined to the right side a little: and the arrow was completely hidden.
Therefore I was called to his cure after the arrow wound for three days.
I therefore found a wound from an arrow quite constricted.
Therefore I examined it with a fine probe and did not feel it; and he himself was finding a prickling and pain under his ear on the right side.
Therefore I supposed that the prick was from the point of the arrow.
Therefore I placed a plaster on the spot with a plaster which had the power of attraction and digestion, trusting that the place would fester and that a sign like an arrow would appear to me so that I could cut above it: but nothing happened in the spot that indicated that the arrow had followed the place.
Therefore I diligently applied a poultice to it for many days; and no accident occurred, and the wound was consolidated in the meantime; and he remained weak from its extraction for a space of days until he felt the arrow one day inside his nose.
And he told me this.
Therefore I placed on the wound medicine acute and corrosive for many days until it opened; and when I probed it and felt the subtle point of the arrow adhering to the wood.
Then I added to the opening of the wound with that acute medicine until the tip of the arrow appeared visibly to us; and about four months elapsed with him in that time.
Then after the wound was enlarged, and it was possible for me to insert forceps into it, and move it, and it did not obey to exit: then I did not cease to be subtle, and to devise over it with modes of ingenuity, until I began upon a certain day with forceps made properly, according to what will come in the form of them at the end of the chapter, until I extracted it.
Then I restored the wound.
And indeed doctors judge that cartilage of the nose is not restored.
Therefore, I restored it, and the wound was consolidated, and the infirm person was healed in perfect health: and nothing harmed him at all.
And I tell you the quality of the extraction of certain arrows: so that you may place that rule and meaning over what I did not say.
Since the parts of this art and their distinctions are not grasped with the narration; nor does it encompass that book, and a wise craftsman compares little to much; and what is present to what is absent; and finds a new operation, and a new instrument among the descents of foreign things of this art when they occur.
Therefore I say that arrows do not come out of limbs in which they are fixed, except according to two modes. Either by drawing it out from where it entered.
Or on the contrary, the other part.
And that which comes out from where it entered, or is an arrow proceeding in fleshy place: and it is drawn out, and it comes out.
If it does not yield to removal by the hour in which it falls: then it is necessary that you dismiss it for several days, until the flesh that is around it rots: and the attraction of it is relieved, and its exit.
And similarly if it becomes lodged in the bone, and does not obey you to come out, then leave it also for several days: and repeat it with traction and movement every day until it comes out.
If it does not obey you to the end after days, then you ought to pierce it around the arrow shaft in the bone itself from every part with a fine awl until the arrows are enlarged.
Then draw it out and remove it.
If however the arrow is fixed in the bone of the head, and has already progressed into one part of the brain's ventricle, and some of those accidents which I have said appear from the sick man, then abstain from drawing out the arrow, and let it go, until it may be equal to be removed after days.
For if an arrow reaches the lung, then death does not delay for him.
And if the arrow is not fixed, only in the bone, and does not penetrate to the fascia, and remains weak for several days, and nothing happens to him from those accidents; then the ingenuity is in drawing out the arrow and extracting it.
If, however, it is firmly fixed and does not obey you when you try to pull it out: then administer a trepanation around the arrowhead, as I have told you before. Then take care of the place until it heals.
If now the arrow is hidden in the place of the body and is concealed and hidden from sense, then seek it out with your touch.
If you feel it, then draw it out with certain instruments which are suitable for its removal.
If you cannot, however, because of the constriction of the wound and because of the length of the arrow deep within: and there is no bone, nor nerve, nor vein there: then find upon it, until the wound becomes enlarged, and it is possible to extract the arrow.
If he has ears that are held fast, then free the flesh fixed in them from every part, with all your skill as you can, and the skills, if it is not possible above the evasion of flesh in a fracture of the ears, and their twisting, until it comes out.
And when you administer the extraction of a arrow, wherever it is, then use the twisting of your hand, with forceps to all parts, until you cause it to emerge: and with the utmost subtlety, so that the arrow does not break, and it be difficult for you its attraction, and its extraction.
If you cannot remove it within one hour, then leave it for several days until what is around it has decayed.
Then repeat the process: for if blood flow is loosened, and if it opposes you, then administer what we said from the cure in its chapter: and keep your strength from cutting a vein, or nerve, or tendon.
And administer the skill in every way you can of the evacuation of the arrow, and let it be with ease, and tranquility, or slowness, and firmness, just as I have told you.
And it is necessary that you do when drawing an arrow, that it be weak according to the figure, according to how it was with the case of the arrow itself.
Because it is more helpful.
If that is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you from the figures.
The arrow which comes out from the opposite part of another, or has already come out from it to the exterior; or makes a swelling at the extremity of the arrow by feeling from the upper part of the skin close by, and you see it protruding: therefore dry it carefully on it, and let the section be according to the quantity which they grasp in it with forceps.
Then draw it out; for indeed it becomes easy to be drawn out.
If it is held in the bone, then twist your hand according to the roundness, until the arrow imprints itself in the bone and amplifies itself; then draw it out.
And if not: let her be left for a few days; then repeat it until she comes out.
If a piece of wood from an arrow is in it, then drive that out with it.
If a stick has fallen and you wish to administer an impulse: then introduce an instrument with a concave shape into it so that the cavity of the instrument enters the tail of the arrow, then drive it in with the same force.
If, however, the arrow is concave, then drive it in with an instrument going into it.
For the arrow is lifted up by that.
If the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary to cut out all the flesh in which the poison is: if it is possible for you to do that.
Then care for it as is fitting for that.
If the arrow is falling into the chest, or belly, or bladder, or side: and it is near because you touch it with your finger, and it is possible for you to cut above it: then cut, and beware of incision of vein, or nerve, and draw it out.
Then treat the wound if you see it, and care for it until it heals.
And this is the form of forceps, with which arrows are extracted.
Let the extremities be like the beak of a bird, which have been made like iron: when they grasp a shaft, they do not let it go.
And many kinds are made from these, large and small and medium, according to the quantity of the magnitude of the arrow, and its smallness, and the wideness of the wound, and its constriction.
Shape of the Concave Impelling Tool.
And the form of the Impeller for the deaf.
This is for the deaf extremity like the radius, so that its entrance may be relieved into a concave arrow and it may be driven with it.
The extremity of this instrument is concave like a bird's feather so that the entrance of the arrow into it and its impulse may be eased.
On the incision of veins.
Chapter XC VII. There are thirty veins that are commonly bled from in the body.
Of these, there are sixteen in the head: two pulsating veins, which are behind the ears, called Herbae; and two arteries, which are apparent in both temples; and two veins which are in the two lacrimals of the two eyes, which are called Aspicientes; and a prepared vein in the middle of the forehead; and a vein which is at the extremity of the nose.
And two guidegis, which are in the neck.
And two veins that are in the upper lip of the mouth.
And two veins that are in the lower lip.
And these are the veins which are called Algecherich.
And the two veins that are under the tongue.
The veins which are opened in the arms are five veins in each arm.
One of these is the Cephalic vein, and it is from the side of the neck; and the common people call it the vein of the head.
And Black.
And it is the Middle vein, and it is composed of the Basilica branch and the Cephalic branch; and the common people call it the vein of the body.
And Basilica, and it is placed in the domestic side: and it is also called Titillicaris.
And the common people call it a vein of the abdomen.
And the string of the arm is placed upon a board: and that is the one in which bloodletting is performed, and that which appears above the thumb by incision obvious.
And Saluatella: and there is a vein which is between the annular and the smallest: and it has two branches.
And in the leg and in the foot there are three veins.
One of them is that which is under the curvature of the thumb from the inside side.
And the second is Saphena: and its place is at the heel from the inner side.
And vein of Nesse: and its place is by the heel bone from the side of the inside.
And in the other leg there are three veins similar to those.
On bloodletting of two veins after the ears.
The cutting of two veins which are behind the ears is a help for old catarrhs, and headaches, and wounds in the head, and ulcers of the head, ancient evils.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is as I have told you.
And it is, as the head of the sick person be shaved: and the occiput of him be rubbed in the place of two veins with a rough cloth with good friction.
Then the sick person should tighten their neck with a cloth until two veins appear.
And their locations are behind the ears in two depressed places of the head.
Therefore, seek them out with your finger, and where you feel their pulse under your finger, mark there with sealing wax.
Then take a surgical knife, and it is called Incisor.
Then introduce it under the vein into the flesh, until the phlebotomist reaches the bone.
Then lift your hand with the vein and skin upwards, and cut the vein with the skin by a cutting incision.
And let the length of the incision be the quantity of two joined fingers, or about that: and make blood exit as much as you wish.
Then bind it with splints and let it go until it heals.
And now he proceeds at the beginning of the book incision of them, and their cauterization.
On bloodletting of two arteries at times.
Of the two arteries which are in the two times of phlebotomy, the help is for ancient migraine: and bad sore, and continuous ophthalmia: and course of superfluous acute discharges to the eyes. And the quality of blood letting is as I tell you.
The weak person tightens his neck a great deal until two veins appear to the sense in manifest appearance: and they are shown to be pulsating under your finger.
Then with encrusting plaster.
Then elevate the skin from above with your index finger and introduce the cutting knife below, and elevate the vein upward.
And cut into it as you did in the two other veins: and make it bleed according to the quantity of your need. Then loose the constriction of the sick person, and place your finger upon the vein for an hour.
Afterward place upon the same poultice and compresses, and bind it above with a strong constriction: and let it go until it heals.
And now comes a recollection of them, and their incision, and their extraction at the beginning of the book.
On vein incision of the forehead after cephalic vein incision.
A wound from a vein-cutting in the forehead is after cephalic bloodletting for old pains of the face, and for migraine, and redness, and foul ulcers.
And the quality of bloodletting is, as I tell you.
The sick man bends his neck with a bandage until the vein appears.
Then take the instrument that is called a Fossorium.
This is its form.
Place the sharp point that is at the head of the Fossorium over the vein itself, and strike upon it with a comb, or with something else in a similar way: and let the blood flow according to the quantity which you wish.
Then loosen the wound of the sick person, and tighten it until it heals.
And sometimes it is opened with a broad lancet.
However, a lancet should not be sharp at the extremity, like other lancets, but rather blunt at the extremity.
And let the lancet be passed across it because the bone is near, and perhaps the lancet will break when it is fine.
On bloodletting of the veins in the two tear ducts.
An injury to two veins that are in the two tear ducts of both eyes is to the eye from scab and redness: and it hurts in the eye, and pain in the face.
And the quality of bleeding them is that the sick man should tighten his neck with a bandage.
Then cut with the phlebotome and you be standing over his head.
And let a phlebotomy be made transversely along the length, with a small lancet, somewhat broad, for there is no flesh in the place.
If indeed the incision is in a delicate extremity, perhaps it will break.
Then make it flow out from the blood as much as is necessary for you.
And place upon them a cloth, and bind them together one night, and untie them.
On bloodletting of the veins of the nose.
Phlebotomy of the veins of the nose is helpful for acute fever and violent abscesses and facial pains, such as migraine and redness that occurs on the face, especially when it is old.
And the quality of phlebotomy is that it tightens the weak neck of
Then hold his nose with your left hand, and take a subtle, long lancet, and place it in the middle of his harelip, between that which distinguishes the nose according to straightness.
Because the vein does not appear to the sense there, and because the blood begins to flow immediately.
And it is necessary that you let your hand with the lancet run slightly and make blood flow according to your need.
Then bind it tight at night with one bandage.
It indeed is restored quickly.
On the lancing of veins according to Guidegi.
Now the ailment of phlebotomy according to Guidegi is for shortness of breath, and beginning leprosy, and melancholy ailments, and sores bad and ulcers corrosive, that is to say, herpes appearing.
And the quality of phlebotomy of these is that it tightens the sick man under both in his neck with a bandage: and let the artificer stand over the head of the sick, and let the sick man be sitting upon a seat.
Then the lancet cuts a vein to the width of a large incision for a short length.
Then draw out from the blood a measured amount, or according to what you see is necessary for it.
Then do likewise with another vein.
Afterwards solve the ligament and tighten two veins with a middle constriction so that the patient does not bleed profusely.
And let her be dismissed until morning.
A wound is healed.
On incision of veins, Albucasis.
The veins of Albucasis are beneficial for phlebotomy because they help with hoarseness in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and bad ulcers, and fissures of the lips, and bad ulcers, also those that are in the nose and around it.
And the quality of bloodletting is, that you make the sick person sit in front of you: and bind his neck with a bandage.
Then turn over the lip and look at the two veins: one is from the right side of the lip and the second from the left side: and the demonstration of both is by the blackness of both.
And that is true: because on their circumference there are small, black veins.
Therefore, cut both with a cutting incision. If there is doubt about you, and you do not know which of them it is: then attend to the incision of the larger of them, and make them more manifest.
And similarly do with the two veins that are in the upper lip: and very much indeed is it customary to do so: and cut two veins that are in the lower lip.
On phlebotomy. The vein under the tongue after cephalic phlebotomy.
As for the two veins which are under the tongue, the usefulness of phlebotomy is this: that cephalic phlebotomy is good for affections which are in the throat, and pains of the gums, and pains of the mouth.
And the quality of bloodletting is that the sick person should sit between your hands facing the sun: and lift his tongue, and look under his tongue on one side a vein, and on the other side a vein: and the color of both sloping towards blackness.
Therefore cut both veins and guard yourself so that you do not use your hand too far in cutting the veins.
For under it are arteries, and perhaps there will be a flow of blood from those arteries.
On the three veins in the elbow.
The veins which are let in the elbow, there are three of which the cutting has custom in all men.
And bloodletting of these is done according to two modes.
Either by pricking with a broad myrtle knife blade: or olive-wood to the fineness of a slope: or cutting with a surgical knife and it is Alnesil.
And this is its form.
Thus Al-Zahrawi is, that which is convenient for the section.
And among these are broad and subtle kinds, according to the width of the veins and their strictness.  The form of the phlebotomy knife should be broad, as you see.
And it is proper to open the hollow veins, full, coming forth, appearing, thick, and those which contain thick, turbid blood.
And this lancet is of less width and more delicate point.
And it is fitting for bloodletting of the veins that contain fine, yellow-tinged blood.
On bloodletting at Basilicas.
The basilica vein of these three is helpful for bloodletting. Because it draws blood from ailments that are in the throat and neck, because it follows the chest and abdomen: and it is fitting for the phlebotomist to take care with the phlebotomy, so that he may beware and be above fear from it, because under it is an artery.
If therefore he errs, and adds in incision of the vein, he incites that artery, and there occurs a flow of blood.
Therefore it is necessary that she be bled not with a sharp lancet: but rather with a cutting one like Alnesil's.
If the basilica does not appear with a manifest appearance, then it is necessary that one takes another basilica, and change it to another, or seek some branch of it; or in place of the phlebotome, a rope of the arm.
For it is manifest, and dry it with a lancet named Anesil, as we have said.
If you wish to perform phlebotomy on the same person, then before the stricture of the arm, you must touch the place until you know the location of the pulse.
Then signs over the place with a cauterizer, then the arm, and the vein dry cut with a concave incision with the phlebotome Alnesil, as we said.
And take care lest the blow fall through the space from the place of the artery.
And when you see, when you tighten the ligature, an inflation in the place which you marked with wax, then that inflation is the inflation of the artery: therefore avoid it.
If you see blood rising during bloodletting like a boy's urine, and it is fine-grained, red; then know that it is from the artery's blood.
Then therefore hasten, and place your finger upon it, long space, then take away your finger.
If therefore the blood is cut (for many times indeed it is cut), then bind the arm, and release it; and let the sick person guard against movement of it; and let him be over fear of it.
And let it not be moved for several days, until it is healed.
If blood does not cease flowing and overcomes you, and there is no medicine present to you at the moment, then cut the artery if it appears to you.
For the extremities are contracted, and blood is cut off.
Or take the bark of ficus and soften it: take half of it and bind it over the place of the vein constriction with a bandage and cotton wool until the next day.
Then if the blood is cut off, it is good.
And if not so: then treat the one with it whose preceding remembrance from the place of powder cutting flow of blood: and the cutting off of its blood is not difficult in many dispositions, because of the small place of the wound, and the possibility of a ligament from the arm.
On the bleeding of the vein called Fusca.
The veins of the Fusca are helpful for phlebotomy, because it draws blood from the upper part of the head and lower part of the body, because it is composed of the Basilica branch and the Cephalic branch, as we said.
And it is fitting for the phlebotomist that he be above fear from his phlebotomy, for under it is a nerve.
If therefore he adds in the puncture of phlebotomy, and finds a nerve, it happens in that numbness occurs, and healing becomes difficult, and perhaps it is not healed completely.
And this nerve appears often to the sense.
If it is hidden in some people, and it is subtle, and does not appear: then you must place your phlebotomy where you phlebotomize, a section with Alnesil, and sever the nerves with your strength.
If the vein is between two nerves, then cut the vein lengthwise.
On the Cephalic Vein.
The phlebotomy of the Cephalic vein is helpful because it draws blood from the head and brings relief to eye ailments.
And it is necessary in this vein properly, if you wish, that you prick it with a lancet, either with an olive-tree lancet, or with a myrtle-tree lancet; because it is the safest of all veins, because there is no artery beneath it, nor nerve. However, it is fitting for you in phlebotomy, that you avoid with the lancet the head of the lacerti, and seek a gentler place: and it does not harm him, if when first struck, it is not found, that it be repeated upon it several times with phlebotomy. Nevertheless, perhaps a boil will develop in some men when it is not lanced in the first percussion, but it does not harm him in any way.
On the usefulness of phlebotomy, and the precautions to be observed in it.
The quality of phlebotomy, and its accidents from it, in which you ought to think about rectification.
Therefore, first of all, it is important for you to know that bloodletting is not administered unless for the preservation of health and its perseverance, and caution against the advent of diseases.
And that a phlebotomy be made in one of the three veins which are in the elbow, namely Cephalic, and Dark, and Basilica.
And that venesection should be performed at the beginning of Spring on a fast, in summer, and in autumn and winter after a meal, when signs of repletion appear.
Let a bloodletting be performed on the first or third day, after three hours have passed.
Venesection, which is administered in illnesses, does not have a determined hour: but when convenience and necessity call for it, at night, or day, and in every hour, and in every time.
And it is not right that boys should be bled until they reach fourteen years of age.
A pregnant woman shall not be bled, unless from the fourth month to the seventh.
The elderly who have passed sixty years should not be bled.
When therefore someone wants to be bled for any reason, it is necessary that he purify his intestines before bleeding with a gentle enema, if in them there is much feces retained: so that the veins at the time of bleeding do not attract impurities from the intestines harmful to the main limbs.
Nor should a patient who is vomiting be bled, that is, full of nausea; nor one who is drunk, nor one recovering from drunkenness, until it has been removed from them.
Nor one with dropsy.
And let phlebotomy be avoided again after colic passion, and vomiting, and flux of the belly, and multiplication of intercourse, and labor, and exercise, and vigils, and fasting, and all that dissolves the strength from the physical or animal thing.
Then consider the subtlety of the humors before that, if blood is thick with foods and drinks, and medicines: if it is possible for it.
Then he enters the bath, if nothing prevents him; or he is exercised with some exercise, so that the blood may be refined.
And place the phlebotomy in his chest, around the third day, as we said; and try so that his chest be evacuated on that day from all accidents of evil animals: such as tightness, and anger, and fear; and from all bodily accidents, such as labor, and punishment, and superfluity, and those similar.
And let him make present to his seat things whose use men have acquired from fragrance, and scent, and joy and the like, to the extent of possibility.
Then let the phlebotomist sit upon a stool, that it be higher than the phlebotomist's stool; afterwards he shall withdraw his arm, and rub himself with his hand twice, or thrice.
Then he tightens the ligament with corrections and wraps it twice.
And let the constriction be moderate, because when a constriction is unequal, either through excess in the constriction, then it prevents the course of blood; or in softening, then it also prevents the course of blood.
Then after constriction it is necessary that the surgeon rub his hands simultaneously and again until the veins swell and become apparent to the sense.
Then let the surgeon cut the vein with a little oil, as was formerly done.
Then he puts his index finger of the left hand upon the vein in the place where he wants to perform a phlebotomy, little: so that the vein does not flee, and the percussion is missed.
Because from veins there is one which you find as a fleeing cord in the vein-letting operation; and from them is that which is full of windiness; and when you put the vein-letter on it, it contracts under the vein-letter, and the vein-letterer is deceived, and does not open the vein; and if he opens it, it is strict. Therefore it is necessary that the vein-letterer be firm, and be solicitous in all these things.
Then he puts down the lancet.
And if not, then repeat that with another incision under it in a small place, or above it with haste: if the place does not suppurate.
If it becomes suppurating or the patient weakens, then dismiss him on that day or two days after, and do not tighten the bandage.
Perhaps it will draw a hot abscess.
He shall not enter the bath.
Then let him return to phlebotomy, if he wishes.
If the opening is small, or blood flows subtly: and you fear that the quantity of blood which you desire may not exit; then repeat the incision of the vein in the very foramen according to straightness, and add little in the operation.
And do this with haste, before the place becomes suppurated, for a suppurating place is in many people at a small operation.
If therefore you see the abscess already, then do not return on it at all, for it excuses nothing to you. And place upon it something of the feces of oil; because it will alleviate the course of blood.
And it is better in this place than oil itself, and than the rest of olive.
And similarly administer the feces of oil in all your bloodletting, where you bleed veins at the prohibition of blood flow, and they make it with tyriaca alfarach, and sagzenea, when one of them is placed over the place.
Blood, when it is thick, becomes refined and resolved.
If a large abscess occurs at the site of bloodletting, which often happens, especially to those who are not bled unless absolutely necessary, or have a small vein opened, then hasten and place on the spot a sponge soaked in water and salt, heated for a short time: and bind it for an hour; because it will be dissolved.
And it is necessary that you do this after the blood has come out of the vein itself, with its completion, or from another vein.
And often indeed abscesses and swellings occur at basilica bloodletting.
Therefore place your hand upon it, then if you find softness at your compression upon it, then that eminence is bad.
Therefore, beware that you place something upon it from what we have said.
For perhaps blood will flow from it of an artery.
But make a plaster for him with that in which there is stypticity, that the place may be covered.
Then care for it as with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
And it is necessary that you extract from every man from his blood according to the amount of his virtue.
And that which appears from the color winning over blood.
If the blood is black, then let it flow out until it turns red; and similarly if you see it thick, then let it flow out until it becomes thinner; and similarly if it is sharp, until its sharpness is removed.
And it is necessary for one who is full, strong, and needs bloodletting with one vein only, that the incision be made wide and broad, and for the weak person, let the opposite be done.
And it is necessary that he extract it in incisions, and that the opening be narrow: and better which is administered in phlebotomy of the vein is, that a transverse section be made, not a puncture.
And this method of phlebotomy is safe from the flow of blood, and from the incision of the nerve: and it is more praiseworthy, and safer than phlebotomy by breadth and length.
And to whom it is customary to come among the bloodletters with fainting, let it be that food before phlebotomy is given moderately with bread infused in pomegranate juice: or boiled rice, if it is heated: and draw out of his blood in three or four times.
And if it is of a cold constitution, then let him take before the bloodletting bread soaked in syrup of myrrh, or in syrup of honey flavored with spices, or in aromatic and fragrant syrup.
If syncope should occur during phlebotomy, and the cause is the exit of much blood, then it is necessary that he take a drink of water with flesh, and a subtle fragrant syrup; and use aromatics with algae, and liniment his chest with it; and use the rest which we said in the division in the chapter on syncopes from evacuation.
But whoever wants to let blood from his arm, and release his blood a second time: it is necessary for him whose phlebotomy is because of much evacuation, and whose strength is weak, that he should release the blood gradually by the amount of strength in continuous days.
He who wants to let blood from his arm, and loosen his blood the second time, and his body is strong; then he should do it after seven or nine hours from his first incision.
Whoever wishes to draw blood from his body to the opposite part to which it inclines: it is necessary that he be bled on the second or third day.
In the body of which there is much blood already heated and sharpened, and it causes fever to occur: it is necessary that the blood go out from it in one vein, and a large quantity be extracted from it: and the opening be enlarged until fainting occurs: after you have been conserving all the conditions of phlebotomy: and that you put your hand over his pulse at the course of the blood, so that death does not occur instead of fainting.
Many times indeed it happens that the phlebotomist is ignorant, and negligence falls.
And it is not right when you wish to loosen the arm and loosen the blood a second time, since the orifice of the vein has already been closed and difficult exit of blood is made, that one should press upon it violently and quickly stretch the cut.
For that is a very bad evil, indeed let it alone until it is bled second.
Either remove with the sharpness of a lancet that which is clotted from the blood at the opening of the vein, and place something salt dissolved in water above it.
And place upon it something of alfarach ointment, or sazzena, and place it with a gentle compression until the blood departs.
If a vein has already been affected by an abscess, then let it go and do not hold it until the abscess sits.
If necessity compels blood to be let for a second time and there is no excuse, then either the phlebotomist should make the incision above that place, or in another arm in another vein.
The cord of the arm is cut by the vein where the Fuscous and Basilica are located, when these veins are not found and are hidden, because it is composed of them.
And the quality of bloodletting is that the sick person should put his hand into hot water until the vein becomes visible and prominent.
Then it is bound over itself with a bandage with slight constriction in the middle.
Then make the incision with the lancet second to the transverse direction, gradually and not laterally or lengthwise: and let the opening be wide, and let your incision be such that it cuts across the joint of the hand for a short distance.
And most especially the flow of blood is put in hot water in wintertime.
And vein incision of this vein is safer than all veins, because under this vein there is neither pulsating nor nerve.
A bloodletting on the right hand of Salvatella is beneficial for diseases of the liver.
And the quality of phlebotomy is that you should tie the vein with a bandage or your hand after you have put it in warm water until the vein swells and becomes apparent to the touch.
Then the surgeon cuts it transversely with a lancet.
And if you cut it entirely, it will not harm him in any way.
And take care, lest you last use your hand with the lancet.
Under it are the nerves of the fingers laid bare of flesh.
Then apply your hand to the hot water, and let the blood run into it.
For if you do not run it in hot water, blood clots at the opening of the vein and is prevented from flowing.
When therefore you have extracted from the blood the quantity of necessity, then place over the vein oil and salt, that it not solidify quickly.
And similarly you must do with every tight branch.
Now the incision for phlebotomy from the left hand is this: because it is helpful against spleen diseases: and do similarly in phlebotomy of it, as you did in the second equally.
The benefit of cutting the saphenous vein is for illnesses that are in the lower part of the body, such as pains in the womb, and retention of menstruation, and infirmities of the kidneys, and ulcers of the hips and legs, old ones, and similar ailments.
And the quality of phlebotomy is that the sick person shall put his foot into hot water and make friction upon it until the veins swell up, and bind above the joint of the foot with a ligature.
And the veins are indeed located near the heel bone, appearing towards the thumb: and they branch out from it on the face of the foot into many branches.
Therefore, let the phlebotomist make the incision in the larger branch of it, or near the heel in its collection: because it is better and healthier.
If he opens a vein on the face of the foot, then be cautious of the nerves which are below it on the face of the foot.
And place your incision for phlebotomy as if you want to cut it transversely, and let the lancet be named Nesil.
If the exit of blood is prevented, then immerse his foot again in hot water; and let the blood run into it until it is evacuated.
If the phlebotomist errs in the first attempt, then he should return with phlebotomy to the upper region for a short time, for that place is safe, and you should not fear evil from it, when you are careful of the nerves, as we said.
And similarly with the saphenous vein of the other foot equally.
The location of the sciatic veins, as we have said, is at the calcaneum from the left side.
And the remedy for this incision is to the pain of the hip, when it is due to hot blood.
And the quality of phlebotomy is that he who is sick should enter the bath and hasten; and wrap his leg from the side of the buttock to above the heel four fingers' width with a slender long bandage: for it does not appear unless for this reason.
When therefore it appears, then the phlebotomist shall open it according to whichever art is possible to you, or according to the transverse cutting. And it is better, either that you cut it with an incision, or separate it with a section.
The place of it is safer, and it itself is hidden in many people's bodies.
If you do not find it and it does not appear at all to the sense, then let a phlebotomist take some branch of it, and it is the one which appears on the back of the foot, and towards the ear; and beware of the nerves, and make it run from the blood as much as you wish.
Then loosen the constriction, and place leather over the site of the incision, and tighten the area.
It heals quickly indeed.
On Wind Evacuation and its Use.
Chapter XCIII.
Surgical instruments are made from horn, and from bronze, and from glass.
And ventosaion is indeed done in two ways.
With incision and bloodletting: and another is ventosaion without incision. And this type of cupping which is without incision is according to two modes.
Or else it is with fire.
Or it is without fire.
And there are fourteen places in the body that receive treatment with scarification and bloodletting.
There is one called Ventosatio Alnocrati, and it is at the back of the head: and Alkehel, and it is in the middle of the neck: and  Ventosatio Alhagdahim, and these are two plates of the neck from two parts together: and Ventosatio menti, and it is under the jaw in the lower mouth: and Ventosatio duarum spatularum: and Ventosatio Alachosos over the end of the tail: and Ventosatio duorum focilium, and these are in the middle of the two arms: and Ventosatio duorum crurium: and Ventosatio duarum cauillarum.
And cupping does not draw blood from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and for that reason there is no loss of strength from them, as there is in the case of phlebotomy.
It is not proper to administer cauterization, whether with fire or without fire, in any ailment that arises from fullness, until the entire body has been evacuated.
If necessity compels us to bloodletting from sickness or out of habit, we administer it at any hour, at the beginning of the month, at its end, and in the middle of it, and at any time whatsoever.
This is because among men there are those who when blood multiplies in them until it needs to be extracted through venesection, find heaviness and pain in their head.
And of these there is one who has found a fullness and redness in his face, head, and neck.
And of these there is one who found itching on his face and forehead, and darkness, and dimness in his eyes.
And among these is one who sharpens the place of his ventilation. And of these there is one whose laughter multiplies.
And of these is he who finds a taste of blood in his mouth; or the tongue becomes inflamed and discharges blood.
And there is one whose sleep multiplies.
And there are those who see in their dream blood and redness, and the slain, and wounds, and things similar to these. When therefore we see something of these things, and properly if it is on the third day of the month: we prescribe then for ventilation to be done, after two hours or three have passed. A wound of the neck, namely, because it contributes to gravity in the head and that which flows out towards the eyes.
