After I have completed for you, O sons, this book which is the last of knowledge in medicine with its completion, and I have reached an end in it, from its expositions, and its own declarations, it seemed to me that I should complete it for you with this Treatise which is a part of the operation, that is, surgery with the hand.
Because surgery with the hand has been in our region and time completely deprived, until perhaps the knowledge of it perished, and its trace was cut off: and there remained from it, except for small descriptions in books of ancients, which were altered by hands: and error and hesitation happened to them, until their intentions were closed, and the force of it was lengthened. It seemed to me, that I should vivify it with the order of this Treatise according to the way of exposition, and declaration, and abbreviation: and that I should come to forms of cautery instruments, and the rest of instruments of work: with the addition of declaration, and the preparation of it which is necessary.
The cause why a good artificer of this art is not found with his own hand in our time is: because the art of medicine is long, and it is necessary for its author to be trained beforehand in the knowledge of anatomy as Galen narrated, until he knows the workings of the limbs, and their forms, and their connection, and separation, and has knowledge of bones, and nerves, and tendons, and their number, and their emergence, and the pulsation of veins, and quiet ones, and the places of their exit.
And for this reason Hippocrates said that the name when it is with a name is much, and when it is with work little, and especially in the art of the hand.
We have now spoken of that at the beginning of this book.
For he who is not learned about what we have said concerning anatomy, cannot be purged but will fall into error, by which men are killed: just as I have seen many of those who fashion themselves from this science, and boast about it without knowledge, and without experience.
That is, because I saw a foolish physician cut an abscess on the neck of a woman, and he struck some arteries in her neck; therefore blood flowed from the woman until she fell dead in his hands.
And I saw another physician who dared to remove a stone from a man who had reached old age, and the stone was large.
Therefore it came to him, and he removed it with the bladder fragment.
Therefore the man died on the third day.
And I indeed had been called to remove it; and I saw from the size of the stone, and disposition of the sick man, that he would die.
And I saw another physician who was receiving a stipend from a certain Duke in our land for medicine: and it happened to an eunuch, black, who was with him, that he broke his leg near his heel: and the physician, in his ignorance, hastened, and bound the fracture over the wound with splints, and straps tightly, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
Then he completed it according to his desires.
Afterward he dismissed him for several days, and commanded him not to loosen the bandage: and he stood thus until the abscess had taken hold of his leg and foot, and came to ruin.
Therefore I was summoned to him: and I hastened to solve the ligament: and there followed tranquility, and he was eased from his pains.
However, the corruption had already been confirmed in the limb: and I could not restrain it.
Therefore, when corruption has ceased to travel through the limb until it perishes.
And I saw another physician who perforated a cancerous abscess; and it ulcerated after days, until the evil of it was magnified with its lord.
That is, because when a pure cancer is from melancholic humor, then it ought not to be reached with iron at all, unless it is in a limb which can bear to have the whole of it cut off.
And because of this, my sons, it is necessary for you to know that an operation divided by hand into two divisions: namely, the operation which is associated with health; and the operation, with which there is danger in many dispositions. And I have now aroused myself in every place of this book, where there is an operation, which has fear and dread.
Therefore it is necessary for you to avoid that, and halve it: so that fools do not find a way to speak and dishonor it.
Therefore, take measurements with care and protection, and your patients with ease and firmness, and use the better way leading through God's grace to health and a praiseworthy succession: and dismiss terrible illnesses of difficult healing: and remove your souls from what makes you fear, so that hesitation may enter upon you in your faith and your well-being. It is indeed more enduring for your glory, and more sublime in this world, and finally to your quantities.
For Galen indeed said in some of his instructions. Do not treat a bad illness: so that you are not called a bad doctor.
Chapter One.
On incision and piercing, bloodletting and ventosa, and wounds: and the extraction of arrows, and similar things: and the whole chapter, arranged by forms of instruments.
Chapter three.
On restoration, and dislocation, and cure of twisting, and similar things: chaptered, ordered from head to foot, and forms of instruments.
Glory to God alone.
The Surgical Book of Albucasis.
Part I.
On the Benefit and Harm of Cautery: And What Complexions it is Suitable For, and at What Time: And Whether with Iron or Gold.
Chapter I.
But before we recall the operation with him, it is necessary that I say the quality of his benefits, and harms, and in what complexion they are shown.
I say therefore, that the discourse on the quality of cautery and its effect is a lengthy and subtle science, and a hidden secret.
Even many wise men spoke about it, and disagreed about it; and for me enough is the little from their words, fearing a prolongation.
Therefore, I say that cautery is universally effective against every constitution, whether with matter or without matter, except for two constitutions: the hot constitution without matter and the dry constitution without matter.
When compounded with hot and dry material they disagreed.
Some have said that the cautery is helpful in this.
And others said the opposite of this, namely that cauterization is not suitable in a sickness which is from heat and dryness, because nature is heat; and it is unsuitable for it to be healed from hot and dry sickness with heat and dryness.
And he who says the opposite of this said: that by cauterization benefit is done in all sickness hot and humid which happens in the bodies of men: because when you compare the body of a man, and its humidities, to the complexion of fire, you find the body of a man cold.
And I indeed say through his discourse: because from experiment I have already found it many times.
Nevertheless, it is not proper that he should come upon this, unless he who has already been proven and exercised in the last exercise of the chapter on cauterization, and has known the diversity of human constitutions, and the disposition of illnesses in themselves, and their causes, and accidents, and the space of time for them.
Of the remaining mixtures there is no need for fear, especially in cold and moist diseases. For now all the physicians have come together on these matters: and they have not disagreed in the help with cauterization in them.
And know, sons, that from the secret of healing by cautery with fire, and its goodness over cautery with burning medicine, it is: because fire is simple, whose action does not reach unless to the member which is cauterized; and it does not harm another member joined with it, except for slight harm.
The action of burning medicine comes to that which lengthens from the limbs, and perhaps causes pain in the member that is difficult to heal, and perhaps it kills.
Fire, however, because of its subtlety and goodness of its substance, does not do it unless it is superfluous.
Now we have ascertained this through experience, because of the length of service and study with the art, and the standing over the truth of things; and for this I excuse myself from the length of the discourse.
And know, sons, that they disagree about the time when it is fitting to do cauterization, and put forward a better time for truth.
And I say that cautery is suitable at all times: because the harm caused by time is submerged in the benefit which is drawn with cautery.
And especially if the cauterization is because of pains from necessary pains, strong and urgent ones which do not tolerate delay; because it is feared from them that a worse evil may occur, than a small harm resulting from time.
And let it not enter your minds, O sons, that which the vulgar and foolish physicians fear, namely that in those sicknesses which are cured by cauterization, there is not always a return: and they place this as a consequence, and things are not as they think: because cauterization is, unless in medicine's place, which alters complexion, and dries up humidities which are the cause, wherefore pains occur.
Nevertheless, a cautery is superfluous over medicine by the speed of its health, and the strength of its operation, and the violence of its domain: and it is possible that sickness may return at some time according to the complexion of the sick person, and the location of his sickness, and the virtue of it: and that which is prepared in his body from the aggregation of superfluities in it: and that which comes to him in its acquisition from foods, and similar things from causes, unless sickness occurs, in which cautery is administered. A slight pain in a limb of little swelling and humidity, such as toothache, because of the pain, and things similar to it, for it is possible that the pain does not return there.
But that is done in few cases.
But again the common saying that cautery is the last resort of medicine is a correct saying: not for what they intend by it: because they believe that it is not a cure which can be compared with medicine, nor with anything else after the use of cautery.
The matter is contrary to that which some think, and the intent is that cauterization is last in medicine, not because it is never used, but rather when we administer methods of healing for certain illnesses, and those medicines do not help; then at the end of the matter we administer cauterization, and it helps. Therefore it falls that cauterization is last in medicine, not according to the intention which the common people and many foolish physicians understand.
The ancients said that a cautery with gold is better than one with iron; and they did not say this except because of the equality of gold, and the sublimity of its substance; and they said that it does not make pus the place of the cautery. However, that is not absolutely true, because I have already proven it and found that it does not do that in certain bodies without others.
And a cautery with itself is good, and better than with iron, as they have said.
However, when you heat the cautery iron in a fire of gold, it is not clear to you when it ignites according to the quantity that you wish, because of the redness of gold. And when it hastens toward itself the cold, and if you add on it ignition, it melts in the fire, and turns into laminas.
Therefore the artificer falls from that into the occupation: and for this reason cautery is made with iron among us quicker and nearer, from straightness to operation.
And I indeed have now arranged this Chapter on Cauterization, according to chapters: and I have arranged them from head to foot: that those seeking it may find what they want from it. On the way of cauterization of the head in the coronal suture.
Chapter II.
This application of cauterization addresses the dominion of humidity and coldness over the brain: which two are causes of dropsy and the abundance of fluid flow from the head to the parts of the eyes and ears, and the abundance of sleep, and toothache, and sore throat: and universally all ailments that occur from coldness, such as paralysis, and dropsy, epilepsy, and apoplexy, and similar ailments.
The method of cauterization is that you instruct the sick person to evacuate first with a cleansing solution medicine the head for three nights, or four, according to what demands the strength of the sick person, and his age, and his custom.
Then bid him make a cut in his head with a knife.
Then make him sit between your hands, so that he has already placed his hands over his chest.
Then place the root of your palm over the root of his nose between his eyes. Whenever therefore your middle finger shall have been injured, mark that place with a non-caustic. Then, a cautery of oil is made in the fire. Its form is this. Then place it upon the marked spot with the unconstrained, descent, whereby your hand may be gradually tightened, and you turn it.
Then lift your hand quickly, and look at the place.
If you now see that from the bone the quantity of alkiel or the quantity of zeuherbi has been revealed, then raise your hand.
And if not, repeat your hand with the iron itself, or with another from itself if it cools: until you see the bones which I told you.
Then take something of salt and dissolve it in water, and drink it into the same wound, and put it over the place: and let it stand for three days.
Then place upon it a cloth soaked in butter and leave it on the spot until the fire has been destroyed. Then care for it with ointment of four drugs until it is healed.
They have said that the greater the wound remains open, the more it emits pus, wherefore it is better and more helpful.
And some of them said that the skin should be cauterized up to the bone, and hold the cautery until something of the thickness of bone is burned.
Then, after that which was burned is removed from the bone, it is then cared for.
And others say that it is necessary that with the cauterizing instrument one should arrive at the very last point, until it imprints a form into the bone, so that the bone may fall off, which is done like the shape of a kirate: or an instrument that women put into the small alphabet infusion: and they believe that vapors of the head are exhaled from this place, and the open wound may be dismissed for a long time.
Then it is cared for until it solidifies.
To me, these two kinds of cautery appear to be nothing but, in certain men, according to the way of fear.
And it is better for him to be released, in my opinion, with his health preserved.
The head is weakened from the breaking of its natural continuity, as we have testified in the other limbs; and especially when the head of the weak patient is naturally feeble. And indeed the first species of cautery is more salutary and better with me, and I use it; therefore operate with it in health.
On the method of cauterizing the head in pain throughout the head.
Chapter III.
When a chronic pain occurs throughout the entire head: and it is prolonged in the infirm, and he uses leeches, and cauteries, and cephalic purges, and oils, and emplastrum.
And especially if it has already been cauterized with one cautery, which we have narrated, and nothing helps it from those things: then consider.
If the head of the patient is of strong constitution and not weak, and it finds intense cold, then cauterize with a cautery below it slightly.
Then cauterize it over every horn of its head with a cautery, so that it does not penetrate the skin, and expose the quantity from the bone, which we have recounted.
And cauterize him with one cautery on the back of his head, in the place which is called vas; and it is a place where the windpipe is put; and raise your mat here, and do not uncover the bone.
He found himself in pain because of this strong pain, and different from the pain of the rest of the burns on all parts of the head.
And I shall say this about the cautery: and it should be a cautery, by which the horns of the head are cauterized, and the back of its head more subtly cauterized, than that with which the middle of the head is cauterized.
And this is its form.
On the manner of cauterization in headache, both with a burning medicine and with iron.
Chapter IV.
When pain and swelling occur in the head region, or the pain extends to the eye, and the head is cleaned with purifying medicines, and the rest of the treatment is administered, which I have said in the divisions of illnesses, and this does not help at all: then cauterization in it is according to two modes: either cauterization with a burning sharp medicine: or with iron. But cautery with a sharp burning medicine is, to take one tooth from another and to scrape it, and cut off the extremities of it on both sides.
Then cut the place of pain with a wide lancet until a place under the skin is made where the tooth is caught.
Therefore introduce it into the skin itself until it is covered; then tighten it above with a ball of constriction that is decent, and leave it for fifteen hours, then untie it, and remove it, and let the wound lie for two or three days; afterwards put upon it a poultice submerged in butter until the place forms pus; then care for it with ointment until it heals.
And if you wish to do it with some burning medicines, which I have written about in the twelfth treatise, on Burning Medicines.
The cauterization of it with iron is according to this manner.
A burning cautery, whose form is this.
And it is called Clauis: because the shape of its head is like the shape of a key, in which there is some curvature, and in the middle of it is a small prominence.
Then place it over the site, and hold your hand; and you revolve the iron gradually with speed; and let the quantity that is burned be as the thickness of the skin, as much as half of it.
And lift your hand so that the artery below is not burned and blood does not flow.
Then soak a cloth in salt water, and place it over the area, and leave it there for three days; then place the cloth with butter: afterwards care with ointment until healed. And if you wish, cauterize this hemicrania with the second end of the knife from the cautery.
And beware of cutting an artery in this headache, not one that is old properly.
On the manner of cauterizing in old headache.
Chapter V.
When you treat a headache, with that which we said from the preceding cure, and that which we said in the divisions of illnesses, and it does not help the cure: and you see from the illness, that what we said from the first cauterization with medicine, or with fire cauterization, is not sufficient, then it is necessary to use a knife cautery until it whitens, after marking the place of pain with a line, whose length is half a finger, or about that: and put your hand on one side, and squeeze it until you cut the artery and reach the bone. Nevertheless it is necessary for you to avoid the continuation of the jawbone which moves during chewing, lest the side be burned or the nerve that moves it, whence spasm occurs.
And let there be watch and caution of the flow of blood from the artery, which is cut.
For in the cutting away of it there is fear, and especially to him who does not know what he is doing, and is neither studious nor experienced; and he abandons the operation with this primarily.
And I come with a remembrance of the regimen of blood flow accidents from the artery according to my manner, and in the place of this book of mine.
If you see that from illness, the cauterization does not suffice for him, and you see the body of the sick person enduring the cauterization in the middle of the head, as we have narrated, take care of the wound until it is healed.
And if you wish, administer a cautery, which we said in the chapter on extracting an artery with a cautery having two blades.
For indeed cauterization is better this way and more effective. On the mode of cauterization in the pain of the Ears.
Chapter VI. When pain occurs in the ear due to cold and is treated with solutions and the rest of the care that we have said in the division, and the pain does not go away, then cauterize with fire: and this is what is called a Point, whose form is this.
Then the points with it after its ignition around the ear whole, as it revolves; or around both if pain is at both.
And lengthen yourself with the cautery from the root of the ear slightly, after you have marked the places with encaustic: and let the quantity of the cautery be ten punctures in each ear, and like that.
Then care for the places, until they heal.
On the manner of cauterization in torsion.
Chapter VII.
A torture which is cured with cauterization is nothing except from the kinds that happen from phlegm, according to what we have said in the divisions of diseases. And avoid cauterization of a kind that occurs from drying and spasm of the nerve.
When you treat this kind of torture with hyenas, and head cleansers, and gargles, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and a second slightly lower than its time, and a third at the junction of the two lips.
And place your cautery from the opposite part of the weak.
Because softening does not occur unless in the part that appears healthy.
And the form of cauterization is, that you cauterize it with a cautery in the direct extremity of the upper part of the ear under the horn of the head a little; and at another time: whose length should be according to the length of the finger.
And lay your hand with the cautery until the amount of half the thickness of the skin is burned.
And this is the shape of the cauterizer, and it is a type from a knife, whose form is preceded: truly, however, it is not too subtle, as you see: and it ought to be that the knife in it is of superfluous thickness little. Then care for the place, as that which preceded: until it heals.
On the method of cauterization in old apoplexy.
Chapter VIII.
When Apoplexia has become chronic, and treatment with what we have said does not help, and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize him with four cauteries on every horn of his head, and with a cautery in the middle of the head, as we have said, and with a cautery at the back of the head, according to what preceded: and the method of cautery shall be according to what preceded.
It is also cauterized with a cautery over the mouth of the stomach: and it is more ultimate.
Then he cares for it, as that which preceded.
On the method of cauterizing in obliquation.
Chapter IX.
It is necessary that in a drink be given first of all to the sick large sheets of wool, and pills that cleanse the brain.
Then shave the head of the sick person entirely, and place on top of his occipital bone a plaster described in the treatise on plasters made from synapis: and place this several times. This is indeed the mode of cautery and perform it according to the same order which I said there. If therefore it is healed by that means, it is good.
If not, then make three cauteries on the posterior part of his head, which should be descending from the upper part of the head to the lower part of the eye: and place between each cautery the thickness of a finger.
Then take care of cauterization, as with what preceded it.
If you wish an addition, and the weak one tolerates it, then make a cautery for him in the middle.
If you wish an addition, then cauterize it over two horns.
Then care for it until it heals: let cautery be olive oil according to the form which has been set forth.
On the mode of cauterizing in Paralysis, and softening.
Chapter X.
You ought to proceed in the purification of the head with barley and with that which we have said.
Then shave the head of the patient; afterwards cauterize it with a cautery in the middle of the head, and with a cautery over every horn of the head, and with a cautery over its back part, and with three cauteries over the vertebrae of the neck.
If however you need in illness softening of the body by more of those things, and he is weak enduring, and the illness is strong: then burn him with four cauteries upon the vertebrae of the back, and the last with a cautery until it is burned from the skin most of it, and raise your hand.
Then care for it until it is healed: and so cauterize with olive oil.
On the method of cauterizing in Epilepsy.
Chapter XI.
An epileptic is not cauterized unless his epilepsy is from phlegm. Therefore it is necessary that you cleanse the brain of him first with a hare's dung, and with the rest of the care which we have said in the division: when he is greatly ill, or is enduring in receiving medicine.
If it is a boy who does not tolerate medicines, then a gargle and cleansing chewing substances are administered for the brain, many days before with improvement of foods.
Then scrape the head of him, afterwards cauterize it with one cautery in the middle of the head, according to what preceded in manner: and with another cautery on the back of his head, and over every horn of his head with a cautery.
If the infirm one is strong and tolerant, then cauterize him with the cautery instruments, which I said in the one having paralysis, and softening of the body over the vertebrae of the neck and vertebrae of the back: and let the cauterization be olive oil according to the measure which preceded. If the patient is a child, then place a fine cautery, according to this manner.
On the method of cauterization in melancholy.
Chapter XII.
When the cause of melancholy is corrupt moisture and thick phlegm, then cauterize it with cautery instruments, which we have discussed in having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is excess of phlegm to melancholy, and the body of the sick person is wet, then give him in a drink that cleanses his brain, according to what preceded in the division; then shave the head of the sick person, and afterwards make a compress properly made from linen, like a circle.
Then place it in the middle of the head: and the weak one sitting square be held by every part.
Then present the ointment. And it is more fitting from old butter of wool.
And heat it over a fire with moderate heat, as much as the finger can bear when it is introduced into it.
Then evacuate it in the middle of its head in a circle, and let it rest until it cools.
Do this for the infirm one time every week, with the rest of his regimen good, until he is healed.
Or if you wish, cauterize it by making small punctures in it most of all, besides holding the hand with the cautery: even let it be fragrant.
For this kind of cautery moistens the brain with quality.
Then place upon it a cloth soaked in butter, or in chicken fat.
On the method of cauterization in water descending to the eye.
Chapter XIII.
When it is declared to you the beginning of water in the eye by the signs, which I said in the division, then begin and pour on the sick person with that which will purify his head.
And guard him from all dampness, and have him sit in a bath, fasting for several days.
Then order him to shave his head and cauterize it in the middle of his head. Then cauterize it over the two temples with two cauteries, if the beginning of water descending is in both eyes at once: or from one side, if the beginning of water is in one eye: and cut off with a cautery all the veins and arteries that are under the skin: and let the cauteries be long in the width of the temples: and beware of the flow of blood.
If you see anything of that sort, then immediately cut it away with whatever medicine is possible: and I will come with the wisdom which is in the extraction of arteries, and their cutting, and caution against the flow of blood.
And sometimes it is cauterized in the neck, under two bones, with two last produced cauteries.
On the manner of cauterizing in old tears.
Chapter XIV.
When the tears of the eyes are old, continuous: and they are on the veins and arteries which are in the manifest head externally, it is verified that it is from superfluities cold, phlegmatic: then cauterize with a cautery the same as I narrated in the beginning of the descending water, a cautery in the middle of the head, and two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries in the neck under the two bones.
And if it requires addition, then cauterize it on every side carefully of the eye, above the extremity of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
On the way to cauterize in the nostril's forepart.
Chapter XV.
When you treat this, with what we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help: then hasten, and give in a drink to the sick three nights; then shave his head, and cauterize it with a medium cautery, with an olive-oil cautery.
Then cauterize it with a cautery clamp using two cauteries, over two eyebrows under the hair a little.
And guard against the artery so that you do not cut it.
And this is the form of the cautery called Claulus.
On the method of cauterization in softening the eyelid.
Chapter XVI.
When the eyelid of the eye softens from pain or moisture, then cauterize the eyelid with one cautery, along with this lunar cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize it above the two eyebrows with two cauteries in every part; and let them extend from the two temples; and let the length of each cauteris be according to the lengths of the eyebrow; and do not let your hand touch the cautery beyond the third eyelid.
And this is the shape of a cautery according to this lunar cautery mode.
On the mode of cauterizing the eyelid when hairs turn inward and pierce the eye. Chapter XVII.
A cautery is done in two ways: either with fire cautery or with a burning medicine cautery.
In cauterization with fire, command the infirm person before it to let his hair go, if he is of those who trim them, until they are lengthened and made equal. If he is pricked at his birth place, then bind his eyes with a cloth so that they may not move until the birth has taken place.
When therefore they are born and equalized, then place the head of the sick person in your bosom: then mark above the eyelid of his eyes with encaustic, a mark which is according to the figure of the myrtle leaf: and let the beginning of the mark be near the hairs.
Then place a moistened cloth in white of egg: or in the mucus of psyllium over the eye.
Then a cautery of fire, whose form is this.
Then cauterize over the figure which you have marked little by little in many stages until the surface of the skin is burned, which is like the shape of a myrtle leaf, completely apparent properly.
And the sign of the health of your work is: that if you see the eyelid already contracting, and hairs being removed at the point of the eye.
Therefore elevate your hand then and let it rest for three days.
Then place over it a poultice with butter, until the scab is removed.
Then care for it with ointment until it heals.
If something returns from the hairs after an hour, and the eyelid softens: then repeat cauterization over that place, as you did at first.
If hairs are in the lower eyelid: then cauterize it until it is raised to its natural place: and it should be so that the hairs do not prick the eye.
On the manner of cauterization with a burning medicine in the same case.
Chapter XVIII.
It is as if you should instruct the sick one, so that he let down his hairs, until they are lengthened and made equal.
Make from cloth a form of myrtle leaf.
Then take from known soap and from the unsoaked lime, a weight of an ounce from each; then rub them together well with good friction, and make it quickly, so that it does not become cold.
Then from the pad take from it onto the paper which you made like the form of a myrtle leaf, and place it over the eyelid of one eye, or two.
And place under the eye a pad soaked in albumin of egg; and let the head of the sick person be in your lap.
And place your index finger upon the medicine, and press it for a short while.
And you shall strike it as many times as the sick man feels the bite of medicine; for he finds its bite like fire.
While therefore he persevered in that which he himself invented, biting, then let go medicine, and move it with your finger.
When therefore the biting subsides, then remove medicine and wash the eye with water.
And consider then, if you see the eyelid raised, as it is raised with contraction with fire, or with incision, it is well: and if not, then repeat over it from medicine on the place, in which the medicine does not imprint, and does not darken, until your operation is equal, and the eye contracts.
Then place over it a cot with butter until the skin is burned away.
Then care for it with diaphana ointment, or another, until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you during surgery that you guard carefully, lest anything from the medicine fall into the eye.
If the eyelid softens after days, and something from the hair fights in the eye, then repeat the medicine on that place which softens from the eyelid itself, just as you did at first.
Then care for him until he is healed.
And this is the shape of the myrtle leaf.
And know that the eyes of humans differ in size and smallness.
Therefore, according to this, let your consideration be: and the way of righteousness is not hidden from him who has a study in this art.
On the manner of cauterizing a fistula of the tear duct.
Chapter XIX.
When you treat a fistula, as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatment is not effective; then, it is necessary that you cauterize it according to this method.
Tell the patient to put their head in your bosom and have his assistant hold his head between his hands so that it may not move or be agitated.
Then place a soaked cloth in the albuginea or in flaxseed mucilage over his eye; then apply fire cautery, whose form is this.
Let it be concave, like the shape of a goose feather quill from one end, with which cautery is made; and if you wish, let it be penetrating to the other end, and if you wish, let it be raised upwards so.
Nonetheless this hollow thing is better for your work.
Then place upon it a cauterium, which is made very hot.
And hold your hand with it for a short time at the cautery by the eye, to the part of the nose, so that your hand does not stray or the sick man rests; and place the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
If therefore you come at the beginning of your cautery up to the bone, it will be well.
And if not: then repeat cautery once, or twice, if it requires it: and dismiss it for three days.
Then place a poultice with butter, and take care of it with a drying ointment, until it heals. If forty days have passed and it is not healing, then put on top of it medicine sharp and corrosive, until the bone is uncovered; and scrape it according to what comes in its chapter.
And there is another mode of cautery of a fistula, which some first said.
Attend to the place of the fistula, and find it: then place in its fissure a fine camel hair, that is, a fine cannula, whose form is this.
And pour into it the quantity of a drachma of lead melted, and hold your hand with a good retaining cane, and let the sick man not move at all, so that it may not run, or the melted lead may reach his eye.
And it is necessary that you place over the eye of the sick a compress soaked in albumin or in water.
For lead, indeed, burns the place of the fistula and heals it with a marvelous healing.
If a fistula is healed, as we have said from cautery and treatment, it is good.
And if not, then it is necessary to administer a hole in the nose, and to reduce the fistula to the course of the nose, according to what will come in its proper place for itself.
On the manner of cauterization in fissures of the lips.
Chapter XX.
Splits frequently occur in the lip, which are called Pili, and especially in the lips of children.
When therefore you treat these fissures, as we said in the division of ailments, and treatment does not help, then a small cuticular cautery with fire, according to this form.
And let its concavity be according to the fineness of a knife.
Then care for him with a cautery until he is healed.
On the manner of cauterizing a fistulous opening of the mouth.
Chapter XXI.
When an abscess occurs at the root of the gum, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth: then it makes pus, and bursts; afterwards it matures, and pus runs, and a fistula is formed; afterwards cures itself, and no treatment helps in it, then it is necessary to apply cauteries according to the quantity that takes hold in the fistula.
Then introduce the burning thing into the opening of the fistula, and hold your hand until the burning iron reaches its depth and end; do this once or twice.
Then care for him afterwards, as we have said about the cure up until it heals.
If therefore the pus is cut away and it heals, it will be good.
And if not, then it is necessary to discover the place and remove the diseased bone according to what comes in its head.
On the manner of cauterizing in the gums and softened teeth.
Chapter XXII.
When the gums become soft because of moisture, and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines, and it does not help: then place the head of the sick person in your bosom.
Then a cautery of fire, whose form will come after this, so that you place the cannula over the tooth: and introduce into it the ignited cautery quickly: and hold your hand for a little while, until the infirm person feels the heat of the fire has already arrived at the root of the tooth.
And lift your hand: then repeat cautery several times, according to what you wish.
Then let the sick person fill his mouth with salt water, and hold it for one hour: and spit it out.
The tooth, indeed, is moved and fixed, and the gums are softened and tightened, and the corrupted humidity is dried.
Chapter XXIII.
When pain of tooth is because of coldness, or there is coldness within it, or a worm, and treatment does not help with medicines: then cautery on the tooth itself according to two modes: either cautery with butter: or cautery with fire.
The cautery with butter is prepared by taking clarified butter and putting it into a bronze bowl or into a crucible.
Then take a roll and wrap it over the extremity of the tendon.
Then immerse it in boiled butter: and place it on the painful tooth quickly, and hold it until it cools: then repeat it several times, until the power of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, immerse linen or wool felt in cold butter, and place it upon the aching tooth: and place upon it heated iron until the fire reaches the depth of the concavity of the tooth.
The cauterization of it with fire is, that you bring it to a tube of air, or a tube of iron. And let there be something of thickness in his body so that the sharpness of the fire does not reach the bone of the infirm one.
Then apply fire cautery, whose shape will come; and place it on that tooth; and hold your hand until the cautery cools.
Do this several times, for the pain will be removed, either on that same day, or on another day.
And it is necessary that in the application of that cautery, the patient fills his mouth with good butter and hold it for one hour; then he spits it out.
And this is the form of cautery.
Cauterize with whatever extremity you wish according to what is possible: and this is the form of the Cannula.
On the method of cauterization in the strophulus.
Chapter XXIV.
When strophulae are from phlegm and from cold humidities, and they do not obey digestion by medicines, and you want to hasten the digestion of them, then use a concave cautery of fire, whose shape is this.
Having two open ends, so that smoke may come out at one end during cauterization and the other end remains closed, and place it ignited over the abscess once, and a second time, if necessary, until it reaches the depth of the abscess.
If the abscess is small, then apply cautery according to the size of the abscess.
Then leave it for three days, and place over it a poultice of buttered infusion until that which was burned by fire is removed.
Then care for it with tooth ointment until it heals in the form of a tube.
On the mode of cauterization in hoarseness of voice, and constriction of breathing.
Chapter XXV.
When humors collect in the channel of the lung, and especially when it is with a coldness of constitution, then it is necessary that the sick person be evacuated first with solutions medicines.
Then cauterize it at the root of the throat in a depressed place: and beware, that you do not come with the cautery to the throat, nor into the skin, except for something of it.
Then cauterize it with another cautery at the junction of the neck at the last vertebra; and let the cautery be a clamp according to the manner which preceded.
Then care for him with what has preceded, until he is healed.
On the manner of cauterization in ailments of the lungs and cough.
Chapter XXVI.
When cough and lung ailment are from cold dampness, and the patient has no fever, nor consumption, and the ailment is old; then cauterize him with two cauteries above the fork in low, smooth, safe places.
And with another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two nipples: and let the cautery be a tube according to the form which preceded.
And if you wish to cauterize with a point, using a cautery called "Punctum," whose form precedes in the piercing of ear pain; and let there be points from thirty points up to others like that.
Then care for him with that which preceded, until he is healed. And now let there be a cautery having three branches: according to this form.
Therefore, let it be eased with cauterization when you make with it once three cautery tools.
On the manner of cauterization in a laceration, in dislocation of the humerus.
Chapter XXVII.
When the head is dislocated because of moisture and does not return to its place within an hour after being dislocated, until it becomes accustomed to returning, then it is dislocated again with a slight movement, which happens as we have already testified, then it is necessary to reduce the dislocation first.
Then the sick person is laid on their back, or on their healthy side.
Then raise the skin which is in the inner Tilici towards the upper parts with your left hand fingers: and if the joint is dislocated inwards.
Then having a cautery of fire with two handles. Its shape is this.
Then cauterize the skin until it penetrates to the other side, and the figure of the cauterization will come with four cauteries.
And sometimes cauterization is performed with a cautery having three strands, therefore the figure of cauterization then becomes that of six cauteries: and the strands are according to the fineness of the thread.
And this is the form of a cautery having three handles.
And sometimes one is added above this mode, wherefore there are eight cauteries.
Then put upon the cautery crushed leeks with salt.
Then make the weak adhere to tranquility, so that the limb may not be moved at any time until it is strengthened.
And if dislocation is upwards, and rarely does that occur, then cauterize it above the shoulder with a cautery, or cauteries many, puncturing.
For the joint is strengthened and moisture is removed, and the weak one is healed.
On the manner of cauterizing the stomach.
Chapter XXVIII.
When cold and much moisture occur in the stomach until it is drawn from its composition, and catarrhs multiply to it, and constant modes of treatment are used, and it does not help: then it is necessary that the sick person be placed on his back, and extend his legs and hands.
Then cauterize with three cauteries, one cautery under the ear of the chest the size of one finger with one cautery clamp, and two cauteries below on both sides of one cautery until a triangular figure of cauteries is formed.
And extend between the two so that they may not join, when they make pus. And let the depth of the cautery be the quantity of two-thirds of the thickness of the skin.
And let the figure of cauteries be according to this form without addition: and if you wish to cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form: and let the cautery which makes this cautery be one according to the shape of a circle according to this form.
And the stomach is cauterized by pricking it for him who fears this cautery; and it is, as signs on the stomach point according to the quantity which you wish with encaustrum; then cauterize it with a point cautery; then care for it with the cure which preceded until it heals.
On the manner of cauterizing a cold abscess.
Chapter XXIX.
When there is pain in the liver from cold and humidity, or from thick wind, until it departs from its natural composition by superfluity, and the sick person is cured with what we have said, and does not improve: then it is necessary that the patient be laid on his back over his shoulder, and signs with a cauterization three times according to this figure, and this same quantity below the Epate inferiorly from the hypogastrium, where the arm of man reaches. And let there be a space between each cauterization according to the thickness of a finger: and let the cauterization be according to the length of the body straight: and do not press your hand with the cauterization too much.
And let the quantity that is burned be according to the thickness of the skin, the quantity of half of it not being added; and let the weak one stand on his feet.
If he is not standing, then let him lie down, who has already extended his legs and raised his arms. This is the shape of a cautery.
And it is indeed possible for you, that you may cauterize these cautery wounds with a knife-cautery, when you have subtlety and prudence in the art.
And guard yourself, that you do not proceed too far in cauterization, and the thickness of the whole skin is burned, wherefore the whole body is burned, and it comes to the intestines: because the skin there is thin, therefore know this.
On the manner of cauterizing abscesses of the liver.
Chapter XXX.
When an abscess occurs, and you wish to know if it is in the liver tissue or its covering: then if it is in the liver tissue, a painful ache invades the sick person, and heaviness without sharpness; and if it is in the covering of the liver, with pain there is extreme sharpness; and you see already that it has fatigued his physicians with treatment.
Therefore, let the sick person lie upon his neck.
Then the figure of the place of the abscess with a cautery: then the fire of the cautery which is similar to a ray.
And this is its form.
And cauterize with it one cautery, until the whole skin is burned, and it reaches the fascia, until all pus exits: then take care of its treatment of fistulas, until it heals.
And it is not right that this cautery be used unless one's study in the art of medicine is prolonged, and by whose hands these pains occur with experience many times; then indeed let him dare to perform this kind of operation.
But to dismiss her with me is better.
On the method of cauterization in pleurisy.
Chapter XXXI.
The ancients said that a cautery with roots of asarum was applied to cold pleurisy in this way.
And it is, that you receive from the roots of dried and long birthwort, one root longer, which is found in it, and let it be like the thickness of a finger.
Then immerse it in oil: and kindle it in fire.
Then cauterize with one cautery where it is between the continuation of the fork and the neck, and with two small cauteries under a slightly sloping guide to the part that is under the beard.
And with two cauteries also in that which is between the fifth and sixth ribs sloping toward the rear a little: and another cautery in the middle of the chest, and another above the stomach.
And with three cauteries from behind: one where it is between two spatulas: and two cauteries from the two sides of the chest, lower cautery which is between two spatulas.
And you ought not to press your hand with the cautery, indeed let it be in plain sight on the skin, smelling. And some ancients have said that there are people who use a cautery from iron similar to a rod: and they ignite it, and put it inside where it is between the ribs, until it reaches the abscess with it, and pus comes out: just as we said in the case of an abscess of the liver.
But in this perforation with a cautery there is fear, that either the weak one dies immediately or it happens in place a fistula, which has no healing.
On the manner of cauterizing the spleen. Chapter XXXII.
When you treat the illness of the spleen, as we have said from the treatment in the division of illnesses, and your treatment is not effective, then cauterization in it is according to three ways, which are all right.
Of which one is, to make three cauteries, or four lining according to the length of the spleen according to the figure of the cauteries of the Liver, whose figure preceded.
And let the amount of cautery be the thickness of a finger, or slightly more or less.
And let the way of cautery be, which we said in the cautery of the liver, equally.
And do not press your hand with the cautery: and let the weak one lie on his back.
And another method of cauterization is: to have a cautery with two handles, which we said in the chapter on dislocation of the shoulder: and elevate the skin which is over the spleen, where the elbow of the left arm reaches; and let your elevation be according to the width of the body, so that the cauteries fall along the length of the body.
Then insert two burning rods carefully until they penetrate the skin on the other side; then remove the cautery: therefore four cauteries are made. And if you wish to cauterize with a cautery having three handles.
Then care for the cautery after you let it discharge pus for many days: for it is more beneficial than all that preceded from healing.
On the method of cauterization in dropsy.
Chapter XXXIII.
Cautery does not fall into dropsy except with proper incision.
When you treat Hydropsy with the methods of treatment which we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, then it is necessary that you cauterize it with four cauteries around the navel, and one cautery over the stomach, and another over the liver, and one over the spleen, and two cauteries behind the back between the vertebrae, and one directly on the chest, and another directly on the stomach: and let the quantity of the depth of the cautery be near the thickness of the skin.
Then release the open cautery so that it may discharge pus for a long time.
And do not remove the weak one from treatment after cauterization with him: for it is necessary that two intentions be joined to him: and he will hasten to himself healing with the help of God.
The shape of the cautery used to cauterize the abdomen should be a clamp, according to what preceded; and the shape of that one used to cauterize the back should be an olive, according to what preceded its form.
On the manner of cauterizing feet and legs. Chapter XXXIV.
When abscesses occur in the Hydropsy (a condition of fluid accumulation), and they are filled with yellow water: it is necessary to cauterize on the dorsum of the foot, which is between the auricular and annular areas: and raise your hand with the cautery, and do not twist it: then raise your hand: and do not repeat it at all.
The water will boil then, and let the cautery be according to this form.
Then make on each of the two legs two cauteries in every leg, and let the cautery be made with the edge of the knife of the cautery: and let the cautery be made according to the length of the leg, one below the knee, and the other lower, about the middle of the leg: and on each hip two cauteries: and dismiss the open cautery without cure for a long time: so that something of water will be reduced from it: then care for it with the rest which we have said.
On the manner of cauterization in the solution of the abdomen. Chapter XXXV.
When there is a solution of the belly from cold and moisture until it weakens the retaining and digestive powers which are in the stomach and intestines: and it is cured with modes of cure, and it does not heal: and you see the infirm person enduring the cautery of exuberant virtue, then cauterize him with a great cautery above his stomach, according to what preceded in the cautery of the stomach with a circular cautery, and four cauteries around the navel fine, with a subtle cautery clauili: and a cautery above the alcatin above the alehosos large, or two cauteries.
And if you see abundant moistures, and the patient bearing it weakly, then cauterize it with a cautery over the comb, and with a cautery over all of the groin; and perhaps add two small cauteries near the large stomach.
It is indeed a healing method whose benefit does not err.
On the method of cauterizing hemorrhoids.
Chapter XXXVI.
When there are many old hemorrhoids in the anus, or one, and they are from thick humors, cold ones, or corrupt humidities, and they are cured with what we said in the division, and the cure does not help: then cauterize with three cauterizations above the lower vertebra of the back under the slightly triangular almeidati, and cauterization below the navel like two fingers.
And if you think that his stomach is chilled, and his food is not digested, and you see his face suppurating, then cauterize him over the stomach with a large cautery, according to what preceded: and cauterize him over his spleen, and another over his spleen, with a clauili cautery: and release the open cautery after some time: then care for him until he heals.
On the method of cauterizing the  artery after its section.
Chapter XXXVII.
When you cut the flesh, then apply the cautery of fire that is like a ray.
Then introduce the burning instrument into the cut flesh; and with your last hand, until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which blood runs, do this once or twice. If therefore many ulcers are present, then cauterize each one with a cautery according to what we have narrated.
Then care for that, with what ointment it helps, until they are healed.
And if you cauterize him with a large cautery on linen, it is more ultimate in healing.
On the manner of cauterizing a fistula in the anus.
Chapter XXXVIII.
When the sick man does not obey the incision and operation which we have narrated in its place, and is terrified by it, perhaps he heals with cauterization.
When therefore it happens to someone that he has a fistula, and it becomes old, pus runs out of it, and corrupt humors.
Therefore it is fitting that you examine it with a fine probe.
Then know the quantity of its depth with a probe.
Then use cauteries of fire, which are like a ray.
Then introduce yourself, ignited, into the fistula itself and the quantity into which the nail has entered. And repeat the cautery on it, until all those corrupted bodies are burned, once, or twice, or three times, according to the quantity of your necessity.
And guard yourself from burning the nerve if it is there, or the large vein: or if a fistula goes to the body of the bladder, or to the body of the intestine, then guard yourself from all these places.
And do not do this unless there is a fistula in a fleshy place: and you consider that it is not penetrating.
Then care for the place until it is healed.
If, however, the place is sealed, and materials are cut away from it, and it remains so for a long time, then you shall know that it has been completely healed.
And if they do not cut away the matter from it, then know that it is penetrating, or there is a rotten opening in its depth, or like one of those: whose recollection will come in its place.
On the manner of cauterizing the kidneys.
Chapter XXXIX.
When pain occurs in the kidneys from cold or from a great wind, and it is lessened because of this ailment of the weak, then it is necessary that you cauterize it above almethenem above the kidneys themselves, with a cautery over the whole kidney with a cautery clauili, whose preceding mention has occurred.
And perhaps we shall cauterize it a second time within the flesh itself.
Therefore, there will be three lines.
Therefore they will be more useful in the healing.
On the mode of cauterizing the bladder.
Chapter XL. When weakness and softening occur in the bladder due to cold and humidity until it no longer retains weak urine, then cauterize its lower part above the bladder where the hairs of the comb begin, and one cautery from the right side of the pubis, and another from the left of it: and let the length of this cauterization be according to the quantity of a knuckle; and cauterize it with a lower back cautery, or two cauteries if it is needed by that: and let the cautery be closed as before.
On the method of cauterizing the Matrix. Chapter XLIX.
When cold and moisture occur in the womb and it prevents impregnation, and her menses are corrupted, and their arrival is delayed, and pain occurs to her at their advent, then it is necessary that she be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we said in the cauterization of the bladder, and cauterium on a cushion below the back, or two cauteries: and let the cautery be clauile.
On the manner of cauterizing a wound in a dislocation.
Chapter XLII.
When the mucous humidities are poured out to the Anchae  and become the cause of its exit from its place: and the sign of this is that one leg is lengthened over the other, when they are compared side by side: and the place of dislocation is found empty in it.
Therefore, it is necessary that the one who cauterizes the diseased part above the margin of its own cautery makes a similar circle: after you have marked with encaustic on the circumference of the margin, as it turns: and so that the itself falls in the middle of the circle.
And let the cautery be of the form that preceded in the cauterization of the stomach.
If you do not have this cautery at hand, then cauterize it with three cauteries, with a large olive-wood cautery, and let the depth of the cautery be according to the quantity of the thickness of the whole skin.
Then care for him until he is healed.
On the method of cauterizing in sciatica. Chapter XLIII.
When pain occurs in the hip joint, and the cause of it is cold and moisture: and the sick person is treated with what we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, and it gets old: then it is necessary that you free the sick person from gross humors with fetid pills, or with artificial pills, and similar things.
Then cauterize him.
And the mode of cauterization in it is according to two modes: either cautery with medicines that burn, or cautery with fire.
Burning with fire is according to many ways.
One of these is, that you cauterize on a piece of wax of the anus with three triangular cauteries, according to this form.
And make a good depth for them, or bad.
And let there be a space which is between every cautery the thickness of a finger; and let the cautery be oiled.
Sometimes a cauterization is done in the middle above the head of the hip bone.
Therefore there are four cauteries.
And if you wish to cauterize with a circle, whose form preceded in the cauterization of the dislocation of the hip, one: so that it be a circle containing the whole hip.
And burn the thickness of the whole skin.
This is the method of cautery for sciatica, when the pain adheres to the hip itself, and does not extend to the hip and leg.
If it extends as far as the hip and leg, then cauterize it with two cautery instruments above the hip, above the place where the sick person indicates, where there is pain, and with your cautery over the tail four finger widths to the left side a little: and let the cautery be a knife-shaped one. And let the depth of the cautery be according to the depth of the thickness of the skin.
If the patient says that the pain extends almost to the toes of the foot, then cauterize him there where he indicates with a cautery, point, three, or four, or more, if it is needed.
And if he indicates pain being under the knee towards the leg, then cauterize it there with a one-bladed knife cautery.
And beware in all your cauterizations that you do not come to the extreme with the cautery so as to burn nerves, or a great artery, and draw through it upon the infirm a bad evil, or contraction.
And I myself have seen one and another of those who cauterized above the tendo Achilles and continued in cauterization, and the leg became inflated until a tumor was formed on the foot, and the whole foot was perforated and corrupted; then there followed solution of the abdomen, and death after that.
If pain is in two parts at once, cauterize both according to this method.
And some wise men have said concerning the cauterization of the anus, whose cautery this is the mode.
Make a saw like this from iron, whose diameter is half a palm's breadth: and let it be at its opening according to the thickness of a finger's knuckle, or a little less: and inside that saw let there be a third saw.
And let there be space which is between every stitch the amount of a finger's joint: and let the stitches be open from two parts: and let their height be like a knuckle, or two knuckles: and make for them a handle from iron properly fitted in the stitches.
And this is its form.
Then it is set on fire until it glows red and throws off sparks; then it is placed upon the wax of the healthy side lying over the ailing side.
Therefore, cauterize him with three round cauteries in one vice.
Then dismiss him for three days.
Afterwards apply plasters with butter and let the open wound be left for many days.
Then care for it with ointment until it heals.
Albucasis says, about this type of cautery, O sons, we have used it little, because of the fear of its appearance: and therefore, because we have found few who await upon it.
Nevertheless, it is good for those who suffer from burns and find a place for it with them.
The cautery however when with burning medicines is to make two samia having perforated armillas, into which descends the hinge of its door from brass or iron, the length of the wall:  in whose height there are two knots, or as themselves.
Let there be a space between the two parts of the size of a finger's width, and let them be open below and above: and let them contain themselves against each other, according to this form.
Then place it upon the bed of the hip, the infirm lying on his sound side.
And press your hand upon the pimple of the anus much.
Then pour between two circles hot water, which has been heated with fire a little, and hold it for the quantity of an hour's time: and let the sick person endure its biting and scorching, for he himself finds the biting as if from fire until the biting subsides.
Then raise your hand with an instrument and wipe away the hot water from the whole wound with sweet water; then let it be left alone for three days.
And place over this butter until the blackness of the burn is removed; and let it stand for several days, and pus will flow from it.
It is indeed the last thing in healing.
Then care for it with ointments, until it heals.
If the pain extends to the hip or leg, make for him a splint in what contains water, according to how you made it even.
And this is the way of hot water: and I have already written it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines.
Take alkali and unquenched quicklime, each one half a part: grind both, and place them in a new pot, whose lower part is perforated with a small hole, according to the quantity that will enter it [the radius]: and place under the bottom of the pot another pot vitrified. And pour over the alkali and quicklime from sweet water, so that both are submerged by a finger: after which you compress them with your hand good compression: and let go the pot until the sharp water descends to the lower part of the vitrified pot.
Then collect that whole water and pour it over another lime; and stir until it is renewed.
For it will then be very sharp and strong, which is administered in many operations of medicine, and in cauterizing the remaining limbs.
Because it performs the operation of fire itself.
And of medicines are those with which they cauterize wounds, just as with the testicles, and honey of cashew nuts, and lime mixed with soap, so that both are mixed together.
And Galen indeed narrating reported, of a certain man from ancient times, the cure by which he was cured of pain in the hip and sciatic vein: and magnified it to be very great.
And he said that it did not need other treatment, and because it was healed from one application, until it returned, because perhaps he himself entered the bath brought in, and came out of it already healthy. And it is, as it is taken from the green seitaragi: and if it is not found green, take dry, fresh; and it is prepared much with a little fat, and put upon the place, where there is pain, or leg, or in the hip; and it should be left on for three hours or until the patient feels a burning sensation.
Then introduce him into the bath.
When therefore the body becomes damp, introduce it into the socket.
For pain departs, and healing takes place.
And know that no one should use a cautery with these medicines, unless after evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides said that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat dung, it helps; and the cautery is made in this way.
Take wool, and soak it in old oil, and place it over the deep place which is between the thumb of the foot, and between the big toe, and it is closer to the big toe.
Then take dry goat dung, and set it aflame until it becomes charcoal.
Then place him upon wool, and let him be, until it is extinguished.
Then again.
Therefore, do not cease doing this until you feel sensation through the mediation up to the depth and rest of pain.
And this method of cauterization is called cautery of the Cow.
On cauterizing back pain.
Chapter XLIV.
Sometimes pain occurs in the back from many causes, either from a fall, or a blow, or the evacuation of superfluities, and similar things, from the infusion of cold and humid matter: and cauterization does not apply except in this single case, which is caused by the infusion of cold matter.
Therefore, after evacuating the sick person with foul-smelling pills and similar ones, three lines should be made on the back where the pain is, according to the width of the patient's loin, after signs have been marked with encaustic paint on every line five cauteries, or more according to the amount that comes from the endurance of the patient's strength; and cauterization should be made with a cauterizer.
And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cautery instruments, with a medial clamp cautery, according to this form.
On the mode of cauterization in an incision of gibbosity.
Chapter XLVI.
This ailment often happens to young children.
And the sign of its beginning in children is: that which happens above him constriction in breathing at elevation, and movement: and you find in the last vertebra of the back and its knots, which has already begun to protrude above the other vertebrae.
When therefore you see that, and wish to make that, then cauterize it with a cautery which is circular according to this form.
And let him take the cautery over every part of the spine equally: and if you wish cauterize around the spine with a cautery point two lines, or three: and let the points be close to each other.
Then care for the place until it heals with that which we said.
And beware, lest you administer cautery in the hump that arises from a nerve spasm.
On the manner of cauterization in gout and joint pains. Chapter XLVI.
When pains in the joints are from cold moisture that flows to any limb of the body, and when they happen in the feet, it is customary for physicians to call it Podagra properly.
When therefore gout is treated because of cold causes with methods of treatment, and the pains are not removed, then a cautery removes them.
And it is, that you cauterize him after evacuation at the juncture of the feet, with many cauteries: and let the cautery be Olive oil.
This is its form.
And if you need to make points on the face of the foot, then make them with a cautery.
If the pains ascend to the knees or other joints, and this often happens, then cauterize the entire knee with three or four cauterizations from all sides, with the same cautery as Claudius. If you need more of this burning with a cautery, then burn it again with a cautery. And do not submerge your hand with the cautery, but rather let it be about the thickness of only the skin.
If however pains ascend to the knees and back: then administer what we have said from cautery in its chapter.
If the pains are only in the hands, then points are pricked around the circumference of the focus, as two lines revolve.
If pain remains in the fingers, then prick them above every node and on the palm of the hand.
If pains should rise after days to the shoulders or elbows, then cauterize both from every part.
And do not evacuate the infirm from good regimen, from receiving medicine.
If a good regimen is followed and the phlegm is evacuated, it will heal with the help of God and this cautery.
On the manner of cauterizing in ruptures.
Chapter XLVII.
When a rupture occurs in the groin and the intestine or testicle descends, and this is beginning to be near, then it is necessary for you to order the patient to abstain from eating on his day.
And let him use gentle laxatives, so that stool descends from his belly.
Then he should sit between your hands upon his back: and bid him hold his breath until it comes out, or appears, the tumor, or intestine.
Then reduce it with your fingers, and mark with encaustic under the fracture on the breastbone, with a sign whose extremity is similar to the half of a circle toward the upper body.
Then the fire cautery, whose shape this is, until it becomes white and throws sparks.
Then reduce the intestine, or bowel, to its cavity.
Then the assistant places his hand over the place so that the intestine does not come out: and you have already opened between the legs of the sick person, and placed a cloth under him, and one servant on his legs, and another on his chest who holds his hands.
Then lay the cauterizer upon the very mark, with your hand holding the cautery straight.
And hold it until you get to the bone with it; or repeat this with another instrument, if you have not reached the bone with it at first until you do.
And carefully observe from the exit of the intestine at the hour of your cauterization, lest you burn it, and there may come through it upon the weak either death, or great evil.
And know that when you do not succeed with a cauterizing tool in closing the bone, your operation is of no use.
And it is necessary that the cautery for infants be fine, according to their measure.
Then care with the rest of the ointment, until it heals.
And let the infirm be lying on his back for forty days, until the wound is sealed.
And it is necessary that you put nourishment in him according to the length of time of his healing, so that he may soften his belly, so that it does not go out of the intestine at defecation and excretion.
Then when he wishes to rise after forty days, then administer a properly made bandage and have him hold it for forty days again.
For when this regimen is used, it heals with complete healing.
When ruptures occur in the rest of the abdomen, and they are beginning, and you wish that they not be added to, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size: and let that which is burned from then on be as one third of it.
Then care for it as we have said: and nothing more be added.
And now some first said that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery, according to this form.
After it is marked with wax and a line which is across the width on the upper side of the rupture is placed, and another line below. And place your hand in the middle with a closed cauterizer.
But a cautery is first easier and better. On the manner of cauterization in pains caused by a fall, or percussion.
Chapter XLVIII.
When pain occurs in certain limbs from an accident or blow, and that pain persists for a long time, and does not help with treatment with medicines: then it is necessary that it be cauterized with a pointed cautery.
And let the cautery of every limb be a cautery according to its size, and its suitability, and its weakness, and its strength, and the location of the torsion, and the pain from it.
If therefore it is cured by the first cautery, it is well.
If not, then repeat cauterization over it.
Because it is customary for these pains to shift from one limb to another that is near it.
Therefore it is necessary that you follow them with a cautery until the sick person heals.
On the way to cauterize in leprosy.
Chapter XLIX.
Leprosy is sometimes helped by cautery with great benefit.
And especially the kind of leprosy, which is caused by the rotting of phlegm and melancholy: therefore when you wish to cauterize it, consider this.
If therefore leprosy is incurable, and you have treated it with what we said in the division, and it has not descended nor stood; and you fear over the infirm that corruption will encompass the whole complexion of him: then cauterize him on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head known, and a second below toward the forehead at the end of the hairs, and two above the two horns, and one behind on the nape of the neck.
And lastly your hand with the cautery briefly, until it makes a slight impression in the bone, and the layers of skin are separated from it, so that the expiration of thick vapor from it may be alleviated, and cauterize also the spleen with the cautery, as above.
If leprosy has already spread over the infirm person, and appears manifestly: then it is necessary that you cauterize with these cauteries which we have said in the beginning, and a cautery on the extremity of the nose, and two cauteries on the two maxillas, and two cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck, and six on the vertebrae of the back, and one large one on the bones near the root of the tail and one above it, in the very middle: and two on the buttocks; namely, on every buttock with one, and two on the knees; one on every knee, and two on the shoulders, and two on the forearms, and two on the tendernesses of his chest: and cauterize him on every joint, from the joints of the fingers of his hands, and feet: and cauterize on every heel of his feet, and wrist of his hands.
And be careful of the nerves which are above the heel bone, so that you do not burn them. And sometimes it is cauterized with a cautery above the bone of the breastbone, and another above the bone of the stomach, and another above the ribs.
And know that the more you add cauterium, it is more helpful and more effective.
And know that the infirm does not find pain in cauterization as they who are healthy find it, because the body of him is already numbed.
And it is necessary that the cauteries be of size and shape according to limbs and joints; as was said previously from the kinds of instruments.
Chapter L.
When a certain limb is numbed, and it is treated with medicines, and oils, and plasters, and does not heal, then cauterize that numbed limb with cauteries, according to what the size of the limb deserves, or its smallness.
And let your cautery be inserted into the thickness of the skin a little.
Then care for it with ointment until it heals.
And sometimes it is cauterized to a certain numbness, which happens to the hand and foot, in the shoulder blades of the back at the exit of the nerves that move that limb: and the numbness is removed.
Truly, he should not presume over it, unless he is wise in the anatomy of the limbs, and the exit of the moving nerves from the body.
On the method of cauterizing in Albaras.
Chapter LI.
When Albucasis says this and does not contribute something from the minds of medicine: then cauterize above it with a deep cauterization for a short time, according to the quantity of the thickness of the skin, until the white is removed, and its color is changed.
Then care for it with flour of herb, and lentils with rose oil, and arnoglossae leaves, and dove blood, and swallow blood: let each be one part: mix all these things, and spread them on cloth, and adhere to the place until it heals.
On the method of cauterizing in cancer.
Chapter LII.
When cancer is beginning, and you wish to stop it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery in a circle around it, as it revolves.
Wise men have said that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle.
It does not seem right to me because I fear that it would ulcerate, and I have already seen this happen several times. And it is more correct that it be cauterized around it with a circle, as we have said; or with many cauteries. On the method of cauterizing in Adubelati.
Chapter LIII.
When someone has an abscess and it delays in ripening, either because of the excess matter causing it, or because of the age of the patient, when he is old with little blood, or because of time, and one wishes to hasten the ripening of the abscess, then cauterize around it with small cauteries punctating many times.
Then let it go.
For itself it will hasten with ripening.
If you wish to make a perforation of it with a cautery, then ignite the cautery, which has this form.
And place it in the middle of the Abulati, until it penetrates the skin; and let the cautery be from what follows weak, so that the course may be eased with pure.
Then care for him until he is healed.
On the manner of cauterizing in a bad gnawing wound. Chapter LIII.
Consumption is nothing but corruption in a limb that walks, and it eats into it; just as fire consumes dry wood.
If therefore you see a lesion in a place that will bear cautery with fire, then apply much cautery with fire, small and large clamps, according to what is suitable for the place in which the lesion is.
Then cauterize it from every part until you eradicate the entire corruption, and let nothing of it remain at all. Then dismiss him for three days, and put over the cauterized places sulfur rubbed with oil, until all the scabs are eradicated, and all corruption is removed.
Then care for him with ointments that generate flesh.
If therefore you see that after three days flesh is born with a healthy birth, in which there is no corruption, it is good.
And if not: then apply a cautery again upon that which remains from the places corrupted.
And it is sometimes treated with a sharp medicine when it corrodes.
For it rises in place of cautery.
Nevertheless, cauterization with fire is more rapid healing; and indeed I have already said cauterization of it with sharp medicine in division: therefore accept it there when you need it.
On the method of cauterizing in nails and warts. Chapter LVII.
Often this ailment happens in the lower parts of the feet: and it is a thick, filtered thing, which hurts the foot. And indeed a cautery is used in these two ways: cautery with fire, and cautery with hot water.
As much as it is with fire, so the cautery should be like a concave feather of an eagle's wing, made from iron according to the quantity which contains the nail on all sides and have a subtle margin.
Then place it burning upon a stake. Then roll the hand with a cautery around the nail, until the cautery reaches the depth of the nail; and let it go for three days, until it begins to discharge pus. Then place a plaster on it with willow bark and pounded salt, and leave the plaster over it at night. For it will be eradicated from its roots.
Then care for the place with a healing ointment until it is healed.
If they are not converted, and often happen on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet: then administer cauterium to them with hot water: and it is, that you take a tube from copper, or iron, or from the quill of a vulture: and lay it upon a nail, or an althelul.
Then pour a small quantity of hot water into the tube: hold your hand and roll it with the compression of your hand for a short time so that the edge of the tube is imprinted on the root of the nail, and the hot water finds its way to the deep, to the root of the nail: and let the patient wait for a short time over the application of the hot water for one hour.
Then let it go, for a claw is eradicated with its roots.
Thus do with them one after another, until you come upon all who are in the body from among them.
Then care for them after they are removed, with that which generates flesh from ointment.
On the manner of cauterizing in tremor.
Chapter LXVI.
When someone has a tremor from cold in the nerve, or from quartan fever, or otherwise: then it is necessary that you cauterize it with four cauteries, or five on the vertebrae of the back, and between every vertebra with cautery, and on his chest with cautery, and on his stomach with cautery.
For tremor rests with a clyster of oil and health hastens in cold sickness. On the manner of cauterizing Albathir.
Chapter XLVII.
Sometimes foul matter, that is, pustules, are expelled from the body of Albathir, which are made from corrupted thick substances.
Therefore it is necessary at first when they appear, that the head of every pustule be cauterized with a fine cautery of myrtle wood, whose end has been set on fire with fire.
Or with the root of long birthwort.
Or with a lentil-shaped cautery. And sometimes, when the boils are cauterized at the beginning of their discharge, in this way: and they do not increase; and the superfluousness is broken by them, and it heals from them.
Nevertheless, it ought to be done after evacuation with bloodletting.
On the manner of cauterizing a flow of blood from an artery in a wound.
Chapter LVIII. Often there is a flow of blood from the artery which has been cut at a wound, whether it happens externally, or at the incision of an abscess, or cauterization of a limb, and the like; and it becomes difficult to stop it.
When this happens to someone, then hasten with your hand to the opening of the artery, and place your index finger upon it: and press it very hard until the blood is stopped under your finger, and nothing comes out from it. Then place in the fire a small oil-burning cautery, and many more; and blow over them until they are well ignited.
Then take from them one, or a little, or much, according to the wound and the place where the artery is broken, and place the cautery over the vein itself, after which you remove your finger quickly: and hold the cautery until the blood is cut off.
If it is expelled with the finger from the opening of the artery and the burning cautery is extinguished, then take another cautery more quickly, prepared from cauteries which are in fire. Therefore, do not cease doing it with one after another until the blood is cut off.
And beware, lest you burn the nerve that is there, and an other evil befall the sick person. And know that when blood flows from an artery, then it is not possible to cut it off except with one of four ways.
Or with a cautery, as we said.
Or with extraction when it is not extracted. For when it is drawn out, the extremities of it contract, and blood is cut off.
For when it is drawn out, the extremities of it contract, and blood is cut off. Or it may be tied with a strong ligature of thread.
Or let medicines of property be placed upon it, which are for cutting blood and tie it with a ligature in a proper manner.
He who administers the cutting away of it with a bandage, and constriction with a cloth, or the placing of burning things, and similar things, does not completely apply it, except rarely.
If it happens to someone and there is no present physician, nor medicine: then begin with the position of the index finger over the opening of the vein of himself, as we have narrated, and constriction of it greatly, until the blood is stopped from the upper part of the wound, and over the artery.
And the finger should not be moved, and it is to be always moistened from above with cold water of vehement coldness until the blood congeals and thickens, and it is cut off. And meanwhile let him consider in it what is needed from cautery, or from medicine.
End of the First Part.
Book of Surgery by Albucasis Part II. On Incisions, Puncture, and Bloodletting in Wounds, and Similar Conditions.
We have said in the first chapter all about illness in which it is fitting to combine cautery with fire and burning medicine, and its opportunities, its causes, and its instruments, and the forms of cauteries. And I placed heads there from the crown to the foot.
And I shall proceed in this chapter along the same path so that he who seeks may find what he is looking for. And before I begin this, it is necessary that you learn, O sons, that in this chapter there is the same thing as in the first chapter on cauterization.
And for this reason, it is necessary that caution be taken with greater diligence, because in the operation which is in this chapter, very often evacuation occurs with blood, by which life stands at risk during the opening of a vein, or incision over an abscess, or opening of a fistula, or healing of a wound, or extraction of an arrow, or incision over a stone, and similar things: from all of which there accompanies trembling, and fear, and in many of them death occurs.
And I warn you, let not that which is in doubt fall upon you, for sometimes men with ways of sickness come to you with ways of this art.
From these things there is one who becomes angry with his sickness, and for him death is light; because of the vehemence he finds from his infirmity and length of his malice.
And with pain is fear that means death.
And of these there is one who gives his tibiae and nourishes you with it, hoping for health, and his sickness is pernicious. Therefore, you ought not to consent to him who comes to you from those, whose manner is such.
Let your caution be greater than your greed and avarice.
And do not presume anything from that, unless after certain knowledge which verifies with you that which to which it has arrived a praiseworthy succession.
And attend to the care of all your sick, with prognosis and indication of that which is fitting for their health.
In this therefore is your help above the acquiring of fame and glory, and memory and praise.
May God inspire you, sons, with his understanding, and may he not take away from you guidance and inspiration; for that is in his hand.
And I indeed have ordered this Chapter by dividing it into sections, according to what preceded in the chapter on cautery, from the neck to the feet; so that the seeking which you want from it and in which you need it might be eased.
On the cure of water that collects in the heads of children.
Chapter I.
Know that this infirmity often happens to boys at birth or when a midwife squeezes the head of the boy without lightness.
And whenever it happens also from a hidden cause which is unknown.
And I indeed did not see this ailment in others than in children: and to every one whom of them I saw it hastened death: therefore it seemed good to me to omit the operation in it.
And I myself saw among them a boy whose head was filled with water, and his head grew larger each day until he could no longer sit on himself because of the size of his head; and the moisture increased until he died.
And this moisture indeed either gathers between the skin and bone: or it gathers under the bone over the fascia.
And the operation on this, if there is moisture between the skin and bone, and the abscess is small, then it is necessary that you make a fissure in the middle of the head, one in width: and let the length of the fissure be as two knots, until the moisture runs.
And this is the shape of a spatula.
If therefore the humidity is more increased, and the abscess is greater, then place those two incisions, according to this form.
And if the moisture is under the bone, and its sign is that you see the seams of the head open from every part: and water is depressed when you press it with your hand to the interior, and it does not hide from you: then you must make three fissures in the middle of the head, according to this manner.
And after incision, remove the entire humidity.
Then stitch it above with wine and oil until the fifth day.
Then loosen the ligament, and take care of the wound with a bandage, and ointment.
And do not let go of tightening the head with equality.
And feed the sick with every dry food of little moisture, until the limb is strengthened and healed.
And another way of cutting is, that you should consider where the magnitude of the abscess appears, and the collection of water.
Because sometimes it is in the back of the head, or on the forehead, or on the right, or on the left.
Therefore ascend with the incision where the abscess and water filling appear to you: and split it according to what is possible for you.
And observe, that you do not cut the artery, and that there does not occur a flow of blood, and that the sick person does not die from that flow with the evacuation of moisture.
On the incisions of arteries which are behind the ears.
Chapter II.
When a certain person has catarrh to the eyes or chest and it gets old and medicine does not help; then the last cure for this is an incision of these two arteries.
Therefore, when you wish to cut them, let the sick man shave his head.
Then rub the place with a rough cloth so that the arteries appear.
Then let the weak man tie his neck with any of his cloths.
Then consider where the vein pulses.
And the places of both are places which are behind the ears depressed: and rarely is it concealed, except in certain men.
Then mark both with a cauterizer, and cut both with a spatula, each side being sharpened to the bone, with the incision reaching the bone, so that it is across the width of the head.
And if you wish, insert a spatula under the artery, and cut it upward with the incision.
And let the length of the incision be as two joined fingers.
For when a vein is cut, blood flows out with a pulsatile emission, which leaps to the interior with frequent leaps.
If however the artery does not appear to the sense, then it is necessary that measurements be taken from the ear to determine the quantity of space three fingers' width.
Then signs with an encasing and fine up to the bone.
And that which ought to be emitted from blood is VI ounces and perhaps you emit more, or less from it. All of it according to the quantity which appears to you from the strength of the patient and the filling of his artery.
Then consider the wound.
Then if something remains at the bone from the incision, then cut it so that a hot abscess does not occur; then bind the wound with linens made of flax cloth.
Then care for it with ointment until it heals.
On the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
Chapter III.
When a person has an old headache or acute catarrh due to acrimonious humors and heat in the temples, or an old, violent sore and similar ones: and it is treated with modes of medical cure, and it does not benefit: then we have experimented in these ailments extraction of the arteries from the temples, or cauterization of them, as we have narrated.
And the way of operating in the extraction of them is, that the unhealthy hairs which are on the temples, should be shaved and applied to the apparent artery in the temple.
For indeed it is shown to you from its pulse, and rarely is it concealed except in a few men, or in the vehemence of cold.
If it is concealed from you, then the weak person should bind his head with any cloth of his own; then rub the place with a rough cloth.
Or place steam with hot water until an appearance becomes manifest to you. Then take the spatula which I formed a little while ago. Then scrape away the skin with it until you reach the artery.
Then throw into it a hook and draw it upwards until you have drawn it out of the wound and made it come out from the tunics which are beneath it on every side.
If however the artery is slender, then wind it with the point of a hook.
Then cut from that part according to the amount by which the extremities are lengthened, and contract them, so that there is no flow of blood.
For if it is not struck and if it is not cut off, blood does not rise fully. Then evacuate from blood six ounces, up to three.
If the artery is large, then it must be ligated in two places with a double, strong thread of silk, or with alhuhod cords, so that it does not quickly go to putrefaction before the wound has consolidated, and blood flow occurs.
Then cut away the superfluous flesh that is between two ligaments.
Do this at that hour, or after another hour. And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery up to the bone, with a knife-shaped cautery: until its extremities are cut and it will stand in place of the same work.
And it is better to work, unless if the sick person has a fever, or an heated constitution.
Because cautery is one of those things that help to end moisture.
Therefore it is better healing.
And it is necessary after the removal of arteries that the place be filled with old burnt cotton: and put upon it wool pads made centrally.
And after the dissolving it is treated with dry medicines which make flesh grow, and with poultices until it heals.
If, while you are operating, a flow of blood from an artery occurs, then hasten to cut it off with a cautery, or to fill the place with zea. And grasp your hand, until the blood is stopped.
If none of those things are present for you, then place your finger on the location until the blood clots.
And embrocate the place with water of violent cold until the sharpness subsides, and tighten it as is necessary.
And because it is lighter and easier to extract the artery, it is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two blades: and let the sharpness of the two blades be similar to an almond.
Nevertheless they are of much less sharpness than two knives.
Because if they are sharp, like two knives, one should apply cold to both; and they do not cut flesh with speed.
Therefore, when there is a slight thickness in them, heat of fire is applied to them, and flesh is quickly cut away; therefore, this work is better than all works, lighter and easier.
And let the space between the two knives be the quantity of the thickness of a finger, after you have marked the two places with encaustic wax: and lay both burning ones gently until they reach the bone, and cut the vein in two places; so that it may be lengthened from its extremities.
For these are not thoroughly solidified with this cautery.
And this is the shape of the cautery.
On the treatment of acute and persistent tearing from the eyes.
Chapter IV.
When there are constant tears, and there is a flow of them from the veins that are above the skull externally: and it does not help anything with medicines in their cure, and you see the face of the sick already red, and he feels a wandering on his forehead, like the walking of ants: and his eyes are exhausted, humid, so that even the hairs of them have been corroded with corrosion: and his eyelids have been heated from the sharpness of the tears: then the ancients devised in their cure by this operation, and they named this cure, With a Sword.
And it is, as you instruct the sick person to remove the hairs that are on their forehead.
Then cut three equidistant incisions on the forehead according to the length of the forehead: and let the length of the incision be about two fingers' width, and one incision be equidistant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length a little from the movement of the arms, and the third from the other part: and beware of the incision of the arteries which are on the two sides: and extend your hand from the continuation of the two jaws, and let the space of all incisions be the quantity of three fingers joined: and let there be prepared for you a piece of sponge, or many dry cloths, with which you will dry the blood.
Then introduce a spatula with two pointed ends, whose following shape is.
From the incision which is on the side of the temple, up to the second incision; and scrape with it all the skin, which is between the two incisions, with the sifac, which is over the bone. Then make it also from the middle incision to the second incision.
Then remove this spatula and insert into the first incision again another instrument, which is called a sharp chisel, blunt on one side, sharp on the other.
And this is its shape.
And place the sharp side of it against the attached flesh with the skin, and the blunt side towards the bone; and drive it until it reaches the median fissure; and cut with it all the vessels which descend from the head to the eyes; except that the incision should continue up to what appears from the skin.
Then make it in the middle fissure until another fissure.
And after an equal quantity of blood has run out, squeeze the places from clots of congealed blood. Then put in every wound of flesh from cooked entrails, and put on them small pellets soaked in wine, and oil, or vinegar.
And see that a hot abscess does not occur.
And on the third day, dissolve the ligament and administer a large infusion with warm water.
Then care for it with ointment of bdellium and the rest with which wounds are cured, until it is healed.
On the treatment of acute and chronic tears and catarrh of the eyes from internal parts of the head.
Chapter V.
When someone suffers from acute, sharp, persistent catarrh: and you see their eyes weakened, small, and their appearance already debilitated: and the eyelids are ulcerated, and hairs fall out of them, and there is a sharp, painful pain deep in the head, followed by sneezing: then take from these occurrences that these materials and catarrh do not come unless from many veins.
And better treatment for them is this.
And it is, as you prescribe, for the sick man to shave his forehead.
Then cut in that fissure one in the middle of the forehead, or another a little across its width, and begin with the fissure from the left temple to the right temple: and let the incision be up to the bone: and lengthen your hand from the temples, which move when chewing: until when the bone is revealed: and you shall dry all the blood with sponges.
Then separate between the two lips of the fissure with a boiled sheep's gut, or with lint made from linen.
Then bind from above with pledgets: and soak the pledgets with wine and oil so that a hot abscess may not occur.
And when you have loosened it, and see that the hot abscess is already diminishing: then it is necessary for you to cover the bone until flesh begins to grow in it.
Then care for it with a drying regimen which causes flesh to be born; such as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony; and prepare a plaster from these, and administer it to the nativity of flesh in these wounds.
On the care of that which falls into the ear. Chapter VI. Everything that falls into the ear is one of four kinds: either a mineral stone, or something like a stone, such as iron and glass: or it is from a plant, such as beans and chickpeas: or it is a fluid thing, such as water, vinegar, and things like these: or something animal.
When therefore a stone falls into the ear, or a kind of stone from those which do not grow in the ear, expose the ear to the sun: if therefore you see the stone, then distill into the ear something from beaten oil, or sesame.
Then administer the extraction of it, and make him sneeze with the condiment, and plug his nostrils at the entrance of sneezing, after which you place around the ear pieces of cloth, or wool, and extend the ear upwards.
It often happens with this treatment.
If it does not come out, then administer its extraction with Gesti, that is, Pizigarolis thin ones: whose form is this.
If therefore he comes out with a gasp, it is good.
And if not, then administer its extraction with a subtle hooked probe of little duplication. If therefore it does not come out through that [opening], then make a tube of metal, and introduce the end of the tube into the ear hole deeply, and put wax which is around the circumference of the tube with softened lard, so that there be no way for the wind except through the tube; then draw out with your own breath forcefully. For it often occurs with that which we have narrated.
If this method does not work: then take from helkalimbat, or from visco, that is, prepared gluten, with which birds are caught, a small amount: and place it at the end of the radius after you have wrapped upon it a cotum placed centrally: then introduce it into the ear opening easily, after you have dried the ear from moisture.
If therefore it does not come out with all that we have narrated, then hasten to cut (it), before a hot abscess or spasm occurs.
And the mode of incision is that a phlebotomist should first cut the infirm on the head: and draw out of him blood according to the measure of his virtue.
Then make the sick person sit between your hands, and turn his ear upward, and find a small fissure at the root of the ear in the depressed place among the fat: and let the fissure be of a lunar shape until you reach the stone; then remove it with what instruments are possible to you.
Then suture the fissure at your time with speed, and care for it until it heals.
If a thing falling into the ear is from one of the grains that grow and swell, then administer its extraction.
If it does not obey you at the exit, then take a thin, subtle spatula, according to this form.
And administer with that the removal of that kind from the grains, which fall into the ear, and do not do this when you think that grain is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, until you place it in a piece of many: then extract them with hooks, or with a fine bristle, or with suction, as we have said, for its extraction will be eased.
In the water that enters the ear, it is necessary for the sick person to use sneezing with condensation first of all: and already filled his ear with a little cooked leather: and he is lying on that ear, in which is the water.
If therefore it goes out through that, it is good.
And if not: then take many stones, according to the length of the finger, thin, soft, and heat them with fire a little, and let the sick person insert one of these into the hole of his ear: and he shall jump on one foot from that side, and strike with another stone upon the stone which is in the ear.
Therefore, do not cease to do this with stone and stone until all the water comes out.
And now water goes out, so that you may take from papyrus, or from rush one, and insert one end of it into the ear: and set the other end on fire until it burns most of it.
Then insert another hook and do this many times until all the water comes out; and draw it out with a tube according to what was said before, in the stone.
In the extraction of an animal entering it, if it is small in size, like a flea, and the like, take care of it as I said in the division.
But if it is a large body that appears to the sense: then administer its extraction with pliers and hooks: and the matter of it is easier than all things that are held in the ear.
In the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you have treated it with what we said in the division and in the treatment of distillations, and your treatment does not help; then it is necessary that you look at the ear in the sun.
If therefore something appears there from worms, then remove it with forceps or with fine hooks.
If nothing appears there, then take a tube, whose form is this, narrow below, wide above: and insert the slender end into the ear according to the amount that the sick person can tolerate it; then suck with it with strong suction.
Do this many times until all the worms come out.
If they do not obey you to the exit, then wrap the tip of the cannula with wax, as I said on the stone.
If they do not emerge with what we have said: then administer distillations which the ancients have already tested in the destruction of worms: and you will find it in the treatise on distillations.
And let your pouring of oil and medicines into the ear be with this instrument, whose form is depicted here.
As you see, make it of silver or copper, narrower below, with a small hole, wider above.
Therefore, let what is in the concavity of the tube be made of properly shaped copper.
And if you wish, take a reed, and wrap cotton at its end with a decent wrapping: then throw oil or juice or what you wish of these medicines into a cannula: and let it be in the ear: then introduce the reed with cotton from above, and squeeze it with your hand with moderate compression, until oil is driven into the cavity of the hearing, and the sick person feels it inside. And that which is poured into the ear, should already have been warmed with fire for a little while: and beware lest what is distilled into it be very cold: for medicines do not tolerate this.
On the treatment of an accident of ear wax buildup.
Chapter VII.
Sometimes infants emerge from the wombs of their mothers unperforated.
And it also happens to some people that there is an obstruction in the ear canal from a wound, or flesh born in it.
And this application sometimes occurs deep within the ear canal, which is not seen by sight; and sometimes it happens to the outer part of the ear canal a little, and it is seen by sight.
Therefore that which happens deep within the ear, and which sight does not comprehend, is in many dispositions difficult to heal.
And in that which follows the use, you ought to place the ear of the sick person in the sun, and look into it: then if you see a seeming hairiness, open it with a fine spatula, whose form is this which follows, let its extremity be in which there is a small breadth, of which part is sharp: and the rest of the spatula be gentle on two sides: so that it does not harm the ear.
If therefore an ear discharge is born of flesh in the ear canal; then hold it with a fine hook, and cut it with ease of violence until the whole flesh is removed.
If a pain is deep within the ear, then take a fine, soft rod and heat it with a little fire; then put it into the ear canal.
If therefore you sense obstruction with that which the sick man finds with heaviness of hearing, try to open it with facility; and beware, lest you wound the nerves of the ear.
Then place licorice in the ear according to the amount of the opening's size which you have covered with Egyptian ointment; do this for several days, until you are certain about the wound's consolidation.
Or take licorice and infuse it in rose water, and pulverize over it ground saffron, and use it.
If you see an ear already suppurating, then it is necessary that you extract the pus, and allow it with another cloth, which is wrapped in a poultice that has been made with rose oil, until the abscess becomes seated warm: then take care of it until it heals.
If, however, there occurs a flow of blood, then immerse a sponge or cloths in cold water and place them over the ear; and use the rest of the treatment which cuts off the flow of blood as has been prescribed in the treatise on distillations.
On the Treatment of Styes of the Eyelids.
Chapter VIII. Injuries of the eyelid which occur in the eye, sometimes are humid, and sometimes are dry.
Therefore, it is necessary that you hold them with forceps: or with a hook, and cut them with a spatula from their roots.
Then place over the places a mixture of zegi rubbed.
If blood flows from them, then cauterize them with a subtle lentil cautery.
And it is better to cauterize them after incision.
For many times they return when something remains from their roots.
And when they are cauterized with fire, those roots burn and do not return.
On the treatment of granula of the eyelids of the eye.
Chapter IX.
Many times something happens in the eyelids that is similar to a grain of sand in its hardness and thickness, and because of this it is called a granuloma: and it is an aggregation of thick moisture in the upper eyelid, and the lower eyelid.
The operation therefore is, that you should consider then, if there is a granuloma proceeding in it, which appears from the eyelid, and move to every part, and its matter is easy.
Therefore find a fissure over it lengthwise.
Then scrape it from every part with ease until it weeps.
Then suspend it with a hook, and cut it off.
If it is not prepared for you, its cutting, except after you have penetrated the eyelid with a slight incision, then it will harm the sick person in some way.
If the fissure is large: then gather it together with suture: and care for it, until it heals.
And if it is small, no evil will come to you from it.
For the ointment restores it and makes flesh of it.
And if the fold is large and sloping towards the inner surface of the ear, then turn the eyelid back, and suspend the fold with a hook: except that you need to make an incision, and press it from every part.
If the eyelid is lengthened through an incision, it does not harm in any way.
Then wash the eye after the cutting with salt water: and take care of the place with that which is applied, until it heals.
On the treatment of injuries to the eyelids.
Chapter X.
A tumor is fat that is generated in the tunic of the upper eyelid: and it happens very much to boys: and it weighs down their eyes, and they get catarrh in the mornings, and they cannot look at the light of the sun because tears flow to them, and therefore you see them lie down on their faces always, and on those they sleep, and their eyelids are under the eyebrows wet, which has already been covered by inflation: and the tumor indeed is visible to the eye, and when you press the place with your fingers, you feel the fat between them.
And the mode of operation is that he places his head in your bosom.
Then take a linen cloth and prepare a groove in it, and make a circle from that groove according to the amount which contains Asirnath from every part.
Then place him upon it, and press with your fingers from every part, so that Axirnath may be gathered in the middle of the circle.
Then find in the middle of that moisture with a sharp instrument make incisions lengthwise, and let not the incision be greater than that which is made in phlebotomy in depth.
Or it is necessary that you cut through the whole skin until you reach Axirnath, for in many arrangements Axirnath proceeds from the fissure according to the form of white, fatty wood.
Therefore, extract it with a cloth which you have saturated between your fingers to the outside: and you will turn your hand to the right and left, until it is scattered: and beware, lest you add it into the fissure, so that you do not reach the eye with the spatula, and wound it.
If, however, Axirnath does not appear to you at the beginning of the fissure, you add a little into the fissure with ease, until Axirnath proceeds.
Then extract it, as we said.
Then submerge cloths in vinegar and water, and place them over the spot, and bind it with bandages.
And there are some men who rub salt and place it in the hollow of the fissure so that it melts what remains of its moisture.
Then care for the same, until it is healed.
If a hot abscess occurs in a place, then treat it with soothing plasters until it heals.
On the ways of a cataract of the eye, that is, when the eyelid softens the eye, so that it becomes wrinkled as it should not.
Chapter XI.
When hairs grow on the eyelids besides the course of the natural hairs, and they age: then these harm the eye, and cause ways of disease to happen, such as frequent tearing, and softening of the eyelids, and clouding, until that becomes a cause for the destruction of the eye.
And a cataract of the eye is treated according to four modes. Or with fire using cauterization.
Or with acute medicine, according to what was previously stated in the chapter on cautery.
Or it is cured with an incision and suture.
Or through tubes, as I shall say.
It is necessary that you place the head of the sick person in your bosom.
Then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand.
If therefore it turns, it is good.
And if not: introduce a needle into it, where the thread is from the lower part of the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate with the thread from above, and let it be near the hairs themselves, that is, near the edge of the eyelid, in which hairs are born: and draw the thread upwards with the eyelid, and turn it with a stick.
Then find in the inner part of the eyelid under the added hairs with a spatula, cutting from the greater lacrimal gland to the lesser lacrimal gland.
Then remove the thread, and place under the eyelid a small piece of cooked linen or cloth: then mark over the eyelid with encaustic wax, so that it is like the shape of a myrtle leaf.
Nevertheless, it is necessary that the figure be made according to the quantity and elevation of the eyelid, because this varies in different people.
Of these there is one who needs to be incised from the eyelid an amount that is large according to the quantity which is softened from the eyelid. Then when you have marked two lines with your spatula, begin from the larger lacrimal gland to the smaller one, and let there be a fissure near the natural hairs, as thick as the thickness of the radius.
Then insert a hook into one of the two angles of the skin. Then scrape away the whole area. Then, with a needle and fine wool thread, gather together the two lips of the wound. Wipe away the blood, and make the excess threads adhere to the two eyebrows, with some sticky things, if you wish to do this; and if not, don't worry about it.
Then dismiss the suture and thread up to three days, or four: afterwards care for it. And if you wish, leave the wound without suture, and care for it so that it dries and tightens.
For the eyelid should be raised during the sealing and closing of a wound; but it will be better later.
This way of healing a wound was taught by the ancients, Albucasis.
But there is anxiety about the sick person, and it is from a good operation, and there is no fear in it.
And another method is in Ataxmir also: and it is, as signs on the eyelid make a figure like the shape of a myrtle leaf, as we have narrated.
Then lift the eyelid with three separate or combined hooks, according to the following form, then cut away the excess with small scissors, according to this form, with equality of incision.
If it is not possible for you to hold a hook and it is not equal: then take an awl in which there is a thread, and introduce it into the middle of the figure: and introduce another thread near the larger lacrimal, and the second thread near the smaller lacrimal: and gather together between your fingers the threads with equality.
Then lift your hand with an equal elevation: and lift the skin over which the incision is made, as we have narrated.
Then gather together the two lips of the wound with a suture: and care for it until it is healed.
If however a boil should occur at your incision or fissure, treat that boil with cauteries and similar things, from sedative ointments.
And sometimes it happens to the eyelid, that its hairs turn.
On the treatment of a toothache with dogs.
And it is, that you convert the eyelid, and cut the fissure which is within, according to what I have told you.
Then with the art make two pipes or two slender rods: whose length shall be according to the length of the eyelid, and their width shall be less than the width of a spatula: and you have already incised at the extremities of both sides where you hold the threads.
Then gather both together with subtlety over that which is superfluous from the eyelid of the eye, and tighten two reeds from both parts with strong constriction, and release it after a few days. For if the skin is tightly bound it will die and blacken and putrify until it falls away of itself.
If therefore it delays, then cut it with scissors.
Then care for it until it heals.
When therefore it is consolidated, the eyelid is elevated; and hairs do not prick.
And this is the shape of two tubes, which you will make according to this figure, and quantity in length and width.
On the elevation of piercing hairs in the eye with a needle.
Chapter XII.
The operation consists in taking a fine needle and introducing into it a fine silk thread gently. Then gather the extremities of it, and knots both sides with a subtle knot: and let the length of the threads be one palm.
Then take another fine thread of silk and place it beneath the first in a short space, and knot its ends if you wish.
Then the patient puts his head in your bosom, and let it be near the sun as the operation is declared; because it is a subtle or minute operation.
Then insert a point with an alembic into the root of the eyelid, and make it penetrate quickly into the eyelid until you withdraw it from above the natural hair.
Then draw the arrow up beyond the point of piercing: and introduce the arrow into that point of piercing: if it is one, or two, or three, no more.
Then draw your hand with it until the hair comes out with its root along with the natural hair on the eyelid.
If it is drawn out and the hair does not come out with it, draw the alinxotati down to the lower part, with the thread that you have composed in it, until the alinxotati comes out of the upper opening, and you see it with the eye: then pull on the alinxotati and the thread, and extract both, and close the eye. And release it closed for two days or three, until the hair adheres to its place, and flesh is born above it.
If the hair is short, then either associate with it a longer hair from natural hairs, and elevate it with it; or let it be, until it lengthens after a space, and then elevate it.
On the treatment of a pterygium which occurs in the upper eyelid.
Chapter XIII.
When this happens to the eye, it is called Leporina.
And this is either natural or accidental, according to Al-Zahrawi.
Therefore, an accident occurs from the consolidation of a wound, or section, or cautery, and similar things.
And the method of operation on this is, that you find that consolidation and that you separate its lips, and you place between them a ligature made of linen, and you bind it, until it heals.
And it is not right that you should use things which dry and constrict in the treatment of this [wound]; for if you do so, Alxatrati returns worse than it was; rather, use things that soften it, such as hay: and embroca with water in which althea has been cooked, flax seed: and unguentum dyaquilon, which has been liquefied with some oil; and envelop with this licorice, and care for it with this.
And your treasure of healing is that you try with every skill that it not be solidified, according to the form which it was at first.
And this operation which we have said, is nothing but a certain rectification of Alcatiraet, so that it does not return to the form of the place according to what it was entirely. Concerning the treatment of a pterygium which occurs in the lower eyelid and is a wrinkle or contraction upward to the right and left.
Chapter XIV.
This is the Alxatrati which is performed below, it is truly named Alxatrati.
It is natural and it is accidental.
And an accidental wound is made from a cut, or fissure, or cautery, and those similar things.
And the way of operation in this is, that you take a needle, in which there is a doubled thread, and dye it in meat, and make it penetrate from the left lacrimal duct to the right lacrimal duct, until the thread comes to both extremities of the flesh.
Then extend the flesh upward with a knife, and cut it with a broad spatula.
If therefore the shape of the eyelid returns as it should, it is good.
And if not, take a probe and put it in the fissure, and turn it with it the eyelid: and find two fissures on the inner side of the eyelid, and let the ends of the two fissures be from two angles of the incision, until they meet and an angle is made of them; until when they are gathered together this figure is made, and it is the Greek letter lambda.
Then remove that flesh by the amount, which is its acute side below, from what follows the eyelid.
Then gather the separated parts; sew them together with a woolen thread.
Then care for them with what we have said, about softening medicines and poultices, until they are healed.
And if a laceration occurs from a cut, and suture, or cautery: then it is necessary that you find the fissure flat under the hairs of the eyelid, also according to what preceded.
Then separate between the two lips with a linctus, as we have said.
And the summary of the discourse on the care of an Alxatrati, when it is above or below, is that the operation should be carried out according to how it is prepared from the form of an Alxatrati.
For indeed there are many varieties in form: and a wise artificer prepares the instrument with whatever mode is possible to him, until he makes the figure return to its natural form, or near it, and himself also the infirm according to what is fitting for him from the operation and instruments in many arrangements.
On the adhesion of the eyelid of the eye with the conjunctiva, or cornea.
Chapter XV.
Sometimes this consolidation happens to many people, so that the upper eyelid adheres to the white of the eye and prevents it from performing its natural functions.
Therefore, you ought to insert the extremity of the radius under the eyelid and raise it upward; or extend it with a hook: then cut the adhesion with a spatula, which should not be sharp at the point of the spatula, but rather blunt for a little while: so that the sick person may not be troubled during the operation, and the spatula be removed, and injure the eye with its sharpness: and let your incision be as if you were scraping off that adhesion with ease, until when the eyelid returns to its natural form, and the adhesion is healed entirely.
Then pour salt water into the eye, and wash it with water; or distill into it from a sieve made, from linen dissolved with water.
Then separate between the eyelid and eye with a linen cloth: and place over the eye wool soaked in alum mixed with white of egg: and after the third day use sieve, and with solids, until it heals.
On the incision of the nail and the prominence of the flesh of tears.
Chapter XVI.
Know that a nail is according to two modes. Or it is nervy and is similar to a hard, fine sieve.
Or it is not a nerve, similar to frozen water of white color: which when it touches iron, or you try to seize it with a hook, it breaks off, and the hook does not fasten in it.
And both kinds do not begin unless from the larger lacrimal duct, until it goes gradually, until it covers what is necessary, and prevents light and the movement of the eye.
And the mode of operation in its incision is: that the sick person should place his head in your bosom.
Then open his eyes, and lift up the eyelid with your hand.
Then collect a thread with a small hook and extend it upwards.
Then take a needle and insert into it a thread made of horse hair, ox hair, or camel hair: and let the thread be strong, and double the end of the needle for a short distance, and fix it in the middle of the hoof: and pierce it with the needle, and bind the hoof with the thread, and extend it upwards: and scarify with a hair the side of the hoof which follows the pupil, and if you join it with hair until its very end.
Then cut the remaining part at the root of the tear duct with a fine scalpel, or with small forceps: and let go the natural flesh of the tear duct, so that there does not happen from its incision an incessant flow of tears.
And sometimes a nail is extended with a hook on the ground: or with a thread, as we have said.
Then it shall be scraped with a spatula of gentle form.
And be careful, lest the spatula touch the corneal tunic and a rupture occur in it, and the pupil be pierced.
Then after the incision, throw into the eye something of salt ground, or made from sief of ziniar, and leave it until the next day.
Then care for him with what is necessary, until he is healed. If the nail is not nerved and you cannot insert a needle into it, nor does a hook catch in it, then this kind of nail is often cured with medicines, and heals as I have said in the division.
If you wish to cut it, then open the eye of the sick person, and take a subtle, gentle, and slightly pointed spatula, according to this form.
And shave the area from above with subtlety.
If you see that it itself thins and breaks, and a razor is imprinted on it, then distill from your hour in the eye from sief made from ziniar, or from red sief, or from ground salt: and close the eye until the next day.
Then repeat over the same operation until the whole thing is removed.
If you have a hot boil in your eye, then let it alone and treat the boil until it heals. Then repeat the operation on it with reason until it heals.
The eminence of the lacrimal flesh, if it harms in the eye with great harm, is to be suspended with a hook, and an incision is made from its part. And do not make the incision until the end, so that the flow of tears does not occur.
Then a drop of red lead, or prepared from cinnabar, should be put into the tear duct until it heals. On the incision of Alguardenic, and flesh born in the eye.
Chapter XVII.
Sometimes in some human eyes a red fleshy mass is born, either placed upon or piled over so that it covers the pupil or approaches it or constricts over the eyelids, and perhaps turns the eyelids outward; and it resembles the rose's balustrade.
And the operation in this is also that the sick person places their head in your bosom.
Then open his eyes, and collect that whole flesh with suitable hooks to it: and hold it with one forceps, or tongs.
Then cut the flesh first, until the whole of it is finished with the cutting instrument.
And be careful about the eye so that you do not injure it during the operation: and let your incision be with the same instrument which we have described in the incision of the fingernail, or with small forceps, with which the asebel is gathered, according to what will come after this chapter.
When therefore the incision is complete, and the whole algue-warden has been removed, then fill the eye with salt rubbed fine: or distill into it powder red, and similar to it from corrosive medicines: and place over the eye a pad of cloth with the membrane of an egg: so that it may be secured from hot abscess.
If anything remains from the surgical procedure, and hot blood dominates you, and you fear a hot abscess: then let go of the eye, and care for it with that which soothes the abscess.
Then repeat over it with the operation until it is healed.
And similarly do with flesh added which happens in the eye of this kind.
Nevertheless, it is necessary that the care of every weak eye, whether by natural or accidental means, be operated on with iron: and do not put your hand into any of these operations until you see that that limb is enduring that operation.
On the collection of pus from the eye.
Chapter XVIII. There are red veins which are woven over the eye, and they prevent the sight from operating its function: and they weaken the eye as days pass.
It is therefore necessary first of all, that you consider if the eye in which the pimple is, is strong, and there is no pain in it other than the pimple: then collect the pimple from it.
And it is, as you should instruct the sick person, to put their head in your bosom.
Then suspend those veins with one hook, or two according to your prudence: and let the hook be a fine double one, according to this form, or let there be two hooks graded in one body, according to this form.
Then collect with fine forceps those veins with subtlety, and remove the blood hour by hour, until you see those veins removed from the eye, and are resolved: and beware that you do not wound the eye with the edges of the spatula.
And let your operation be in midday before the sun, and be steadfast in your operation greatly: that you do not cut except those veins.
And when you have finished, then distill into the eye a green or red liquid: so that its sharpness corrodes what remains of the scab.
If it is not possible for you to collect all of it in that hour, then apply a plaster to the eye with that which soothes the pain of the eye; and leave it for several days until the pain subsides; and ensure it is free from hot suppuration; then repeat over it according to the same method until it heals.
And this is the shape of the forceps.
On the reduction of a dislocation to the nose.
Chapter XIX.
Physicians call a fistula an Arissat; it is treated with a cautery, or with a sharp medicine burning, according to what has preceded in its account.
And if it does not heal, then there is no skill in it; unless you find a boil at its birth and extract all the moisture which is in it and the pus, until the bone is uncovered.
When therefore the bone is revealed, and you see in it corruption or blackness, then scrape it with an instrument, whose shape is this.
And it is called Asper's head.
Make it of iron, and let its head be round like an azir, which is marked with the sharpening of a file, or the marking of an aliskilfer, finely marked: and place it upon the site of the damaged bone. Then roll it between your fingers, and you press your hand for a short time until you know that the corruption is already scraped away: and do this several times.
Then roll it between your fingers, and you press your hand for a short time until you know that the corruption is already scraped away: and do this several times. Then restore the place with medicinal and astringent dressings.
If therefore the place is consolidated, and flesh is born in it, and the course of healing is cut off: and it remains for forty days, and is not renewed, and does not suppurate, and no accident happens to it: then you shall know that it is now healed.
And if not, then there is no talent in him, unless he reduces the fistula to the nostril hole, according to this form.
And it is, as you cut away from the second bone with iron, or with sharp medicine: and when the bone has been exposed, then take the terebrum according to this form, let its iron end be triangular: and let the wood of it be a pyramid tapering down to the end, just as you see.
Then place it over the bone itself: and let it be near the tear duct: and extend your hand from the eye a little.
Then roll your hand with the probe until it penetrates the orifice and feels it weak; by this you will find that air comes out of it when you hold your hand over your nose.
Therefore then restore the place with astringent medicines as I have taught you.
When therefore flesh is born, and the place hardens: then the matter which flowed outwards, returns to the nose: it is therefore lighter on the weak.
On the reduction of the prominence of the eye. Chapter XX.
When the eye projects with its entirety and there is no harm or diminution in sight, then it is necessary to loosen the patient; then phlebotomize him; afterward place ventilators in the neck without scarification, but with suction.
Then place a liniment over the eye made from acacia, and aloe, and frankincense, and sarcocolla.
Then bind the eye from above over the dressing with many little pads.
And the manner of some is: that you may take soft cloths, many, and every cloth be doubled from these over four: make many from them: then put them one upon another, according to the quantity that the eye needs: then bind over them with a hard cloth a strong band.
And repeated blowing with suction without incision.
Then remove the wind-filled [parts], and let the eye remain closed day and night.
If the ligament again softens, then it is necessary that it be tightly bound; then remove the ligament after a day and night, as we have said.
If therefore you see the eye already returning to its white tunic, it is good; and if not, then repeat the plasters, and pills, and strictures, and wind-bags, until it heals.
On the Incision of the Vaginal Pouch
Chapter XXI.
When rupture occurs in the tunic Vulvae, then it protrudes and proceeds outside the eyelids like a grain of Vulvae, and the form of man is defiled because of it, and the desire to cut it arises: then the operation on it is, according to what I say: and it is, that you insert a point into the root of Vulvae from the lower to the upper part.
Then introduce another needle with a double thread from the lacrimal part, and make it penetrate: and let go of the first needle according to its position.
Then cut the place of a double thread and tie with it the part of the vein in the circumference of the needle: and tighten it very much.
Then draw out the point, and place upon the eye wool soaked in albumen on the white of the eye; and let him go until the thread falls with glue.
Then care for the eye with that which comforts it, until the wound is healed.
And sometimes the eye is constricted with a circle from cloth on every side until the eye gives great prominence.
Then it shall be pierced with a fine spatula until it reaches the depth of the eye, and the moisture of the white part will come out, and the eye will descend, and immediately enter; then tighten it until it heals.
On the treatment of an Alcumnatus (gangrene).
Chapter XXII.
This sickness called Alcomnati is nothing else but pus that gathers in the eye, like water flowing down, and it is not itself.
And the way of operating on it is, that you make the patient sit on a prepared seat, or upright.
Then take the head with your hands from both parts and move it until you see the sanie come to the lower part with your eyes.
Then it is bound and not allowed to descend, and the opening is closed: and may the sick person see things as he used to see: and if it does not descend below, know that it is water.
If, however, the descent of the sound is not prepared with what we have said, then make the sick person sit between your hands. Then take a fine spatula and find with it above the skin layer a short distance at the continuation of the junction with the corneal tunic in the crown, until pus comes out.
When he goes out, then distill into the eye warm water in which you mixed honey: or water in which you have already boiled hay and honey: then care for it with the rest of the care until it heals.
On the treatment of water that descends into the eye, or cataract.
Chapter XXIII.
We have now spoken of the kinds of water used in division, and which is suitable for piercing, as has been explained and stated. Then receive the same according to health.
Therefore, it is necessary for you to make the sick person sit between your hands, square, opposite the light, near the sun: and bind his healthy eye, and tighten him well: then the eyelid of his eye with your right hand, if the eye in which there is water is the left eye; or with your left hand, if the eye is the right.
Then take with your right hand the almond if the eye is left; or with your left hand if the eye is right.
Then place the tip of the spatula near the crown along the thickness of the radius in the white of the eye appearing to be that of the smaller tear duct; then push the spatula with force: and you revolve with it your hand until it penetrates into the white of the eye: and feel that the spatula has already arrived at the empty space.
And it is necessary that the measure of the journey from the almond to the depth be the measure of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the blackening, and this is the crown of the eye.
You will see it in the pupil itself, in the eye's vision, because of the clarity of the cornea.
Then place the almond until it reaches the place where the water is.
Then press it downwards with one finger after another.
If therefore water descends, then the sick person sees it above which he opens his sight immediately, and the almond in his eye.
Then rest for a little while.
If therefore water should descend, then lay it down second, except that it may leave the almond.
When therefore it is fixed, and does not ascend: then remove the almond with ease: and you turn your hand gradually. Then dissolve in water something of clear salt gemmae: and bathe with it the eye inside.
Then place a whole wad of cotton or wool soaked in rose oil and albumen into the eye, and bind the eye with it to the healthy one.
We, however, and those who are of our time, put upon it a powder of cinchona with albumin of egg.
If the eyelid does not yield to your entry into the eye because of its hardness, for it is from men whose eyes are hard indeed: then you must take a tool called an Alberid, which has this form.
Therefore, pierce with it only the junction itself, and do not thrust your hand into the foramen: and there is nothing else but to make a way to the almond-shaped place underneath.
Then introduce the almond, as we have said.
And at the completion of your work, prepare for the patient a well-made bedchamber, in which he should lie on his back in a darkened room; and forbid him all motion, and from coughing; and place before him that food which soothes his nature; and let him not move his head right or left at all.
And let the bandage be in its place until the third day. Then dissolve it in that dark house, and try its nature; and make him see things.
Then reduce the ligament up to the seventh day.
And it is not proper that he should do this at the hour of healing, or after the incision immediately: indeed it is necessary that he should avoid this; because water rises quickly through vehement sight.
If a hot abscess occurs, then it is necessary that you loosen the eye before the seventh day, and rectify it with something that will soothe the abscess until it is soothed; then loose its sight, and place over its face an oral thing which regulates its sight under those days, with it being in that dark house.
Then he should leave his house gradually and turn back in his own case.
And know that in surgery a pupil is not excused from viewing often; then indeed he may dare to operate.
And now indeed a certain one came to us from those who are from Al-Rayy, who said that it was made in Al-Rayy a great well, which sucks up water.
Therefore, truly I did not see anyone in your land who has done that; nor read it in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that it is new.
And these are the forms of kinds from the wound, so that he who is ignorant may stand upon them.
They shall be made of metal properly, and their extremities shall be triangular with this same subtlety, and the sharp end.
Forms of the uterus.
On the care of flesh born in the nose.
Chapter XXIV.
Sometimes growths of different kinds are born in the nose, of which one is similar to many scorpions' feet: and from this there is cancerous flesh, stony, dusky in color; and from this there is flesh that is soft, not dusky in color.
In that which from these flesh is gentle, not fraudulent, nor cancerous, it ought to be done that you make the sick person sit between your hands opposite to the ground, and open his nostrils, and project the hook into those fleshes: then draw them to the exterior, and cut what you have grasped of them with a spatula subtle and sharp on one part, until you know that the whole flesh is already removed.
If anything remained of which the removal is not possible: then scrape it with one fine instrument with ease until nothing remains of it.
If blood masters you, or a hot abscess occurs: then oppose it as is necessary; or if it is from malignant abscesses, then hasten to cauterize it until the blood is cut off and all flesh is removed.
Then vinegar and water, or wine, are poured into the nose after the incision.
If, however, the nose is opened and moisture proceeds from it up to the palate, then you know that it is now healed.
If moisture does not penetrate as it should, then know that within it is flesh born in the upper bones of the nose, to which the instrument does not reach with the incision.
Therefore, it is necessary that you introduce a thread of linen which has some thickness, and knots many knots on it; and place between every knot the quantity of a finger, or less; and instruct the infirm person, so that he may put one end of the thread into the nose with a reed, or with whatever possible is to him after he has made it similar an azer; and draw his own scent until it comes as far as the caassum, and emerges over his throat.
And many times indeed boys similar to this Attomi make in schools: and it is an easy thing for him who wants.
Then place two ends of the thread, one end which comes out over the nose, and the other which remains in the nose.
Then and with a minister the closing of the flesh with knots which are on the thread. Do this until you know that the flesh is now with knots of thread.
Then withdraw the thread: and put it in the nose after the removal of the blood clot which you have soaked in Egyptian ointment; do this for three days, or more, until the ointment corrodes all that remains of the flesh.
Then place a lead tube at the end of the thing for a few days until it heals.
If however care is needed which dries, use that one.
To make a cauterizing instrument for the nose, which is used to distill oil and other medicines into the nostril, make it of silver or copper; let it be like a small lamp, open like a shell; and its passage similar to that.
And if you wish to make a closed tube, like a reed.
And the instrument for making a surgical probe should be full and open-ended: which should have a handle at its end, with which you hold it when you heat oil in it, or whatever else from juices and flowing things.
And this is the form of the instrument. On the treatment of a nose injury.
Chapter XXV.
Many times a tumor is born at the extremity of the nose, and it grows larger, and increases with days until its appearance becomes foul.
And therefore it is necessary that at the beginning of its appearance, you should cut away this and eradicate its roots entirely.
Then place upon the spot, either a cautery, or burning medicine which stands in its place.
If therefore the incision is delayed until it increases in size, then consider if it is stony, hard, dark-colored, with few sensations: then do not touch it with iron, because it is a cancerous abscess.
Many times indeed I have seen one who fell ill with a collection of pus and much evil befell him who had it.
And if the abscess is mild to the touch, not dusky in color, and you see that incision is possible throughout its whole, then evacuate the sick person, and cut into it without fear, without trembling: and care for the place with something that dries and constricts, until it heals.
On the suture of the nose, and lip, and ear.
Chapter XXVI.
Know that when there is a loosening of continuity in one of these cartilages, it is little help to operate on it, except in some people.
Therefore, when something of that sort happens to someone, you should consider if it is a wound fresh with its own blood: and then gather the edges of the wound with suture; then take care of it until it heals.
And if the lips of continuity have already been separated, and each part has been made healthy: then it is necessary that you scrape off the entire part with its own sharp edge until it bleeds.
Then gather together the two lips with suture, and tighten them, and pulverize upon it the blood of dragons, and frankincense ground; and put above the powders a piece of diaphana plaster, and some other kind of solidifying plaster: and dismiss him bound for two days, or three.
Then dissolve it, and change the medicine: and let it be until the threads are cut by themselves. Then treat it with ointment until it heals.
The method of sewing is to bring together the edges of the rupture, either with needles, as we have recounted in the stitching of the abdomen: or bring the edges together with thread, as I have told you.
On the removal of lip nodes.
Chapter XXVII. Many people indeed suffer from abscesses, most of them in the inner lips of their mouth, hard like grains of herb; and some are smaller, and some larger.
Therefore, it is necessary that you convert the lip, and bind it over every node of it, and suspend it with a hook, and cut it from every part.
Then fill the place after the incision with pounded wool until the blood is stopped.
Then it shall be covered with vinegar, and the place where there is a clotting shall be cared for with it until the wounds are healed.
On the cutting of flesh born above the gum.
Chapter XXVIII. Many times flesh is born above the gum, which the ancients call an abulus.
Therefore you ought to suspend it with a hook: or hold it with forceps, and cut it at its root, and let the pus or blood flow.
Then place over the rubbed zege spot, or other powdered astringents, drying agents.
If that flesh returns after treatment, for it often does return, then cut into it a second time and cauterize it: for it will not return after cauterization.
On extracting teeth with iron.
Chapter XXIX.
Sometimes they are gathered on the surfaces of the teeth from the inner and outer part, and between the gums, rough, unsightly, and sometimes they turn yellow and green until corruption comes from it to the gum, and the teeth become foul through this.
Therefore you must make the sick person sit between your hands, and his head in your bosom, and with a rasp and file, on which appear to you crusts, and something like sand: until nothing remains of them, and similarly do of blackness, and greenness, and yellowness, and others until they are cleansed.
If therefore that which is in them from the beginning of reason is removed, it is good: and if not, then iterate over them reasoning on another day, second, and third, until the last study comes to what you wish.
And know that the tooth needs razors of different forms and figures, according to how you prepare for your operation; therefore, the razor with which the tooth is shaved from the lower part is different from the razor with which the tooth is shaved between the teeth, according to other forms.
And these forms of razors should be prepared for you, which you see.
On the Extraction of Toothache.
Chapter XXX.
One must treat a tooth with pain with all one's skill, and be tardy in its extraction.
For there is nothing that can replace it when it is removed: because it is a sublime substance: so that unless there is an excuse for its removal, then when the infirm person is forced to remove it, he must strengthen it and be certain with you of the aching tooth.
For many times indeed does pain deceive the sick man, and thinks that it is in the tooth's nerve and pulls it out; then the pain does not recede until the weak tooth is pulled out.
For we have now seen that from the operation of vein-cutters.
When therefore it is certified to you that a tooth aches itself, then it is necessary that you scarify around the tooth with a spatula, in which there is some virtue, until the gums are loosened from every part; then move it with your fingers, or with subtle forceps first gradually, until you shake it.
Then place the large forceps in that location, and the head of the patient between your knees: which you have already held well so that it does not move; then pull the tooth according to a straight line, so that you do not break it.
If therefore it does not emerge, then take some of those instruments and introduce it under it from every side with ease, and try the movement of it, just as you did at first.
If, however, the tooth is perforated or corroded: then it is necessary that you fill that hole with a cloth: and bind it with the extremity of a fine thread, so that it does not break in the hour of your constriction upon it with forceps.
And it is necessary that you carefully perform the incision around the gum on every part much.
And guard your strength so that you do not break it, and let its part remain, and return above the infirm from that evil which is greater pain of it first.
And beware, lest you do what ignorant phlebotomists do in their haste and their boldness in the removal of it, besides that which we have recounted.
Many times indeed they cause great diseases to happen to men, of which the more difficult are to break and remain roots of them all or some of them: or to extract him with some bones of the jaw: as we have been testified many times this. Then it shall be covered after its removal with wine, or vinegar and salt. If it happens that blood flows from the places (for often this happens), then press something out of gauze, and fill the place with it; and if not, cauterize it if you are not able to use gauze.
The shapes of fine forceps which are used for moving teeth first, let their long ends be, short handles, thick, so that they do not double when with them is pressed upon the tooth: let them be like you see of handles which are thick until when you tighten them, they do not bend themselves nor double: short ends, and let them be made of iron or from steel well-made, straight ends. And in their ends let there be teeth, of some of which enter into some, and tightly bind by a decent, strong constriction.
And sometimes extremities are made like the shape of the beak of a bird called a stork, and they are of strong constriction.
On the removal of teeth and the extraction of fractured jawbones.
Chapter XXXI.
When something remains at the site of a broken tooth's extraction, it is necessary to place butter on the area for one or two days, until the place softens; then introduce into it an algasti, or forceps, whose extremities resemble the beak of a bird called a stork.
The shape of this is a forceps.
Let their extremities be made like a file inwards: or like an awl.
If therefore it does not obey you towards the exit with these forceps, then it is necessary that you hollow above the root, and uncover all the flesh, and introduce the instrument which is called Little Lever, whose form is this.
Let the short end of the extremity be somewhat thick and not soaked, so that it does not break.
If therefore the root comes out through that, it is good: and if not, it is necessary to help with these other instruments whose shapes are these.
The form of the first triangular extremity, in which there is some thickness.
The form of a slender pointed extremity.
It is also used with this instrument having two branches, whose shape is this. And with other instruments and tools which preceded in the extraction of teeth.
Also be the wound instrument with this which is assimilated to a great hook, of this shape, triangular tip twisted, in which there is something of thickness so that it does not break; and let it not be soaked.
And know that instruments for teeth are many: and similarly the rest of the instruments are not counted, and a prudent craftsman, subtle in his art, finds for himself the instrument, according to what the operation and the ills themselves signify to him.
Because they are from agriculture and those things which the ancients did not say about instruments because of the diversity of their kinds.
If a bone of the jaw or any other bone of the mouth is fractured, or rots: then examine it in its place with that which is fitting to it from instruments and forceps which I have said in the extraction of roots, and help with the pliers, whose shape is this.
Let there be something of thickness gradually, so that it may tighten or be held with the bone, and not escape and flow, until the bone comes out: and restore the place with appropriate medicines to it.
If there is a small amount of rot in the bone, then scrape it away from its rot, and care for it until it heals.
Of the locking together of teeth that are higher than others.
Chapter XXXII.
When teeth protrude beyond their natural course, a foul form is produced; and especially when this happens in women and girls, namely those of the vulva.
If a tooth is born after another tooth and does not fit, or it is possible to file it down, then remove it. And if it is attached to another tooth, then cut it with this instrument, whose shape is this.
It is similar in form to a small beak, and is made of tempered iron, with a very sharp point.
Let your incision be made on that tooth for many days, and because of the hardness of the tooth, so that it is not moved by another tooth.
If it is prominent, exposed from its scraping: then a file him with a file from India, whose form is this.
Let the whole thing be from ivory and the handle of it of small punctures like a file with which needles are made: with which the tooth is gradually filed in many days with ease, so that the tooth is not disturbed, and falls out; then smooth it, at the end scrape it with certain razors.
If it is a tooth that has broken off and hurts the tongue, then it is necessary to grind it down until the roughness of the fracture is removed and it is smoothed out, so that it does not hurt the tongue nor impair speech.
On the retention of teeth with gold wires.
Chapter XXXIII.
When a concussion and shaking of the front teeth occurs from a blow or an accident; and the weak one cannot grasp what he eats so that it does not fall; and you have treated them with staunching medicines, and the treatment did not avail: then the mind is inclined in them to be bound together with gold wire; because silver turns green and rots after days; but gold never changes.
And let the thread be of medium thickness and coarseness according to the quantity that it takes between the teeth.
And the form of this suturing is that you take a thread and insert half of it between two healthy teeth; then you weave with both ends of the thread between the loose teeth, whether there be one or several, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side.
Then again weave the texture until you reach the part from which you began: and grasp your hand with subtlety and wisdom, until it is moved no longer: and let your constriction, as you tighten the thread, at the roots of the teeth, be such that it does not escape.
Then cut the superfluous ends of the thread with scissors: and gather both together, and turn them with a twist: and hide them between the sound tooth and the moving tooth, so that it does not injure the tongue: then let it be left thus tight until it remains.
If it is loosened or cut, bind them with another thread, and it will remain so throughout the entire time.
And this is the form of teeth, and the figure of the rotation of two sound teeth, and two moved teeth, as you see.
And sometimes it happens, that one or two teeth return to their places after a blow, and remain there as we have narrated, and this is done only by an artificer who is wise and experienced.
And sometimes a piece from the bones of the jaw is fitted and shaped like a tooth, and it is put in its place, so that it strengthens the tooth and is tightened as we have said; and it remains, and serves with it for a long time.
On an incision of the ligament that happens under the tongue and prevents speech.
Chapter XXXIV.
If there is something hard and knotted in it, and it is from the clotting of a wound, then throw into it a hook, and find it along its width until you cut the ligament, and the knot is loosened.
If it happens that there is a flow of blood, then place on the location ground and rubbed. If blood overcomes you, then cauterize the place with a dull cautery, which is suitable for that; then take care of it with the rest of the treatment, until it is healed. On the extraction of a ranula which occurs under the tongue.
Chapter XXXV.
Sometimes a boil occurs under the tongue that resembles a small frog, preventing the tongue from performing its natural function: and perhaps it grows so large until it fills the mouth.
If therefore you see it of a dusky color, or black, hard, which finds no sensation by the sick person; then do not touch it, for it is cancer.
And if it is inclined to the groin, where there is moisture, then throw into it the hook, and cut it with a fine spatula, and free it from every part.
If blood defeats you in the hour of your operation, then place on it crushed ziziphus, until the bleeding stops; then return to your operation, until you have extracted it with its complement.
Then it shall be covered with vinegar and salt: and care for it with the rest of the appropriate treatment until it heals.
On the treatment of abscesses of the two tonsils.
Chapter XXXVI.
And then either you will pierce it, or it will break by itself.
And if it is white in color, round, and its root is slender: then it ought to be cut.
And the operation on him is, that before you operate, see if his abscess has calmed down in peace, and is complete, or has diminished by some reduction: then, therefore, make the sick man sit facing the sun, and his head be in your bosom: and open his mouth, and let a servant receive between his hands, and press his tongue downwards with an instrument whose shape is this. Let it be made from silver or copper, which is as fine as a knife.
When therefore you press upon it with him and a pimple is shown to you and falls upon it by your sight: then take an awl and fix it in the tonsil and draw it out to the outside as much as you can, besides drawing up with it something from the coats.
Then cut it with an instrument, whose form follows.
It is like forceps; however, its extremities should be curved so that the opening of each is directed directly at the other sharply: therefore care should be taken that it be made of iron or soaked in alum.
If this instrument is not present, then cut it with a spatula, whose form is this.
Be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other.
And after you have cut one tonsil, cut the other following this same type of incision.
Then after the incision the sick person gargle with cold water, or with vinegar and water.
If it happens to him that there is bleeding, let him gargle with water in which the rinds of pomegranates have been boiled: or myrtle leaves, and things similar to these from astringents, until the bleeding stops; then take care of him until he heals.
And sometimes abscesses are born in the throat other than the two tonsils.
Therefore, cut it according to what I said in the incision of two tonsils equally.
And I myself had treated a woman from an abscess which was born between her throat, which she drew towards the blackness, with few senses, which it almost entirely closed her throat: and the woman was breathing through a narrow passage, and already it had prevented her from eating, and drinking water: and already she had come close to death, if she had remained for one day, or two days.
And the abscess had grown so large that it had emitted two branches until they came out above the two nostrils.
I therefore hastened and fixed one of them hooks in place.
Then I drew it out, and a large portion came out with it.
Then cut it where it is grasped from the hole of the nose.
Then I did that which had protruded from the other nostril opening.
Then I opened her mouth and pressed down on her tongue: and afterward I fixed a hook into the abscess; then I cut away a part of it, and there came out of it only a little blood: therefore the woman's throat was healed, and she immediately began to drink water, then she took some food.
Therefore I did not cease to cut into that abscess many times over a long period of time; and an abscess would succeed the place which I was cutting, until it became too long and with it that.
Therefore, I conceived and cauterized an abscess between the throat.
Therefore, I set it up; then I walked away from the part, and I did not know what God did with it after me.
On the incision of a vulval abscess.
Chapter XXXVII.
When catarrh descends to the womb, and it becomes ulcerated, and is long: then itself is called perpendicular. And if it is in the lower part thick, round, then itself is called womb.
When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help: and you see that the hot abscess has quieted from it, and is subtle: then it is necessary that you cut into it.
And if from it there is a rounded mass gathered together, and it has no length, and it is bloody, or brownish in color, or black, and it has no feeling: then it is necessary to make an incision into it.
There is fear over the weak in that.
Therefore, when you see it according to the manner which I have said, and its width, and length, that you make the sick person sit facing the sun; and press his tongue with an instrument, of which the previous account was given; then fix the hook in the uvula, and pull it downwards; and cut it with one of the two instruments which I have said for the incision of the two tonsils.
And it is necessary that you do not cut from it, except what is added above the natural termination without addition.
If you cut more from it, you will injure voice and speech.
Then after the incision use what we have narrated concerning the incision of two tonsils: and take care of it until it heals.
If, however, the patient fears the incision, then it is necessary that you use your ingenuity in its cauterization without fear and trembling.
And the way of cauterizing in it is, except with sharp water; and it is, as you place the head of the sick person in your bosom.
Then press the tongue of him with the instrument that we said.
Then take from the water which I told you about in the chapter on cauterization, and mix it with unquenched lime, and put it not thick, nor thin, and fill the cavity of this instrument with it, whose form is this.
Let the extremity to which the medicine is applied be concave, like the concavity of a spoon's handle.
And place the instrument with medicine upon the wound itself: and let the patient be lying on his side, so that the saliva from his mouth may flow out of the inner medicine, so that it may not descend from it to his throat, and harm him.
Then hold your hand with medicine.
And you will apply it from the first hour over the wound in half the quantity of the hour until you see it already blackened and subdued by the medicinal bite.
And if you wish to receive the cotum and wrap it over the end of the radius, and fill the cotum with medicine, and introduce the radius with the cotum into a tube from above, until the cotum adheres to the uulum. Do this many times until you achieve what you desire from the cauterization of the vein.
Then let it fall away; for itself dries up and falls off after three days, or four.
If you wish to repeat the medicine, repeat it; and after cauterization wipe around the wound with a cloth soaked in butter, and cleanse with that which is around it of the medicine; and cover it with cold water.
And it is treated externally with compresses, and internally with gargles, until it heals.
Therefore this kind of healing is healthier with incision and farther from fear.
And sometimes an ulcer is treated even when it is more subtle than cauterization and incision: for it is treated with fumigation, according to this method.
Take a cloth, and hyssop, and oregano, and rue, and sesame, and chamomile, and wormwood, and similar herbs of these: and gather all these, or some of them in a pot, and submerge them with vinegar, and let them boil: and let the pot be lined with clay properly: and let there be a hole in the middle of the pot, on which an instrument is placed concave according to this way.
Make it from silver or copper, and insert the end, which has the grain, into the bone of the infirm until the vapor ascends to the bladder above the tube, until the bladder is darkened much.
Then repeat over it many times until it becomes white.
And beware, that you do not make this cure at the beginning of the arrival of the abscess.
Generally, he adds to an abscess: and it should not be done unless at the decline of its heat.
If this instrument is not present to you, then take a tube, and put cork on the end of it: so that the bone of the sick person does not burn: because cork prevents steam from burning the bone: and this is good cure with health.
On the extraction of thorns, and bones from the throat.
Chapter XXXVII.
Often a piece of bone adheres in the throat, or a fish spine, or something else.
Therefore, you ought to remove what is apparent from them which falls under the sight, after pressing the tongue with an instrument at the sun, and it is declared to you what is in the throat.
And that which does not appear to you and is hidden in the throat, it is necessary for you to make vomit weak before food is digested in the stomach.
Perhaps indeed it will emerge the annexed thing through vomit.
Let the sick person swallow a piece of barley bread, or the root of lettuce, or swallow a mouthful of dry bread: or take a piece of dried marine sponge, soft, and tie it with a thread, then swallow it.
When therefore it arrives at the place where the spines or bones are, and is drawn out, then it comes forth. If therefore it does not come out with what we said: then use an instrument of lead according to this form.
Let it be thicker than the radius a little, and at its end let there be a curvature, so that it may enter its gullet with ease; and let it also have its head elevated upward.
And let him beware of touching his epiglottis, so that it does not happen to him that he coughs and drives in with it his mouth, or a pin, or introduce himself the physician with his hand.
Truly it is better if the sick person himself inserts it, because of his knowledge of the location of the thing attached: and he should push downwards, or draw his hand with the instrument upwards, the whole thing according to the quantity which is prepared for him, until it emerges.
On the removal of the leech.
Chapter XXXIX.
When a leech is treated with what I said in the division on treatment with medicines, and it does not help, then consider in the throat of the sick person in front of the sun, or in the sun after pressing his tongue with the instrument that I told you about.
If therefore your sight falls upon a leech, remove it with a small hook, or with fine tweezers.
If it is not possible with them: then take a concave tube and insert it into the throat of the sick person up to almost the gullet; then insert into the cavity of the tube a burning iron with fire.
Do this many times: and let the sick person abstain from water all day.
Then let him take a mouthful of cold water, and open his mouth in it: and put his mouth into it, and do not swallow anything from it: and move the water every hour with his hand.
For when the leech feels water, it immediately falls.
If it does not come out as we have narrated, then fumigate the sick person with cumin, or with asa with the instrument which I have narrated in the fumigation of the vulva.
Do this many times, because it itself will fall.
And the method of operation in fumigation is that you take a pot, in which are live plums with fire: and let the pot be covered with a lid, in the middle of which there is a hole: and let the extremity of the instrument be placed in that hole.
Then throw the fumigation and let the sick person put his mouth at the end of the tube, and close his mouth so that the fumigation does not go out, until you know that the fumigation has already reached the bloodsucker.
For the leech will immediately fall off.
If it does not fall, then repeat fumigation many times.
And let the weak endure thirst, and eat salt and other things, and not drink water. It is therefore necessary that he should depart with this regimen.
And this is the form of the instrument with which bloodsucker is extracted from the throat, when it falls upon itself.
It is similar to forceps, as you see: except that it has this curvature which goes into the throat.
And its extremity is similar to the beak of a bird called a stork, in which there is the roughness of a file: when it grasps something, it does not let go of it at all.
On the opening of abscesses, and their incision, and care in general.
Chapter XL.
There are many kinds of boils, many different ways, according to how they are remembered, namely one, and one in this book: and they are diverse in their piercing, and their cutting from two ways.
Of which one is of a kind of abscesses within itself, and that which it comprehends from humidities.
And the second mode is because of the places, in which it happens from the body.
Because an abscess occurring on the head is different from an abscess occurring in the anus: and an abscess occurring in a fleshy place is different from an abscess occurring in the joints: and to each of these their own judgment by operation.
And from abscesses there are some which ought not to be pierced unless after the ripening of the healing in them, and the completion of it: and from these there are some which ought to be pierced while they are raw, and do not ripen according to the completion.
Like abscesses that are near the joints.
Because an abscess when it happens near a joint and is prolonged to be so, until it rots what is around it, perhaps the ligaments or nerves of that joint are corrupted: therefore it is a proper cause of the contraction of that limb.
Either it is an abscess at a principal member: because if you delay its piercing until it matures, it will harm either him or through that principal member.
If it is near the anus, pierce it unripe: and it is not necessary to pierce a fresh abscess, not completely digested, unless it is near the anus so that it does not putrefy deep, and lengthens to the interior of the anus, and becomes a fistula, or becomes at its end what does not heal. It is necessary that you know the hour of perforation of an abscess, which has matured according to its completion: and this is found in the sedation of pain, the recession of fever, and the diminution of redness, and pulsation, and the sharpness of the head of the abscess: and other signs. And it is necessary that you make the same perforation in the lower part of the abscess and of the more prominent eminence: and let the perforation be sharp in length of the body, if the abscesses are in the parts of the hands and feet, and places of the limbs, and tendons, and nerves, and arteries, and finally in all equal places, where there is no reflection.
In those things which are reflected, go with a perforation according to that limb.
When an abscess is in fleshy places, it is better to let its discharge out, until its digestion is confirmed, as we said according to the completion.
For if you pierce it before that place, the course of the pus from it is prolonged, and there is much dirt and filth, and perhaps the lips of it and its depth will harden.
And certain abscesses are pierced according to the width of the body as needed; or according to what the limb needs.
And it is necessary that you administer in small abscesses a small perforation, and in large abscesses a wide perforation; or many sections according to the similarity of the size of the abscess.
And they are from abscesses, in which it is necessary that the skin be concaved: and it should be cut when already made like a cloth, and made at the end, which is already dead: such as happens to many, so that it may ulcerate, and buboes.
And among these are those that are cut with a three-angled incision.
And of these there is one which occurs like the figure of a myrtle leaf.
Like an inguinal abscess.
And among these there are those in which a round incision is administered, and a lunar incision: and similar to these incisions.
For that which has no head, such as superficially soft boils, it is necessary to perforate it with a superficial or only flat puncture.
And it is necessary, when the abscess is large and has already collected much pus, and you pierce it, that you do not hasten and extract all the pus in that hour: rather, extract a part of it.
Then apply a poultice to the abscess until the next day.
Then remove something from the pus again.
Do this many times according to the gradation until it comes out: especially if the man is weak in strength, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old man decrepit, for indeed the animal spirit is much dissipated from the animal with the discharge of phlegm: and perhaps the weak one dies, and you do not perceive it.
Therefore, this chapter should be read with great caution.
And after you have pierced your abscess, it is necessary that you cleanse the wound and consider.
If therefore is a wound of little inflammation, or is a flat incision, then administer a poultice from linen, or old cloth.
And if there is a large abscess and there are many fissures of perforation, it is then necessary that you insert into each fissure licorice until they come to meet each other.
And if in an abscess you have cut away a part of the skin, or in its circumference have hollowed it out: then it is necessary that you fill it with sheep's wool, or as when a bandage is applied, or be powdered with flax lint without moisture: and bind it until the third day.
Then throw it out, and care for it with that which is necessary from ointment, until it heals.
If blood flow occurs during your operation, then administer cold water and vinegar after a cloth has been soaked in them: and place it over the place of blood flow many times.
If the flow of blood persisted, then it is necessary that you administer a regimen and treatment and powders, which I have recounted in many places in this book of mine, and from the division.
If it is wintertime, and the site of the abscess is near many nerves, then you should pour hot pills mixed with wine and oil onto the place.
And if it be in summer, and the places are fleshy: then it is necessary that you place poultices soaked in water, and oil, or him with wine and oil, and the whole cold.
Until the third day, as we have said, then it is necessary that you loosen the abscess, and cleanse it, and administer to its cure what is fitting for it, until it heals.
This is therefore what is necessary from the knowledge of the treatment of abscesses universally.
According to the method of distinction, I have already said about every kind of abscess, how the way to its cure is taken chapter by chapter individually.
On the incision of boils that occur in the scalp.
Chapter XLIX.
Small abscesses occur in the skin of the head, and they are of the kind of boils, which contain pouches, which are like little bags of a hen's udder.
And their kinds are many.
Some of them are fatty; and some contain moisture similar to mud; and some contain moisture similar to gruel and porridge; and the like, and some are hard and stony.
And in the sectioning of all and their extraction there is no fear, as long as it does not oppose an artery at their sectioning.
And the operation in their cutting is, that you may experience it with an instrument, whose form comes after these, which is named Intromissum, until you know what it contains.
If it contains moisture, then dry it out with a cutting along its length, superficially: according to this form.
And begin with a cut from line b to line g. When the moisture has been evacuated, then scrape out the cyst which contains that moisture, and do not let anything come out of it completely.
Many times indeed it returns, if anything remains of it. Then immerse the cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present: and if not, in water and salt: and fill the wound with it, and leave it until the next day.
For it will also corrode that which remains of the cyst. Then repeat upon the same wound with the Egyptian second, and third, and if it does not suit you with that, until you are confident that nothing will remain from the cyst, then take care of the wound with ointment, until it is healed.
If it contains a fleshy node, then cut it according to this form, with the incision having the shape of a cross: and throw hooks between the lips of the incision, and scrape it from every part: and strive your strength in extracting the tunic that contains it.
If an artery does opposition for you, then do that which I will tell you after this.
And similarly do in an abscess, if it is stony, from the cutting and the same care, according to what we have said. And the section over a stony abscess is easier; because it has little blood and moisture.
And sometimes there are some of these abscesses that are in the head in certain men, with which there is no moisture at all deep within.
Or place the perforation of them always from the lower part of them, so that the course of healing may be eased to the lower parts.
Then care should be taken with that which is suitable for healing them.
On cutting the windpipe constrictions in the neck.
Chapter XLII.
Very often these abscesses occur in the neck, and under the arm pits, and in the groin: and sometimes they occur in the rest of the body.
And above those which happen to them in the neck, there are one and many: and they are generated from each other: and every Strophula is from them within its own tunic, just as it is in knots and abscesses of the head, as we have narrated.
And there are many kinds of these Strophulars.
And of these there are stones: and of these there are those which contain humors: and of these there are malignant ones, which do not obey cure.
In that one therefore which you see of good disposition in touch, whose manifest color is close to the skin, and moves to every part, and is not attached with nerves of the neck, nor with guidegi, nor with artery, nor is deep: it is necessary that you cut it with a superficial incision from the upper part to the lower part of the body from line b. to line g., and scrape it from every part: and extend two lips of the skin with a hook, or with many hooks, if you need it, as we said in abscesses of the head, and extract it gradually.
And it is a precaution that one should not hit a vein or a nerve.
And let the spatula not be too sharp: so that it not add your hand with the incision, or trouble the sick person, and cut what is not necessary.
If you cut a vein or an artery, and this prevents you from operating, then place in the wound crushed zege or some powders that stop blood flow, and tightly bind the wound, and leave it until the sharpness of the abscess subsides and the wound softens: or until it begins to want to putrefy.
For blood is cut off with the tunic.  Therefore go back to your operation until you have finished it.
Then care for it.
If the entire strophula is cut, then it is necessary to join the two lips of the wound together; and its own, immediately after you see that there is no longer any superfluity.
If, however, you see that there remains an excess because of the size of the Strophula, then it is necessary that you extend yourself to cut its root and remove it: and administer the suture which we said.
And what contains moisture from the strophules, perforate it with a superficial perforation: so that the place of its maturity appears to you: and place the perforation below where follows the lower part of the body, as we said.
After the perforation, administer a poultice with ointment and similar things so that it will corrode what remains of the corruption until when you see the wound already cleansed; then care for it with an ointment that generates flesh until it is healed.
On the cutting away of the epiglottis due to an abscess within the throat.
Chapter XLIII.
The ancients said that this incision was made in the epiglottis, and I did not see anyone in our land who had done it; and this is the writing of their words.
When someone has a strangulation, it is necessary to make a section of the epiglottis: because if this is not done, no help comes because all the veins and lungs are weak.
In those who have a hot abscess in the mouth, or throat, or at both tonsils, when there is no pain in the canal, it is necessary to use a section of the epiglottis to avoid destruction which occurs from pre-inflammation. Therefore when we want to cut the epiglottis, under three or four circles of the epiglottis, it is necessary with a small incision across, in that which is between two circles by the amount, that the section be in the fascia and not in cartilage: and this place is convenient for the section because it is devoid of flesh, and blood vessels are far from it.
If the surgeon is timid, then he ought to extend the skin of the throat with a hook.
Then he cuts the skin until he comes to the canal: if he sees anything from them (the vessels of blood), he evacuates it.
Then he cuts the siphon which we have recounted: and it is signified above the incision of the channel from the phlegm that issues from it, with that which is broken and the cutting off of the voice.
And leave the open wound for some time.
When therefore it is removed at the hour when cataract is feared, collect together the two lips of the wound of skin, and sew itself alone without cartilage.
Then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow, until it is healed.
Says Albucasis.
The summary of this discourse which we have narrated is not an exposition, unless when they see that some of these abscesses has already opened the throat of the sick person: and the sick person has been raised up above death, and wants to be intersected by his breath: they go to cut the Epiglottis, so that the sick person may breathe over the place of the wound with some breathing, and may be saved from death: and for this reason they ordered to let the open wound until the evil of illness is finished, and it is its malice in three days, and as itself: then therefore they ordered to sew the wound, and care for it until it heals.
And that which I saw with my own eyes was that one handmaid took a knife and put it into her throat and cut a part of the windpipe with it.
And I was called to treat him, and I found him moaning, as is the moan of a dead man.
I therefore examined the wound, and found blood which had flowed out of the wound a little.
Therefore I was troubled that she had not cut off the vein nor guided it, and wind was going out of the wound.
Therefore, I took care of his wound and cared for him until it was healed; and nothing happened to the maidservant except a hoarse voice; and she returned after days to better condition.
Therefore I say: that in the cutting of the epiglottis there is no fear.
On the incision of a hiatal hernia.
Chapter XLIV.
This abscess called a hernia of the throat is a large abscess, according to the color of the body: and it occurs much in women.
And it is according to two modes: either indeed it is natural; or it is accidental. Certainly, it is not natural talent.
Accidental is according to two modes: one of which is like lumps of fat.
And another way is similar to a boil that arises from the tying of an artery.
And in this there is fear, and it ought not to be presumed against it with a sword, unless in that which is small; and you prove it, and investigate it with the insertion.
If therefore you find a similar knot, plump and not suspended with any veins: then cut it, as knots are cut: and remove it with what it contains from the cyst, if it is in a cyst: and if not, then examine the whole of it.
Then care for the place as much as is necessary until it heals.
On incision over types of swellings.
Chapter XLIV. There are many kinds of knots, and I have already said all their kinds in the division: and it is necessary that I tell here the difference between a Knot, and an Fistula: when there is doubt-making. I say therefore, that when the heat, and fever, and violent pains shall be settled until the boiling of superfluity is calmed, and putrefaction is complete: then indeed the fever and heat will rest.
When a node there is no heat, nor fever, nor pain, and it contains them in a bag called sifachin, which is proper to them, and is according to the color of the body: and its beginning is like a lentil, and it becomes like a batecha, and greater and lesser.
And they are according to two kinds: either fatty or containing moisture.
And the colors of humidity are many, according to what I said in the division. Therefore, when you come to the treatment of a Node, you must examine it and inquire about it first with the instrument called Intromissum, according to what its form will be in the chapter that is after this.
And the manner of investigating abscesses, and all nodules is, that you take this instrument and insert it into the moister place which you find in the abscess: and you revolve your fingers with it gradually until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the skin.
Then your last hand according to the measure of the size of the abscess.
Then remove what was introduced and consider what comes out in its trail.
If therefore a running humidity exits, whatever the color: then dry it with a superficial incision, according to what I said in the rest of abscesses.
And if moisture does not issue from the track of introduction, then know that it is fatty: therefore make a dry incision over it in the form of a cross, according to this shape, as I have taught you; and suspend it with hooks, and scrape the skin from every part with ease; and guard the cyst if you can above it, so that you may extract it sound with the Node.
If, however, the bladder bursts during the operation, and it is not possible to remove it whole, since this often happens, then remove it piece by piece until nothing remains of it.
If there remains something little, or much, from it, a Knot returns according to the greatest amount.
If it overcomes you, and there remains a little from it, then fill the wound at its completion with some sharp corrosive powders: and tighten the wound, and place above it what sits abscesses hot, and care for it with the rest of the cure until it heals.
If therefore it is a large knot, then cut two lips of it, and care for it with that which becomes flesh. If the vein is against you, pulsating or not pulsating, then hasten, and fill the place with crushed zeige, and release it strict for two days, or three, until the wound putrefies, and the boiling of blood rests: then return to cutting that which remains from the Node.
On instruments for cutting and piercing the mouth.
Chapter XLVI.
Of these there are forms of instruments introduced, and they are of three kinds.
Of these there is a great one, and of these there is a medium one, and of these there is a small one.
Let iron probes of square extremities be made, centered, so that they hasten entry into an abscess.
And these are the forms of Experiences, and not, that is to say, piercing: and one of them is named beris, that is, piercing: and they are of three kinds.
Of these there are great, and medium, and small.
It is necessary that these abscesses and openings and fistula are investigated through what is between them from the bones.
And others are made round, smooth, and blunt, like large needles which they use to stitch the wounds with, from brass, or copper, or iron, or silver. And the better ones are made from citron.
And experience is also made with black lead, which are suitable for testing fistulas, the concavity of which is such that they are reflected with their gentleness when reflected with those reflections.
And there are again three kinds. Because some are long, some medium, and some short, according to the quantity of the width and constriction of the fistula. The shape of hooks, and there are many kinds. Because they are simple, that is, those which have one care; and there are three kinds as you see, Great, Medium, and Small.
And of these are blind pouches: and they are of three kinds.
And of these there are hooks having two curves, and they are of three kinds: and of these there are hooks having three curves, and they are of three kinds: and all these are necessary in their place.
And these are the forms of scalpels, with which knots and abscesses are cut and scraped; and they are of three kinds: because there is a large one, a medium one, and a small one.
The extremities that are cut are sharp, and the other extremities are not sharp; and they are not placed like this, except that aid may be given to them in the scraping of nodules out of fear of incision of a vein, or nerve; and that the weak man may heal by them, and find for a short time tranquility from burning as he finds in the scraping of an abscess.
These are called Magda and they are of three kinds.
They are made of metal, and are similar to a still, with which alcohol is made: and at the wide end there is a small point hidden, Spatula; and through it it runs to the interior, and to the exterior when you wish, as you see.
The shape of a wound concealed between the fingers at the site of an abscess perforation; these are not felt by the sick, and there are three kinds, large, medium, and small.
Wounds of the winds with which the flow of blood is severed; and they are of three kinds, large, medium, and small.
They are made from copper or citron, round, of slight length, as you see: and let them be fine.
And it is necessary that these kinds of Winds be with you both large and small, so that you may cut off blood with speed when necessary, and then when medicine is not present to you.
However, do not use them for cutting blood in every part of the body, and do not use them except in fleshy places: such as the groin of the leg, and the hip, and the armpit, and the nipples, and the abdomen, and the inguinal region, and the like, from fleshy, moist incisions.
And sometimes instruments are made from these similar to the peelings of figs, according to their shape; with which blood is cut when it flows from the site of phlebotomy, or at the incision of a vein, or artery: and sometimes they are made round according to this form.
On the care of the breasts of men which are like the breasts of women.
Chapter XLVII.
Sometimes the breasts of some men become swollen at the time of sleep (that is, when they begin to dream) until they resemble a woman's breasts; and they remain festering with pus.
Whoever avoids this, it is necessary that he cut above the nipples with a lunar incision, according to this form from line, b, to line, g. Then scrape away all the fat.
Afterward fill the wound with medicinal ointment.
Then bring together the two lips of the wound with a suture, and take care of it until it is healed.
If however the nipple inclines to the lower part and softens because of its size, as happens to women: then it is necessary that two incisions similar in figure to a lunary be found on its two upper sides, each one containing the other at the limits of both, until there is a greater line containing the lesser, according to this form from line, b, to line, g. Afterward scrape the skin which is between the two lips and remove the fat, and administer what we have said about sutures and powders, which is necessary for healing, until it heals.
If, however, you are not able to make the incision as needed because of the patient's distress or because of bleeding, then it is necessary that you fill the wound with a paste submerged in corrosive ointment and let it sit until it corrodes what remains of the flesh.
Then care for him until he heals.
On the incision of an abscess that occurs under the nipple.
Chapter XLVIII. These abscesses that occur under the nipple are of a kind of hard struma, which contains cysts, and from these there are those that contain moisture.
What therefore are those which contain humors, it is necessary that they be cut with a lunar section, according to this form, from line b. to line g. For when all that is in the abscess of blood is evacuated, then fill it with old ointment, and dismiss it until the next day.
Then the clot is removed, and it is treated with a suitable ointment until it heals.
If the abscess is of the kind of Strangles nodules, then cut over it as we have said in the section on Strangles, equally.
If, however, the wound extends in this way that it emits pus, then administer to it a cautery, according to what we said previously.
On the incision of an abscess that occurs because of an artery and vein.
Chapter XLIX.
When an Artery is ruptured and the skin above it is closed, many times abscesses happen from there; and similarly, with Veins, abscesses and swelling happen as well.
And the signs by which it is known that an abscess and inflammation are due to the Artery and Vein are: because when an abscess is due to the artery, it is long, gathered deep in the body: and when you press the abscess with your fingers, you feel as if there were a creaking sound.
And that which is for the vein is round upon the visible body.
And a section above this abscess is an error, and especially that which is under the armpits, and groin, and neck, and in many places of the body: and it is very great.
Therefore it is necessary that its care be carried out with iron, and what also from them exists in the extremities, or in the head, it is necessary that it be carried out.
Therefore, regarding that which is from them [the wounds] by inflation of the orifice of the Artery, find in skin a cut in length.
Then open the incision with hooks, afterwards the Artery: and free it from the tunics until it is revealed.
Then insert the needle under it and make it penetrate to the other side, and tighten the artery with a double thread in two places, according to what I taught you in extracting the two arteries that are in the temples.
Then pierce the place which is between two ligaments with a lancet, until all the blood that is in it comes out and the abscess is dissolved.
Then administer a cure that generates pus until the ligaments fall away; afterward care for it with ointments suitable to it, until it heals.
If it is an abscess due to the incision of a vein, then you must hold with your hand as much as possible from the abscess with skin.
Then introduce a needle under the place which you have held with your hand, and make it penetrate: and let there be in it a thread double, until you draw it out from the other side.
Then tie the ligature with the abscess itself, according to what I told you about the ligation of the vein, from two parts with two extremities of thread. If you fear that the extracted thread may be left behind, then introduce another needle with a different thread beneath the whole abscess at the incision; press and tighten your threads in four places.
Then dry out the abscess in its middle, until when it discharges what is in it; then cut away the excess of skin, and release what is bound from it.
Then put upon it the little bit which you have submerged in wine and oil.
Then administer treatment with liniments and ointments until it heals.
On an abscess that happens from a twisting of the nerves.
Head L.
Just as an abscess occurs in arteries and veins, so it also occurs in nerves; which occurs in them from a blow, or from excessive labor, and similar things: and it most often occurs in those places of the helpers, or heel bone, and in every place where joints move: and it is a serious abscess. Its color is similar to the rest of the body, and it is found in many arrangements without pain: and when it is squeezed with vehemence, it feels in it weak like a stupor.
And it is not an abscess gathered deep within the body, rather it is under the skin, and it moves to every part, and it does not go forward or ahead, nor backward to the back parts.
Therefore, what is found of these things in joints, it ought not to be invaded with iron.
For perhaps contraction will happen.
In that which is in the head, or on the forehead, cut the skin with a sharp instrument.
If therefore is a small abscess, then hold it with forceps and cut it from the root.
And if it is large, then suspend it with a hook, and scrape it; then remove it, and gather the wound together with suture: and take care of it until it heals.
On the incision of an abscess that occurs in the abdomen.
Chapter LI. Sometimes certain people get growths in their bellies and other parts of their bodies, which are called Fungalia, because of their similarity to mushrooms.
Whose root is subtle, and their head is coarse, and their lips are reversed.
And there are some of them which are small: and there are some of them which are greatly magnified.
And I myself have seen a man, and in his belly there were two growths, which were more like fungi than other things: there was no difference between them, white, small roots, and their lips were reversed, and they were found, and humidity flowed from them always.
Therefore, I cut them, and I found in one about X and VIII ounces and in the other about VI ounces. And the operation in the incision of them is, that you consider then, if the patient is humid, and the color is white, moist, fine root: then cut it with a wide spatula, and let there be cauteries in fire present to you.
For often much blood is expelled during its section: therefore if you are overcome by blood, then cauterize it.
If you see someone weak and fearful of the incision with iron, then take a leaden thread properly made, and bind it with it to the athulus: whose manner is what we have said, and release him for two days.
Then add lead to the constriction.
Therefore, do not cease to tighten the lead until it is imprinted in the lil, until it is severed and falls by itself without labor.
If however the root is thick, then there is some fear and anxiety in its incision, especially since it is in the belly.
Nevertheless it is possible, that you cut in half of it.
Then cauterize it so that it does not return.
Then take care of the wound until it is healed.
And be careful not to cut into that which is dark in color, with few senses, and foul appearance; for it is a cancerous abscess: and I shall come back with a remembrance of Cancer after this.
On the treatment of umbilical prolapse.
Chapter LII.
A prominence of the navel occurs from many causes.
Or from fissures which are above the belly: and it exits from this either the large intestine, or the small intestine, according to what happens in other ruptures.
Either from blood flowing from a Vein, or from an Artery, according to what has been said before.
Or compressed by a tight bandage.
If it is due to a fissure and the discharge of pus: then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body: and it is soft, without pain: and it appears in various locations.
And if it is due to the extrusion of the intestine, then its location is, with that which we have narrated, of greater diversity.
When therefore you press it with your fingers, it disappears; then it returns, and perhaps there is a sound with it; and it becomes much magnified at the entrance of the bath, and causes labor.
If it is due to moisture, it is soft, then it is not concealed when you press it with your hand, nor is there constriction, nor addition.
If it is due to blood, then with these signs the abscess appears black on the skin.
If it is due to flesh born: then it is a serious, large, hard abscess, and it sets according to the quantity of one.
If it is because of windiness, then its touch is gentle. And the operation on that one is, when you consider if the prominence of the navel is due to blood from the Artery or Vein, or windiness; then it is necessary for you to prohibit its cure.
For in that there is fear and trembling, as I have taught you in the chapter, in which I said abscesses because of the artery and vein.
If the prominence of the umbilicus is due to the intestine or a tumor, then you ought to instruct the sick person to hold his breath and stand upright extended.
Then signs with a plaster around the whole umbilicus.
Then command him to lie on his back between your hands.
Then with a spatula wide around the umbilicus on the place which you marked with encrusting.
Afterwards extend the middle of the abscess to the upper part, with a large hook.
Then bind him around with strong thread, or with a silk cord, firm binding: and let the knot of the ligament be secure.
Then open the middle of the abscess extended above the ligament.
If therefore you find it already captured by the ligament: then extract the alien body and introduce your index finger into it, and drive the intestine to the interior of the belly: and if you find a tumor, then take it with a hook, and cut away its superfluity.
If, however, the artery or vein is opposite you, then wind around it much.
Then return to your operation.
Take two needles, and insert into them two strong threads: and insert two needles into the circle that you made around the abscess in the form of a cross, so that they penetrate.
Then bind the abscess in four places over the needle: and if you wish, remove the needle, and let go of the place, until the extended flesh rots: and it falls by itself: or cut into it when it becomes subtle and rots.
Then care for it with what is necessary from ointment until it heals.
If a protrusion of the navel is from flesh or moisture then it is necessary to concave the abscess as we have said.
And you will draw out blood, or moisture, which you find in it.
Then care for it with that which solidifies the place.
On the treatment of cancer. Chapter fifty-three.
For I was not able to heal anyone from it; nor did I see another before me who had come to that.
And the operation on it, when it is located as we said, is, as before, and to purge the sick person from black bile several times.
Then if you find the lancet with a manifest filling.
Then prepare the weak with preparation, in which it will be spoken with the operation.
Then project into the cancer hooks that are suitable for it.
Afterwards hollow it out from every part with the skin, according to examination, until nothing remains of its roots: and let blood flow, and do not cut it quickly, moreover express the places, and wipe away the gross blood all with your hand, or with whatever instrument is possible there.
If, however, a thick flow of blood occurs from the incision of an artery or vein: then cauterize the vein until the blood is cut off.
Then care for it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
On the treatment of dropsy.
Chapter LIII.
Now we recount in the division of kinds of dropsy, and how the gathering of water is made: and the signs of every kind, and its cure with medicines.
And that which is cured with iron is only a kind of ascites alone; and it does not approach with iron the species of tympanitis; nor the species of hydrops entirely; for that is mortal.
When you have already treated this kind of hydrops tympanitis with medicines, and your treatment did not help, then consider.
If weakness has already come upon the sick person, or if there is another illness besides dropsy: such as if he has a cough, or a flux of the belly, and the like: then beware that you do not treat him with iron: for there is fear of this.
If you see a patient with excessive vigor and there is no illness except for dropsy alone: and he is not a child, nor an old man; then the mode of operation in him is that you elevate the patient standing between your hands, and let your assistant press his belly with his hand, driving the water to the lower part of the breastbone.
Then take a spathe prickly, according to this form.
Let it be two parts acute, long, and the acute end like a spatula.
Nevertheless, there should be something of brevity gradually, so that you do not pass through it with it at the time of the operation to the intestine, and wound it.
Then consider.
If the formation of dropsy is from a part of the intestines, then it is necessary to lengthen with a cut from the navel three finger widths, down to the direct below the breastbone.
If however the generation of hydropy is because of the sickness of the liver, then let your section be on your left from the navel three fingers.
And if its formation is due to the spleen, then a section should be made on the right side: and it ought not also to be a section on the side where the sick person wants to lie, so that superfluities do not flow to that weak place.
Then pierce the whole skin with an instrument.
Then introduce into that incision and raise your hand with the Spatula between the skin and flesh, and scrape it as if you were scraping it: and let the quantity which is scraped be the quantity of a fingernail, or about that.
Then pierce the abscess until the spatula comes to the place of emptiness: and that is the place of water.
Then draw it out, and introduce into the opening an instrument which has this form.
And it is similar to a cannula: it is made of silver, or copper, or brass, soft, smooth: which has a small hole in its lower part, and on its sides are three holes, two from one side, and one from the other side: and its end is cut, according to the manner of cutting a reed, as you see: at the upper end of it there is a ring.
For when an instrument comes to water, then itself immediately descends upon the instrument, therefore it evacuates out of water in an hour a medium quantity.
For if you evacuate from it more than is necessary, perhaps the sick person will die in an hour through resolution of his animal spirit; or he will fall into a fainting spell that approaches death.
But evacuate from it according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the sick man signify to you from the virtue of his pulse, and from its goodness.
Then remove the instrument, and hold the water.
This is because it is held back immediately because of the skin which retains the opening which is above the sifac: of which I have told you, as to pierce it according to that mode.
Then on the next day repeat the instrument if you see the patient can tolerate it; and also remove a small quantity from the water. Do this for several days without fear, and guard yourself from error until there remains only a little water.
If however you treat the weak one, and let much water out of him, then care for him with burial in hot sand, and with much sweat in a bath and sun, and let him wait on thirst. And care for him with drying medicines, until he is healed: and cauterize over the stomach, and liver, and spleen, after the extraction of water: according to what I have narrated in what precedes.
On the care of infants who are born with their urinary openings not perforated.
Chapter LVII. When someone is born from the womb of his mother, and the head of his infant is not perforated, or it has a narrow opening, or it is not in its proper place.
Therefore it is necessary to assist with its perforation immediately when it is born with a Spatula carefully and delicately, according to this form.
Then put a thin lead peg into the hole, and bind it: and hold it for three or four days.
When therefore he wishes to pass urine, let him remove it, and urinate.
Then reduce it.
And if you do not place lead, it is now possible that the urine which flows over the place, will not allow it to close.
He whose opening is narrow is treated with lead, as we have said, for many days until it is enlarged.
Those who have a hole in a place not their own are harmed.
That is because from those who are born, there is an opening at the end of the penis: therefore it cannot urinate forward until he raises the penis with his hand upwards. Therefore, there is no generation because the semen cannot reach the womb in a straight line; and it is a very foul ailment.
And the way of operating on him is that he be laid upon his back.
Then extend the head of the twig with your left hand forcefully, and cut the head of the twig from the place of the phallus, with a sharp point, or with a sharp spatula: just as is the incision of a reed, or as you would cut something with a knife, so that its middle comes out like the head of the twig: and so that it falls in the middle according to what is necessary.
And beware during your operation of bleeding.
Many times indeed it happens.
Therefore oppose him with that which stops the blood, and care for the wound until it heals.
On Al-Butus which occur in the foreskin and head of the penis, and corruption, blackness, and adherence.
Chapter LVI.
These things often happen to Albucasis in a staff, and it is a prominence of foul flesh.
And from that some are malignant, and some are not malignant.
Therefore, you ought not to suspend a non-malignant growth with a fine hook and cut it away until you have completely removed it.
Then place upon it a cloth immersed in Egyptian ointment. Then care for it afterward with dyacin ointment until it heals.
If Albather is malignant, of foul color, then you must administer cautery to it after its incision and the burning away of its root.
If, however, the glans is caught in the foreskin of an uncircumcised patient, and part of the glans is within the foreskin and part outside: then you must first remove the glans that is inside, until it has healed, then care for the external part; because when you treat both at the same time, the foreskin does not heal but is perforated.
And now also happen in the testicles and foreskin blackening and corruption.
Therefore it is necessary for you to hollow out everything that has been blackened and which wants to rot or which is already rotten.
Then a line over it after that with honey which has already been mixed with flour and the rind of pomegranates, and crushed herb of cress.
Then care for it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
If there happens to be a flow of blood, then administer cautery with a lunar cautery, according to this form.
For cauterization is helpful for two dispositions at once, namely for the flow of blood and for a wound when it is corrupted.
If the head of the staff is eroded and destroyed completely in an hour, then it is necessary to insert into the urethra a lead pipe so that the patient may urinate on top of it.
In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis, and this adhesion does not occur unless in one whose foreskin is healthy, and circumcision is not required on it: and sometimes adhesion occurs because of a wound, or an abscess: therefore it is necessary to scrape it with a blunt Spatula until the ligament is loosened, and the head of the penis is freed from every part.
If it is difficult to distinguish these fine things, then one must excise something from the head of the penis and from the foreskin.
That is because when the prepuce is thin, perhaps it will be perforated because of its thinness quickly.
Then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a fine linen cloth which has already been moistened in cold water so that they do not stick again.
Then it is treated with a wine compress until it solidifies. On the purification of infants and the treatment of illnesses that befall them through error.
Chapter LVII.
Circumcision is not a solution of continuity, like other wounds: however, since it is performed by our operation, by our will, and its use is proper to boys, it is necessary that we mark in it a better operation, and a smoother way leading to salvation.
Therefore I say, that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books; because they do not use it in their laws, and it is only what we have acquired by experience.
That is because I found that most artisans and bloodletters use purification, cutting with a scalpel and forceps: and they use pliers and tie with thread, and incision with a nail.
And I myself have proven all these methods, and I have not found a better one than cleansing with forceps and binding with thread.
For when skin is scraped with a knife during cleansing, often it escapes.
Because the skin of the prepuce has two layers: therefore, perhaps the upper skin is cut and the lower tunic remains: therefore it is necessary to make an incision to cut the other, and the future pain.
And when cleansing is done with the alfacat, that is to say, a finger, which surgeons use, the incision of the extremity of the male member is not made secure because perhaps it enters its foramen.
In purification, however, if the nail comes out, perhaps it will damage your operation; and indeed the skin of a boy is brief in nature, and many times they are born thus, that they do not need purification; and I have already seen this.
I discovered a good method of purification with forceps and a ligature made of thread, because the forceps are proportionate to the incision; because the sharpness which is above is like the sharpness which is below.
When therefore you press your hand, the two sharpnesses are proportioned, and they cut according to the operation one at a time; and a compression is made with a similar figure, containing the skin of the twig from every part, so that no error falls at all.
And the way of operating on it is, that you make a child, especially one who understands briefly, think that you do nothing but tie a thread to his stick; and dismiss him until the next day.
Then make him rejoice and be glad in every way that is possible for you from that which he receives through his understanding.
Then introduce your hand into its stick, and puff into the skin, and draw it upward until the head of the stick emerges.
Then cleanse it of what is gathered in it, from filth.
Then tie the marked place with a doubled thread.
Then bind the lower part with a small bandage following after. Then hold with your index finger and thumb the place of the lower ligament well, and cut between the two ligaments.
Then lift the skin upward quickly, and extract the head of the splinter.
Then let the blood flow gradually (for it is better), and put powder on top; and above the powder, a cloth in which a vitellus boiled in rose water has been soaked, mixed with rose oil. Recently well: and let him rest upon it until another day: and take care of him with the rest of the care, until he is healed.
The form of the forceps for cleansing is this.
Let the two extremities be blunt, and let them meet: let no branch of the bone emerge from them; and let the length of the two points be equal to the length of the two handles.
The error occurring during cleansing is this: for perhaps the whole skin has escaped internally, or a part of it at the incision. Therefore it is necessary that you extend it from your hour with your finger before suppuration of the place: and cut it according to equality.
If you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then remove it with a hook and cut it.
If three days have passed and the swelling under the rod remains, it is an abscess: then release it until the abscess sits hot, and scrape it with ease, and cut into it according to what is prepared for you, and beware of the head of the rod.
It will not harm him.
Therefore treat it with that which consolidates a wound from powders, which we have narrated in the treatise on powders: and if it happens to be cut above measure, and escapes to the upper regions, it does not harm it even then.
Therefore, treat it with what we said until it heals.
On the extraction of urine retained in the bladder.
Chapter LVIII.
Retention of urine in the bladder occurs from an obstruction caused by a stone, or frozen blood, or pus, or flesh born, and similar to those we have said about the modes of healing in the division.
And if it is not released urine, and you see that its retention is because of a stone which is already in the neck of the bladder; then it is necessary that he be lying on his knees.
Then let his feet be laid upon his back, and let him extend his belly from the upper part of his back, and let the weak one draw in his breath as much as possible.
Therefore it is necessary when the bladder's neck is moved for the removal of a stone, that urine be discharged entirely.
If it is not loosened with what we have said, and the matter is severe upon the infirm person: then it is necessary that you administer its extraction with an instrument which is called a syringe, whose shape is this. Let it be of silver, and be subtle, soft, concave like a birds feather tube in subtlety of radius, long in similarity to one and half palm: to which let there be a subtle tube in its head.
And the way of exit of Urine through him is, that you take a doubled thread, and tie on one end of it wool or cotton, a good ligature: and insert the end of the thread into the lower part of the Syringe: and cut with scissors if anything superfluos from the wool, but introduce into the tube with force, as alzer.
Then anoint the syringe with oil, or with butter, and egg white; and make the sick person sit on a seat, and embrocate the vein, and its rod with moist oils, and olive oil, and warm water.
Then introduce the syringe into the rod with ease, until it reaches the root of the rod.
Then double it above from the navel. Then drive the syringe into it, until it reaches the vesicle, and feels that it has come weak to the empty thing: and this is not done in this order, unless because the passage, in which it goes, is in which there is a winding.
Then extend the thread with wool gradually.
Urine will follow wool.
Then remove it and make urine flow through the urethra: and repeat with the syringe, and do not cease doing this until the bladder is emptied, and the patient finds relief. On the quality of enema with a clepsydra.
Chapter LXIX.
It is indeed closed, that is, sealed.
And in it there are three openings, two on one side, and one on the other side, as you see.
And the concave place, where that which drives it is, let it be according to the quantity that it needs itself without addition, until when it is drawn with something, it draws from the moistures: and when it is driven, with it expel to a great distance: according to what the clepshydra does, which throws naphta, that is, Greek fire in the battles of Mars.
When therefore you wish to draw moisture into a vein, introduce the end of a syringe into the moisture, and draw with it what drives it upward, for moisture is drawn into the cavity of the syringe. Then introduce the end of it into a rod, according to what we have narrated concerning the syringe.
Then drive moisture with it, for that moisture comes to the wound immediately, so that the weak one feels it. The form of a thin enema with which the bladder is cleansed.
Then insert a strong thread into those openings, as they turn. Then gather a circle, as it is gathered with plaster; after you have placed in it what you wish from moistures, and oils, and waters.
Then bind him in the instrument and do with it as you did with the bladder from expression with your hand until humidity comes to the bladder.
On the Extraction of Stones.
Chapter LX. We have spoken in the division of kinds of Stone, and its treatment with medicines: and I have said the difference between Stone generated in the kidneys, and bladder, and signs of the whole of it: and I have said the Stone in which the operation falls with hand and section: and it is Stone generated in the bladder properly: and he who is fixed in a rod: and I am narrating it with manifest exposition and abbreviation.
Therefore I say that a stone generated in the bladder happens most often to boys.
And from the signs of it is that urine exits from the bladder similar to water in its fineness: and there appears in it white sand, and the weak man rubs his staff with it, and he labors with it, and often hangs down. Then it is erected, and it goes out with him in many of them.
And healing is easy for boys up to the age of fourteen.
And it is difficult in the elderly.
In youths, however, it is medium, in that which is between those: and of that whose Stone is greater, healing is easier: and if small, its cure is reversed.
When we come to the cure, it is first necessary that we cleanse the sick person with enemas, which will draw out all the feces that are in his bowels: for this sometimes prevents the finding of the Stone when it is sought. Then take the patient with his feet and shake him and move him downwards so that the stone descends to the depth of the bladder, or leaps from a height several times.
Then make him sit between your hands, and his hands be under his hips, so that the whole bladder may slope downwards.
Then inquire about him, and touch him externally.
If therefore you feel a stone in the space, then hasten immediately with a section upon it.
If it does not fall under your touch at all, then you must wipe the index finger with the oil of the left hand, if the boy is weak: or the middle finger if he is a complete young man: and insert it into his anus, and inquire about the Stone until it stands under your finger: and turn him gradually to the neck of the bladder.
Then press upon it with your finger, and push it outwards towards the place whose section you wish: and order your assistant to press the scrotum with his hand, and order another assistant to extend the testicles with his right hand upwards: and with the other hand, to remove the skin which is under the testicles in the part where the incision is.
Then introduce a spoon-shaped blade, whose form is this.
And find in it what is between the anus and testicles, and not in the middle, to the side of the left hip: and let the incision be above the stone, and your finger be in the anus: and let a transverse incision be made, so that the external incision is wide, and the internal is narrow, according to the quantity that it is possible for the stone to exit from it not greater.
Perhaps a finger which is in the anus compresses the stone at the point of incision, and it comes out without difficulty.
And know that from a stone which has corners and margins, because of this it is difficult its exit.
And from that it is smooth, like a gland, and round: and its exit is easy.
Therefore, to him who has angles and margins, add to the fissure.
If it does not come out in this way, then it is necessary that you apply pliers over it, or tie over it with a band tightly, whose end should be like the Moon which tightens over Stone and does not escape from it, or to insert under it an instrument subtle, of curved extremity.
If you cannot get it in above, then enlarge the opening a little.
If something from blood overcomes you, cut it off with a zig.
If a stone is more than one, then drive first the large one to the mouth of the bladder.
Then cut upon it.
Then push a small piece after that: and similarly do if there are more than two.
If it is large, then ignorance is great as to cut over it with a large incision.
Because it happens to a sick person, one of two things, either that he will die or that there is frequent discharge of urine because the place does not heal at all.
But administer expulsion until it comes out: or use instruments in its fracture with forceps, until you remove it bit by bit.
When therefore you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with frankincense, and aloe, and dragon's blood: and bind it, and put upon it a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or rose oil, and cold water: that a hot abscess may sit.
Then place the sick person on their back over his neck, and not loosen the ligatures until the third day.
When therefore you have loosened it, pack the place with water and much oil.
Then care for it with dyacin ointment and basilica ointment until it heals.
If, however, a hot abscess, and corrosive, and similar to these occurs in the wound: as if blood congeals in the bladder, and urine is prevented from it; and this is known by the emission of blood with urine.
Therefore insert your finger into the wound and draw out the blood from it.
For if it remains, it provokes the corruption of the bladder, and its putrefaction.
Then wash the wound with vinegar and water and salt, and apply to it of every kind what is fitting for its cure until it heals.
And it is necessary in the hours of the healing of the whole, that you bind two thighs, and join them, because of the medicines which are placed upon the place.
If the stone is small and is in the urethra, and it is lodged there and prevents the outflow of urine: then treat it with what I told you before you come to the incision.
For many times indeed you will be excused from surgery by this cure, for I have already proved this. And it is, as you take a perforator from iron steel, whose form is that of a triangular end, sharp, fixed in wood.
Then take a thread and tie it with a stick under a stone so that it does not return to the wound.
Then insert the piercing iron into the rod with ease, until the perforator reaches the stone itself; and revolve the perforator with your hand in the stone gradually; and try to make its perforation, until you cause it to penetrate from the other side.
Urine however is perfected immediately.
Then press your hand upon that which remains of the stone from the outer part of the shaft.
He is broken, and he exits with urine, and the sick man is healed.
If this treatment is not prepared for you because of something that prevents it, then tie a thread under the stone and another thread above the stone. Then dry over a stone in the very rod between two ligatures.
Then remove it.
Afterwards, dissolve the ligament, and cleanse the congealed blood which forms in the wound.
And it is not necessary to place a thread beneath the stone, unless it is so that it does not return to the wound; and another ligament from above, unless when the thread is loosened after the removal of the stone, the skin returns to its place, and covers the wound; and for this reason it is necessary for you when you tie the upper thread, that you elevate the skin upwards, so that it may return to its proper place, and cover the wound, as we have said.
On the Extraction of Stones from Women.
Chapter LX I.
A stone is rarely produced in women.
If someone should happen to have one of these stones, then the treatment is difficult, and it is prohibited for many reasons.
One of these is: that a woman perhaps is a virgin. And the second is because you do not find a woman who will reveal herself to a doctor when she is chaste, or from those who have husbands.
Thirdly, because you do not find a woman well-versed in this art, especially the operation with the hand.
And the fourth is the distance from the place of the stone: therefore a deep incision is needed, and there is fear in this.
If necessity compels it, then it is necessary to take a female physician, well-knowing; and few are found.
If you do this first, then seek a chaste, subtle physician and present the woman to a midwife well-versed in women's matters, or a woman who practices this art. Do this for her, and especially instruct her to do everything that you prescribe to her based on the examination of the stone. First of all, it is necessary to see if the woman is a virgin: then one should insert a finger into her anus and seek the stone.
If therefore he finds it, he will compress it under his finger, and then orders the midwife to insert her finger into the womb of the weak woman, and to inquire about the stone, after she has placed her left hand over the uterus, and compresses it with good pressure. If therefore he finds the stone, then it is necessary that he move it gradually from the opening of the bladder to the lower regions with the greatest of his skill, until he comes to the root of the hip.
Then he cuts above it at the middle of the thigh at the root of the hip, from whatever part it is prepared, and feels the stone in that part: and his finger shall not be moved from the stone, pressing under it: and let the section be small at first.
Then he inserts a probe above that incision.
If therefore he feels the stone, then let him add to the incision according to the quantity proportionate to what the stone issues forth from it.
And know that there are many kinds of stone. From these things is small, and large, gentle and rough, long, and round having branches.
Therefore, know its kind, as it shall be signified to you by this over that which you see.
If blood overcomes you, then add crushed zegerib to the place and hold it for one hour until the bleeding stops.
If a bleeding wound overcomes you, and you know that the blood is flowing from an artery that has been cut: then place powder over the location, and bind it with little pieces of a suitable bandage: and do not move it: and dismiss the stone, and do not extract it.
Perhaps the weak woman will die.
Then, care for the wound.
When therefore the sharpness of the blood has subsided after days, and the place has rotted, then return to your operation until the stone emerges.
On cutting a hydrocele.
Chapter LXII.
The ramie of water is not, except for a collection of moisture in the white sifac, which is under the skin containing the testicle; and it is called sifac. And sometimes it is in the own tunic which nature has prepared for it in the part of the scrotum, until it seems to be: which is another egg, and it is the skin of the testicle between the white sifac, which we have said; and this is not done except rarely.
And this kind of branching is produced from weakness which happens in the testicles: therefore this matter flows to them.
And sometimes it happens from a blow upon the testicles.
And this moisture has many colors. Either its color is sloping toward yellowness, or it is reddish-blood colored, or it is dark, black, like feces, or it is watery white, and this is the most common of these.
If it is in a white band, as we said, then the abscess is round to a short length, like the shape of an eye; and the testicle does not appear because moisture holds it back on all sides.
And if there is moisture in the own cloth, then an abscess is round with a part of egg white, and therefore a man thinks that it is another egg.
And if humidity is between the skin of the testicles and the white tunic, then it falls under sensation.
When therefore you wish to know the knowledge of the color of moisture, then experience the color of moisture in an abscess with a square having been inserted, whose form preceded.
Therefore, according to what emerges from the trace of the introduction, judge that which is between them.
When therefore we come to treatment with iron, then it is necessary that you instruct the sick person, that he be bled if possible, and see his body full.
Then it is laid back on its back over a somewhat elevated thing, and cloths are placed beneath it.
Then sit you on his left side, and bid the minister to sit on his right side, who shall extend his rod to one of the two sides of the skin of the testicles, and to the part called "mirach" of the abdomen.
Then take a wide spatula and cut the skin of the testicles from the middle lengthwise, as far as almost the pubic bone: and let the incision be made according to the right line which divides the skin of the testicles, until it reaches the white covering: and scrape this off and observe, or carefully avoid cutting into this, so that you do not sever it: and let your scraping be on the part that hangs with the egg more: and carefully examine with the scraping according to the quantity that is possible to you.
Then pierce the syringe full of water with a wide perforation and draw out all the water. Then separate between the two lips of the incision with hooks, and extend the scalpel upwards, and do not touch the skin containing the testicles: and cut the scrotum however you can, either in its entirety or piecemeal, especially its subtle side.
For if you do not carefully examine it, there is no safety in its incision, but water returns.
If, however, an external egg proceeds from its shell during your operation: then when you have completed the incision of the wound, reduce it back in.
Then gather together the two skin flaps of the testicles with a suture.
Then care for it as for other wounds, until it is healed.
If you find a corrupted egg from another blackness, then it is necessary that you ligature the vessels which are suspensory, fearing the flow of blood.
Then cut away the testicle with its suspensory ligament, and extract the egg: afterwards take care of it as we have said.
If water is gathered in two parts, then know that there are two branches: therefore dry the other part according to what you have done in the other one equally.
And if it seems fit to you that there be one operation, then do so; afterward wipe away the blood.
And introduce into the sections cloth submerged in oil, or in rose-colored oil; and place before the opening another piece of cloth which you have submerged in wine and oil, and expand it over the two testicles, and the miracle of the belly; and place above doubled cloths, and are small rolls; and bind them above with a bandage which is having six according to this form.
Then two cloths are taken, and they are sewn, and they are filled with carminative, according to this likeness: and the ends by which it is pressed are made of felt, or damp wool: and they are assembled with the binding in the lumbar brace: and one end takes over the anus up to the back, and the second takes to the chest part: and two ends above the two lower hips, and two other ends above the two groins, and the whole binding is assembled in the lumbar brace.
And sometimes this branch is treated artificially with a cautery at the place of the incision with iron: and it is, that you take a thin knife-shaped cautery, and cut with it the skin of the testicles: and it is ignited, according to what we have narrated: until when it reveals the white sifac containing water: then take the cautery, according to this form.
It assimilates like the Greek letter.
Then pierce it with that, and it is ignited until all moisture departs.
Then extend the scalpel with hooks, and scrape away with a fine burning cautery, and cut into it as much as is possible for you, until you have removed all of it.
And be careful from the egg, lest fire touch it.
And know that this operation is more healing and farther from blood flow, and better than the operation with incision.
If, however, something contrary happens to you at the time of incision, or at the time of cauterization, an abscess that is hot, or bleeding, or something else: then it is necessary that you cure what is contrary to you from it with the cure that is suitable for it, according to what was said before.
If, however, the sick person is fearful and does not await this operation because of its horror: then administer the perforation as I narrate it: and it is.
When it is made certain to you by that which we said of significations, that the ramus is watery; then it is necessary that you make the sick person sit upon a seat elevated.
Then pierce the abscess in its lower part with a wide spatula: and place the perforation according to the length of the body, and let the opening be wide until water runs through completely.
Then place over the common location a cloth and tie it, and allow it to run until the residue of water runs out; then care for it until the wound heals.
If however the contrary is that of the water's exit at the hour when you perforate it; and this is not otherwise, because the white panniculus makes a contrary force in the wound opening, and prevents the exit of water: then it is necessary to insert a feather into the wound, or an instrument with which hydropic water is extracted, whose shape preceded: or add a little to the operation of the wound.
And know that water returns and is gathered after six months, or about those.
When therefore it is gathered together, then it shall be returned according to the same mode, and the sick person shall pass his days.
On the treatment of fleshy branches.
Chapter LXIII.
Know that in sectioning above this branch, it is due to fear leading to harm in many situations.
Therefore it seems to me his discharge from that is salutary.
And I am remembering the operation on it, and the appearance of the abscess.
Therefore I say, that many abscesses occur in bodies, of which some are formed in the testicles: and this comes about from many causes, namely. Either from an excess of sharp, acute pain, which flows down to the testicles.
Or by percussion.
And the color of an abscess is according to the color of the body, and pain is not found in it, and it is a grave abscess.
And perhaps it is a stony abscess, whose color is dusky, and there is no feeling in it.
And sometimes it happens from the tying of arteries and their inflation: as has already been recalled above: or from the inflation of veins.
Therefore, what is from them due to the inflation of the arteries, is known by the arrangement of the abscess, when you compress it with your fingers.
And you should not touch it at all.
That which is done by inflation of the veins, does not disperse anything when compressed with fingers. And now it is possible that a section can be made on this kind of thing, and on the remaining flesh: and it is, as to cut the skin of the testicles.
Then extend the egg upwards and remove it with a white cloth: and free the suspension from the vessels, and tie the vessels: and cut the suspension after you have freed it from every part of the parts of the wound.
If therefore the egg is consolidated with those fleshly matters born, then it ought that you draw the egg, and cut into it. And if there is adherence between something from the siphon, or in what is between vessels: then it is necessary that you free the entire adhesion, and cut it with a round incision.
If however the birth of flesh is in the place of adherence which is behind; then it is necessary that you cut the whole of it, and extract the egg, as we have said. When therefore your operation is complete, then fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine; then take care of it with the rest of the cure until it heals.
On the treatment of branches, which is with a vine.
Chapter LXIV.
An ulcer is a boil enclosed by some kind of wrapping, similar to a hernia, with softening of the testicles; and it makes difficult movement over the weak one, and exercise, and walking.
And in the healing of this illness there is fear, because of the remembrance of that which preceded it.
Truly, it is necessary that we speak of the operation according to what the first ones did. Therefore I say that it is necessary that you make the sick person sit on a raised seat.
Then make an incision with a wide sharp spade-like instrument transversely into the direct vessels, until the vessels are discovered.
Then scrape from every part, as we have told you in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples.
Then dry it in the middle section straight according to the length of the body, and extract what is gathered from foul-smelling corrupt moistures.
Then care for a wound as with the care of other wounds, in which pus is to be generated, so that vessels which nourish one testicle fall away.
It is not evil because of it.
If it happens that the veins are all cut by a wound, then they must be removed with the testicles so that the egg is not deprived of nourishment because of the incision and does not waste away or burn up and be without benefit from them.
On the treatment of intestinal volvulus. Chapter LXVIII.
Therefore intestines descend from that rupture to one testicle.
And this rupture is either from a tearing, or an extension of it.
And these two kinds occur from many causes. Or by percussion. Or by jumping. Or with shouting. Or by elevating a heavy thing, and similar things.
And a sign, when it is from the extension of the siphon.
This is what happens gradually over a long time, and does not happen suddenly: and it is an abscess equal to the depth; because of this, the siphon compresses the intestine.
And its sign when it is from a cut in the skin, because it causes a sudden violent pain from its beginning: and it is an abscess different, appearing under the skin nearby; and this is because of the exit of the intestine, and its course to the outside of the skin.
And sometimes it comes out with a piece of intestine: and this is called Intestinal Ream; and the piece: and sometimes it is done with wind.
And sometimes feces run into the intestines and are retained there: and this is harmful to the sick person because it causes bad pain, especially when it is pressed upon.
And in the treatment of this kind of disease with iron there is fear: therefore it ought to be guarded against accidents.
And the way of operating is that you order the sick person to bring back the intestine with his hand into the cavity of his body, if he obeys the return.
Then he is laid back on his neck between your hands; and raise his legs.
Then extend the skin that follows the skin above, and cut the skin of the testicles entirely along its length.
Then fix hooks on the two lips of the incision, according to what you need to open the incision with them: and let the incision be according to the quantity, as far as is possible, so that an egg may come out of it.
Then scrape the spermatic cord and what is under the skin of the testicles until when it reveals a white, hard scrotum from all parts: then introduce your index finger into what follows the testicle, into what is between the white scrotum, which is under the skin, and the second scrotum, and separate with it the adhesion which is in the posterior part.
Then move with your right hand to the interior of the skin of the testicles: and with this extend the white cloth upward, with your left hand: and elevate the testicle with the cloth to the part of the section: and order the assistant to extend the testicle upwards: and you dissolve the adhesion, which is behind complete solution.
And search with your fingers so that there is nothing there from the intestine rolled up in the white hard cloth.
If you find anything from it, then drive it down to the lower belly.
Then take a needle with a thick string made of ten threads: and introduce it into the last sifach, that is, the tunic which is under the skin of the testicles which follows the section: then cut the extremities which protrude from the thread until there are four threads.
Then arrange some of them over some with a figure in the shape of a cross: and tie them with alsifach, which we said before, because it is under the skin ligament of the testicles, firmly, until no part of the vessels, which nourish them can send anything to them; so that a hot abscess does not occur from there.
And place again the ligament second outside the first ligament, long from it by less than two fingers.
And after these two ligaments are let go from the siphash, which is under the skin of the testicles, the quantity of the size of a finger: and cut the rest all according to the roundness, and take out from it the ovum.
Then dry in the lower part of the skin of the testicles make a cut from which blood and pus run, as we have said before.
Then administer wool soaked in oil, and place it in the wound: and administer the bandage that we have mentioned.
And sometimes a white lead (sifach) which we have mentioned is cauterized after its incision, fearing a flow of blood.
It often happens.
And let the ligament be loosened until it falls of itself.
If, however, his case is delayed, then it will be rinsed with hot water: and put on top of it what we have said, until it falls.
Then care for the wound with the rest of wound care, until it is healed.
On the Windpipe.
Chapter LXVI.
In this treatise I have not seen anyone who has dared to treat it with iron.
And first of all they said that it is done as we narrated in the Rue which is with the Vine.
That is, as you bind the bowels after incision over them with ease below: then dry in the middle, and care lastly with that which opens it, until the bowels fall. And care for the wound, according to what we said, until it is healed.
On rupture that occurs in the groin.
Chapter LXIV.
When a rupture occurs in the groin, as we have said, and the place is prominent and nothing from the intestines descends to the testicles; and if it does descend, it is small, and returns every hour; but if it is prolonged with it for a time, a fissure is added in the sifach until the intestines descend into the sifach.
And this happens from extension of the sifach, which is in the groin, as we have said.
That is because it extends; then it softens, and the place becomes pus-filled and prominent.
And its treatment is with a cautery, as its narrative preceding this has stated.
And sometimes it is treated with iron, according to this method: and let the sick person lie on his back between your hands.
Then dry the place of rupture and abscesses and prominent, with a cut across, according to the quantity of three fingers.
Then tighten the alsifak and, which are under the skin, until when the white sifach is revealed, which is under the skin that follows it.
Then take a probe and place it on the prominent spot from the scrotum and press it deep into the belly.
Then sew the two prominent places above the extremity of the radius from the sifach, and connect one with the other with a suture; then extract the extremity of the radius.
And do not cut the omentum at all, nor pull the intestine, nor anything else, as I have taught you to do in the treatment of a rupture of the intestine. Then comes the care of wounds.
When therefore you cut the threads, cleanse it, and restore the wound until it solidifies.
If the wound is contracted, and there is no prominence of the rupture.
And a cautery is better in this place; because it is nearer to health.
On softening the skin of the testicles.
Chapter LXVIII.
Many times the skin of the testicles is softened in some men, because of which the flesh which is between them is softened, and its appearance is defiled.
Therefore it is necessary for him who is asked to cure this, that he make the sick person lie upon his back, and cut the whole skin which has been softened over the natural skin. Then he will bring together the two lips with suture: and if you wish, sew in the first place the excess of softened skin with three sutures, or four, and a firm suture.
Then care for the healing of the remaining wounds, until they heal, and the threads fall away.
On Castration.
Chapter LIX.
Know that castration is forbidden in our law: and for this reason it was permitted to me not to remember it in my book; and it is not necessary to remember it, except for two modes.
One of these is that it should be in the knowledge of a physician when he is asked about it: and that he may know the cure of him who has it.
And another method is that we often need the castration of certain animals for our benefit, such as rams, goats, and cats, and similar animals.
Therefore I say that castration is done in two ways. Or through rubbing.
Either through a fissure, and section.
In that which is done by friction, the way of operation is: that we make the animal sit in hot water until its testicles soften and become pliable and hang down; then rub them with your hand until they dissolve and do not appear under touch.
In castration by a slit and incision, it is necessary to hold the animal and press the skin of its testicles with the left hand.
And this way of castration is better because it is done by attrition: for perhaps attrition leaves something of the testicles, wherefore the animal desires copulation.
Then care for the wound until it heals.
On the treatment of a hermaphrodite in two ways.
Chapter LXX.
A hermaphrodite is from males according to two modes.
One of them is because it appears where the following space is, or in the skin of the testicles, where there is between two testicles, a figure like a woman's vulva, which has hair: and sometimes urine flows from that which is in the skin of the testicles.
In women there is one kind, and it is the vulva of a woman above the comb like small testicles of a man, protruding to the outside: of which one is like the priapus of a man, and two like two testicles.
And the cure of three kinds, two from men, and one kind from women, is: because it is necessary that you cut the added flesh until the impression of it escapes.
Then care for the wounds remaining to be healed.
In the second kind of men, from which urine comes forth, which is in the skin of the testicles, there is no operation, nor is there any cure at all.
On the incision of the labium majus and the protruding flesh in all women.
Chapter LXXI.
It is possible that a protrusion is added above the natural thing, until it becomes soiled and ugly in appearance; and sometimes it is magnified in some women to such an extent that it expands like in men, and comes even to the point of intercourse.
Therefore you ought to hold the superfluity of tissue with your hand, or with a hook, and make an incision; and do not reach the end of the incision, especially in the deep part of the root, lest blood flow occurs.
Then care for the wound itself, until it is healed.
Flesh that has grown is flesh that is born in the opening of the womb until it fills it, and perhaps it emerges to the outside according to the likeness of a tail. And because of this some first call the ailment "tailed.
Therefore we ought to cut it as we cut a hernia, and treat it until it heals.
On the treatment of Al-Ratica, which is a woman's fistula that is not perforated.
Chapter LXXII.
The vulva of a woman should be unperforated or have a small opening.
And it is either natural or accidental.
An accident occurs from illness that precedes it; and indeed it happens either from flesh added naturally, or pus fine or thick; and it happens either in the depth of the womb, or on its sides, or on its upper part, or lower part; and it forbids intercourse and impregnation, and childbirth, and perhaps it forbids menstruation.
And its knowledge is made by the appearance of the midwife, if pregnancy is apparent near.
If it is not apparent, then seek it with your fingers, or with a rod.
If the swelling is from a superficial abscess and is close to both lips, then hasten, and rupture it.
And it is, as you place little balls upon the two lips.
Then place your fingers of both hands together, and let the woman lie on her back with her legs spread wide.
Then extend the two lips with force until the subtle siphon is torn apart and the opening is revealed.
Then take wool and soak it in oil, and place it over the area: and let the woman every day, so that the place does not congeal with another vice.
If however the  sifac is thick and coarse: then it is necessary to cut it with a spatula broad similar to a myrtle leaf.
If the wound is from flesh, then suspend it with hooks and cut into it: and have with you medicinal agents that will stop the flow of blood without biting, such as acacia, and dragon's blood, and also a mixture with egg white.
Then administer a lead pipe wide, so that the wound does not close quickly, hold it for several days; and administer linen from dry flax, then care for the rest of the cure, until it heals.
And sometimes a birth of flesh occurs in the womb. It is therefore necessary that it be cut according to this method: as long as there is no cancerous ulcer, for a cancerous ulcer which is in the womb should not be opposed with iron at all.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids, Athihelil, and the redness of the vulva in women.
Chapter Seventy-Third.
Hemorrhoids indeed are an opening of the veins' mouths, so that much blood runs continually from them.
When hemorrhoids are old, they become piles: and I have already said in the division of their kinds, and signs of them: and I shall say here what remedies they receive from them, and what they do not.
Therefore I say that hemorrhoids which are in the opening of the womb, and do not appear to the sense, then there is no cure for them with iron.
Those which are within the opening of the womb over which the sense falls are those that are cured.
Therefore, it is necessary that you introduce the woman into a cold house.
Then extend the atheril with forceps, or with a rough cloth, and cut it from its roots.
Then pulverize upon them at the flow of blood from one powder of incisions without corruption: such as acacia, and dragon's blood, and so on, and things similar to these.
Then he shall drive his feet against the wall for one hour.
Afterwards place it in cold water.
If the bleeding persisted, then make her sit in a decoction of sumac, and bark of pomegranate, and roosters, and similar things.
Then take barley flour and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a poultice with it on his back.
If blood is cut with it, that is good: and if not, make it adhere to the back with sponges, and pads, without scraping.
Then take wool and immerse it in the juice of tharadith, or the juice of arnoglossa, or the juice of alaulat branches, that is, aglantar, Pontic wine, and make it adhere to the lion's mane.
When therefore the abscess rests, then care for the place with ointment until it heals.
Albarth and red is similar to heads of alhaasse, and is rough in appearance.
Therefore, you should cut what appears from it, according to what I said in the previous point equally: and take care of it until it heals.
Of the piercing of the Extirations which occurs in the womb.
Chapter LXXIV.
Many kinds of abscesses occur in the womb, such as cancer, and stone abscesses, and ulcers, and buboes, and blisters, that is, herpes, aestiomemus, and fistulas, and hemorrhoids, and ragadiae, and thelil, and hot abscess.
And I have indeed already said all these ailments and their kinds, and their signs, and their cures in the division: it is necessary that I say in this treatise about a hot abscess which happens in the womb, when it is from abscesses which collect pus, and you wish to know how its opening is made with iron.
Therefore, it is necessary that you consider.
Then if the pain of an abscess in its beginning is acute with percussion, and heat, and fever: and you see it red: if sensation falls upon it, then do not hasten with its perforation: and care for it with that which helps on maturation, until when the sharpness of accidents rests.
Then it is necessary that you make the woman sit upon a seat which has two seats, and recline, or lean back upon her back, and bring her feet to the lower part of the belly: and let her hips be spread, and put her arms under her knees, and bind each one with a suitable bandage.
Then let the midwife sit at the right side and administer the instrument which opens the orifice of the womb.
Whose form comes in those which are after.
And it is necessary when you wish to administer this instrument, that you fasten with a rod the deep part of the womb of the woman; so that what enters from the instrument be not more than the depth of the womb, and harm the weak one.
If the instrument is more than deep, then you should place pads on the roof of the deep uterus so that the entrance of the whole instrument into the deep uterus is prevented: and you should place a winding, which runs in the instrument, from the upper side: and so that it holds the instrument, and so that the minister revolves the winding until the deep uterus is opened.
When therefore it appears as a protrusion, and is touched by hand, and is soft and pliable: then it is necessary that one should cut it at its head with a broad spatula.
When the pus has been evacuated, then it is necessary to place a linen pad submerged in rose oil in the wound; or green oil, which has some astringency. And place the pad, and withdraw the section deep into the matrix.
And place the exterior over the matrix, and over the wool comb submerged in water, in which mallows have been boiled.
Then it is treated after two days with ointment which is fitting for it, until it heals.
And sometimes the womb and wound are washed so that it is clystered with water and honey; then with water in which lily root or long asarabacca has been boiled; then return to ointment.
If a wound is hidden inside the womb, then it is necessary to prevent its healing with iron, rather care for it with what we have said in the division.
The doctrines of obstetrics, how to treat embryos living, according to the unnatural figure.
Chapter LXXI.
It is necessary for an obstetrician to know first of all the form of a natural birth.
Therefore, from these signs you will know that when you see a woman pressing down below, and she desires to smell the air, and is lifted up above her which is on her from childbirth, and hastens the exit of the embryo: then you will know that this birth is according to the natural figure, and its exit is above its head, and secondary with it; or suspended, or hanging from the navel. When therefore you see these signs, then it is necessary that the belly be compressed so that the embryo may descend quickly.
Whoever is beyond this birth, is unnatural, blameworthy.
Because sometimes the fetus emerges on its feet, and its body emerges before its head, and one of its feet, and one of its hands, or sometimes only its head and hand emerge; or perhaps it emerges with its belly, and similar things from these praiseworthy figures.
Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to be prudent, subtle in all these things, and to guard herself from error and failure: and I am showing every figure of them, and how the ingenuity is in each, and shall be signified by that, and shall stand upon it.
When the fetus emerges from the head during its natural birth, and it becomes forceful against the woman, and childbirth becomes difficult for her, and you see that her strength is already weakened: then make her sit upon a seat, or let women hold her; and apply vapors of wool of her vulva with boiled fennel, and with humid oils.
Then the midwife shall insert between her fingers a small spatula, and find with it the second one, and cut it with her nail until it runs which is in it of moisture; and press the womans belly until the fetus descends.
If it does not descend, then a woman must be given an enema of fig seed with sesame oil.
Then command him after an enema that he be compressed: and make him sneeze with the condiment, and hold his mouth and nose for one hour.
For the fetus will immediately emerge.
If two hands of the fetus come out first, it is necessary that you join them together so that you may gradually reduce them with ease.
If it does not yield on entry, then place the woman upon a seat and elevate her feet upwards: then strike the seat against the ground: and let the woman be held so that she does not fall during the concussion.
If therefore the hands do not come out, and the fetus dies: then cut them open, and remove the remainder of the fetus: and tie its hand with a cloth, and draw it out with equality; for itself will come out.
The exit of the embryo from the feet of its mother.
When the fetus comes out on its feet, then it is necessary to push them upward; then turn the fetus gradually; afterward make it even.
Then he shall take one of his feet and gradually extend it.
When they emerge as far as the hips, then order him to be compressed, and make him sneeze with condiments: for he will emerge, if God wills.
And if it does not come out as we have described, then gradually reduce the fetus until you place it according to its natural form.
For then he will exit with easier passage.
If that which we have recounted is prohibited, then take from the mucilage of aloe, and sesame oil, and gum dissolved: and pound the whole in a mortar with good percussion; then apply it to the vulva of a woman, and below her belly.
Then make her sit in lukewarm water until she obtains a lower backache.
When therefore you see that the lower parts are already heated, then make for him a salve of myrrh: and apply it to him.
When therefore he holds the knife one hour, then make him sit upon a seat.
Then make him sneeze: and hold shut his mouth and nose: and press the lower part of the belly with easy compression.
For the abscess will burst at once.
The exit of the fetus above the knees and hands.
When it comes out according to this form, then one will be able to put his hands into it gradually.
Then she is laid back on her neck, and her feet hang down to the lower part; and she lies on a bed, and clasps her hands.
Then press upon his belly gradually.
Then extract what is under his feet from the dust, until it is prepared in the lower part.
If the fetus does not emerge, then take its feet and move them with a strong motion.
Then press what is above the hypogastrium gradually until the fetus ascends to the upper regions.
Then he will insert his hands and gradually bring out the fetus; and instruct the woman to press until the fetus emerges.
The fetus hangs lengthwise from the hands.
He will invent in the reduction of the hand.
If he cannot reduce it, then raise the woman up, and make her walk about.
If he cannot walk, then make him lie on a bed: and shake his legs with a vigorous shaking.
Then administer the liniment which you have prepared from gums.
If she receives it in childbirth, then make her sit upon a seat.
Then study in reducing the hand, and equalize the fetus according to its natural shape: and make her sneeze, and command her to press herself until it comes out.
The fetus exits through the neck of its mother, with outstretched hands, and its face is toward the back of its mother.
The midwife must hold the fetus in her hand, then turn it gradually and align it with ease.
When therefore it is made equal, then place upon its surface what we have narrated from oil and mucus.
Then command him to be moved gradually.
When therefore you have done that, then make her sit upon a seat, and command her to incline to the right side.
Then order him to press it; and make him sneeze with condiments.
The prepared fetus is laid upon its side.
When it descends to the opening of the womb in this way with a sponge, then split the sponge with your finger until it is emptied of moisture.
If therefore it is suspended over the face of the fetus, and its neck, then cut it from the navel: that it may not be retained, and die.
Then drive the fetus into the insides until you place it as is necessary: and command the woman to compress herself several times: for he himself will come out through a light exit.
The exit of twins, or many fetuses.
Know that twins often are born; and sometimes three, and four.
However, this is foreign and rarely happens.
There are five things outside nature and do not live entirely: and they contain them, although they multiply, according to one: and they are separated by a siphon, distinguishing between them the ligament tied at the navel of each of them.
And sometimes they emerge as one fetus emerges from the natural exit, easily; and they emerge from a praiseworthy exit, as we have narrated. If some of these are difficult during labor and arrive at what we said from unnatural figures, then care for them as we have narrated: and let the midwife be subtle, and do what she does with ease and slowness, and devise according to every figure with that which is prepared for her from ingenious guidance to health.
Sometimes one, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and more than ten are formed in the womb: and it has already been verified to me that a woman miscarrying emitted seven, and another fifteen, all formed.
That which was done by measurement of the glorious wise man.
Therefore, this whole thing ought to be in the science of Obstetrics. Perhaps it will come to him similar to that: he should therefore oppose it with it as is necessary.
On the extraction of a dead fetus.
When you treat a dead fetus with what I said in the division of medicine, and it does not come out, and you are forced to use surgery with your hand, then you must consider.
If therefore the woman is of sound virtue and is not with any of those things from which her destruction is feared; then it ought to be that the woman be laid upon the bed on her back, and her head be inclined downwards, and her legs elevated: and let the minister hold her by two parts, or fasten her to the bed, so that her body may not be drawn out during the extraction of the fetus.
Then moisten the bone of the uterus with oily humid substances along with althea gum, fennel seed, and flaxseed. Then let the midwife anoint her hand with these oils and ointments, then introduce it into the uterus with ease.
Then he will look for a place where he will set the hooks from the fetus, and places suitable for it.
Therefore consider then, if the fetus is prepared to descend upon its head: then fix hooks into its eyes, or on its neck, or in its mouth, or on its palate, or under its beard, or in its clavicle, or in places near the ribs, and under the hypogastrium.
If however the descent is upon his feet, then in the hip bone and ribs of his middle.
And it is necessary that he hold the hook with his right hand: and place its curve in that which is between the fingers of the left hand: and introduce it with his hand with facility, and fix the hook in one of those places which we have said, until he comes to the empty thing.
Then it shall be extended by an equal extension, and not let the extension be according to straightness only, but rather be moved to every part, so that the exit may be relieved; just as is done with a tooth when it is being extracted.
And it is necessary that what is between them be made more flexible.
If a part is retained from that, then the midwife ought to anoint some fingers with oil and introduce them from the side so as to rotate what is held with them.
If therefore a part of the fetus comes out, then change the hooks to another place which is higher: do this until the whole fetus emerges.
If therefore the hand comes out before other parts, and it is not possible to reduce it because of its constriction: then it is necessary that a cloth be wrapped over it.
Then extract it until the whole thing comes out, cut it either at the joint of the foot or in the elbow; and thus you must do with one hand, and with both feet.
If however the head of the fetus is large, or it has constriction at its exit, or there is water gathered in its head: then it is necessary that he insert between his fingers a pointed spatula, and find it with it and extract the water; or break it apart with an instrument called Almisdac: whose form comes with the forms of the other instruments in the chapter which is after this.
Similarly, if the fetus has a large head, then it is necessary to cut open the birth canal; or extract it with forceps, as we have said.
Then draw out the bones with forceps.
If the head comes out and is tied at the fork: then it should be sought until the moisture which is in the chest is discharged.
If it does not complicate, nor obey an exit: then cut off the head piecemeal, according to what is possible for you.
If it is an abscess or hydrops in the lower abdomen, then it must be incised until the moisture drains from it.
If however the fetus is on its feet, then its extraction is easy, and its direction to the mouth of the womb is light.
If it is constricted in the belly, or the chest: then it is necessary that you remove it with the cloth which you have wrapped on your hand: and find the belly, or chest, until it heals what is within them.
If the remaining limbs are removed and the head returns, then the midwife shall insert her left hand. If therefore the opening of the womb is open, then he shall insert his hand into the depth of the womb, and with it seek out the head, and draw it up with his fingers to the opening of the womb: then he shall insert into it one hook, or two hooks, and draw it up with that.
If the mother's jaw is constricted, because of a hot abscess that happens to it; then it is not necessary for it to be scraped over, rather it is necessary then to administer an effusion of moist, fatty things; and administer plasters; and sit in waters which soften and moisten.
If the fetus is on its side, then it is possible to equalize it; then administer what we said about the living fetus.
If that is not possible, then cut it in pieces and remove it.
And it is necessary that you let nothing out of the second [instrument] inside at all.
When therefore you have completed your operation, then administer what we have said about hot abscesses which occur in wombs.
If it happens that there is a bleeding, then let it descend into water of astringents and administer the rest of the treatment.
And I have indeed seen a woman, in whose belly a fetus had died; then she became pregnant again over it, afterwards another fetus also died.
Therefore, a long time after this, he developed an abscess at his navel, and it became swollen until it opened, and it began to discharge pus.
Therefore I was called upon to cure him, and treated him for a long time; and the wound did not close.
I therefore placed upon it from certain plasters of strong traction: and it emerged from the place bone.
Then after some days, another bone came out.
I was amazed therefore, since there is no opening in the belly.
Therefore, I thought, because they were from the bones of a dead fetus.
I therefore inquired about the wound, and extracted many bones, with a woman being in better dispositions of herself; and now she has lived thus for a long time, and sends out from the place a little pus.
And I did not set forth this foreign thing here unless it contained knowledge, and aid to that which the physician craftsman administers with the hand from healing.
On the forms of instruments necessary for the extraction of a fetus.
Chapter LXXVII.
Here is the shape of the Straitjacket, by which books are leveled, to which two whorls are equally placed at the two extremities of two logs.
Nevertheless, this vertigo ought to be of a finer constriction; and that it may be so, let it be made either out of ebony or out of boxwood.
And let the width of all the wood be like two fingers: and the edge of each of the two is like one finger, and the length of each of them is a palm and a half: and in the middle of the two pieces of wood are two additions of the same kind of wood, which are already fastened on both sides, whose length is half a palm and a little more: and the width of each is like two fingers, or a little more.
And these two additions are inserted into the mouth of the womb, so that it may be opened with them when you turn two whirls.
The form of dizziness when the womb is opened.
Another form, similar to this one, more delicate and lighter.
Make it from ebony wood, or boxwood, according to the likeness of forceps.
Nevertheless, at its end there should be two additions, as you see here above: and the length of the whole addition from these is like a palm: and the width of both is, two fingers.
When therefore you wish to open the womb with it, then make her sit on a bed, with her feet hanging down, with that which is between her legs open.
Then introduce these two additions joined into the matrix: and you are holding the lower end of the instrument between his hips.
Then open your hand with an instrument, as you do with forceps, equally according to the amount that you wish from the opening of the mouth of the womb, until the midwife does what she wants.
The form of vertigo which the ancients called the form of the driving force by which the fetus is driven.
The form of a small anvil for crushing the head. Form of a wound having one spine.
Form of forceps having two spines.
Form of forceps with serrated teeth, with which the head of a fetus is crushed.
The shape of a spatula has two extremities for cutting off the head.
The shape of two spatulas, also called awls.
All these instruments are practiced and the more they multiply in kind and are prepared by the craftsman, the faster they are for their operation and the higher they are among men, because of their quantity.
Therefore, you should not disdain from among these instruments that one be prepared for you.
Their necessity is inexcusable.
On the Extraction of a Second Stone.
Chapter LXXVIII.
When the secundina is retained at childbirth, then it is necessary that you instruct the weak woman to retain her breath.
Then make him sneeze with the condiment: and grasp your hand over his mouth, and his nostrils.
If therefore it comes out through this, it is good.
If not: then take a pot, and perforate in the lid a hole: and put in it herbs that open the matrix, such as  calamentum, rue, and agrimony, and chamomile, and marshmallow, and willow bark, and centaury: take all these herbs, or some of them, and submerge them with water, and put them over the fire.
Then place a bundle of reeds over the opening of the container and the other end in the uterus; and hold it until vapor reaches the cavity of the uterus.
Then make her sneeze, as we have said.
For Secundina will easily come out.
If however it remains after this treatment and does not come out: then order the midwife to submerge her hand in sesame oil, or a thick althea poultice. Then he introduces it into the vulva, and seeks with it the Second one.
When therefore he has found it, then let him take it and extend it gradually.
If it is attached deep in the womb, then he will insert his hand, according to what we have recounted, until he finds the Secondine and extracts it gradually according to straightness, so that the womb does not fall down at a violent pull: indeed it ought to be turned with ease to the right and left sides; then add in the quantity of the attraction.
For it then obeys, and is preserved, and departs from adhesion.
If the pelvic bone is constricted, as we have already narrated: care for it with sneezing and from medication of a pot with herbs.
If it does not come out with all that we have narrated, then beware of tiring yourself on its repeated extraction.
It is true that what comes out to the mouth of the uterus from it should be tied to the hip of a woman.
Then irrigate it with ointment tetrapharmakon.
For it will indeed rot after days, and dissolve, and it will come out.
But when it decays, a bad smell arises from it to the stomach and head, and harms the weak one.
Therefore it is necessary that appropriate fumigations be administered to it.
Some ancients already experimented with fumigation of nasturtium and dried figs.
The form of the instrument with which a woman is fumigated during the retention of the Second [menstrual cycle] and menstruation.
Make from a jar similar to an alembic, or from grease; and place the broad end over fire; and let fumigation be placed over prunes: hold it until that fumigation is consumed; and repeat another.
On the treatment of an unperforated anus.
Chapter seventy-ninth.
Many boys are born with their anuses not perforated, which have already been examined by a subtle sifac.
Therefore, let the midwife pierce that siphon with her finger; and if not, pierce it with a sharp spatula; and let her beware of the edge, lest she touch it.
Then place over it a cloth soaked in wine and oil.
Then care for it with ointment until it is healed.
If however it is deemed necessary to place a plug, then put in the hole a lead pipe for many days, and remove it when the child wishes to recover.
And it sometimes happens that a fistula occurs in the anus even from the closing of a wound or an abscess.
Therefore it is necessary that that consolidation be cut, then treated with what we have said from treatment and lead. On the treatment of fistulas that occur in the lower part.
Chapter LXXX.
fistulas which occur in the lower [region], are Knot and Swelling which occur near the anus of the mouth: or in the space of one part: and it is one fistula, or more.
When therefore that Knotting becomes obsolete, it is opened and a watery humidity, white, or a subtle pus flows out of it.
And sometimes there are among these penetrating fistulas.
And there are among these fistulas when they are in a penetrating space up to the bladder, and up to the male organ's passage.
And they are penetrating up to the hip joint and to the knot of the tail.
From this it is known if a fistula penetrates to the anus, even a non-penetrating one, as you introduce your index finger into the anus: and introduce a thin probe into the fistula from bronze or iron: when there is no twisting.
If there is a twisting in it, then introduce into it a thin lead probe or a horsehair probe until you feel the probe, or the probe in your finger.
If you do not feel it thoroughly, and nothing proceeds from the hole by excretion, nor windiness, nor worm as I said; then know that it is not penetrating: therefore hasten to treatment.
And when a fistula is penetrating to the bladder or to the urinary tract, then its signification is the excretion of urine from it, and the prohibition of it from this so that the place may be consolidated with medicines.
If it penetrates to the joint of the hip or to the bone of the hip: then its sign is that the probe arrives there, if there is no crookedness up to the bone: and finding of pain around the area, and that pus comes out of it always: and that medicine does not avail in it, nor does it solidify with ointment.
And in these fistulas that penetrate through it there is no treatment at all; and the treatment of them is toil and vanity for him, out of foolish physicians, upon whom it is formed. In that which is not penetrating, and not old, healing is expected with a saw, according to what I tell you, and I have already proven it: and it is, that the sick person lie between your hands on his back: and raise his legs up to his hips, and let his hips be inclined to his belly.
Then introduce a lead probe, or of copper, if there is winding in the fistula, until you know where it reaches the tip.
If he feels her weak around the anus, then you ought to insert your index finger into the anus.
If therefore you feel in your finger that something has already pierced through itself, detected besides that which you feel between your finger and the skin or flesh: then you know for certain that it is piercing; do not therefore labor on it, because it is not healing, as we have said.
However, they say that in some people flesh heals and with the medicine which is hoped to help, it is as if fine cauteries are put into the fistula according to its size, as was said before, and you introduce the burning one into the fistula until it reaches near the anus.
Then repeat this twice, or thrice, until you know that all those added and filtered parts of flesh, which are like the quill of a birds feather, have been burnt.
Then take care of it with a covering of butter until the burned flesh has come out; then take care of it with ointments that generate and consolidate flesh.
If therefore he is healed, it is good.
And if not, then it is never cured with any other treatment.
And if the probe goes out and does not reach your finger which is in the anus, and there is between it and the probe a thick layer of flesh, or skin; and you see an opening in that which follows the surface of the skin, then cut the skin from the beginning of the opening, and you go cutting with the probe which is in the fistula, until the cutting reaches where the end of the probe arrives, and the probe is freed and falls.
Then cleanse those filtered meats which are similar to the quill of a bird's feather, so that nothing remains from them.
If blood overcomes you, and loosens between you and your operation so that you cut those flesh: then better that which is done, and more rapid help, cauterize it with fire, or with a sharp medicine.
Because a cautery with fire gathers good qualities,  the burning of those added tissues, and the cutting off of blood, and the drying up of humors.
Then treat it with licenses wrapped in butter, or ground celery stalks, until the place emits pus and those charred meats come out into the pus.
Then the wound is treated with ointments that consolidate it and generate hard flesh; and there are medicines which have astringency and dryness.
For when they are restored, then it is already healed: and do not fear a repetition. If however fistula has already come to the depth of the anus, and extends from the superfluity of the body: then introduce your finger into the anus, and inquire with it.
If therefore you feel a wound, and between you and it is a covering of silk or flesh, and it is near to penetration: then there is no operation on that, unless according to the way of trust and hope.
That is, because it is administered in one of three ways: either you cauterize it, as we have said; or you cut it until you reach its hollow space, so that it is possible for you to insert a ligature, and the cure from next.
And do not proceed much with the incision, so that you do not cut the ligament containing the anus, and it happens over the weak exit of excrement without volition. Then take care of it as we have said. Perhaps it will heal: or stretch the wound itself and clean it after drying it almost to the anus, as we have said, either with a probe, or with another instrument of sharp extremity.
Then purify those filtered tissues that are in the section, as far as you can with examination.
Then endeavor the restoration of the whole wound with a cut, and an opening above where it is consolidated; and let a fistula remain open in the inner part of the anus, and it will be lighter upon the weaker [part].
And sometimes a fistula is treated in this way: and it is when you insert a probe into the fistula: and it is on the side of the anus near the surface of the body with skin and edge of the anus: then take a probe with a perforated end, which is like an awl, that is, prepared leather, according to this form.
And introduce into it a thread wrapped from five threads, and about it.
Then insert a probe with a thread into the fistula until it reaches its cavity.
If therefore it is penetrating in the margin of the anus internally near, then draw out the thread from that opening: so that you introduce your finger into the anus, and draw out the extremity of the thread, and join the two extremities together: and tightly grasp both, and release it one or two days: and the more the thread sinks into the flesh, tighten it well, until those fleshes which are between the two extremities of the thread sink in, and fall: then take care of the wound, until it consolidates and heals.
For you ought not to do it for a wound so that you don't cut into it.
Then do with it as we have said, until it heals.
The shape of a spina knife which is used to make an incision for a fistula, the care of which is very acute, and one part is not acute so that it does not cut what is not necessary, as you see.
Concerning the stitching of hemorrhoids from which blood flows when cut, and the treatment of fissures.
Chapter LXXXI.
There are hemorrhoids in two ways.
Or they are like pieces of charcoal or plums within the anus, or like seeds of a fig.
And of these there are small ones, and large ones: and blood runs from them always, and there is one, and there are many.
And they are outside the anus, and at the extremities of it.
But those things which are outside the anus are, for the most part, very few in moisture, from which runs yellow water or little blood in constant flow; and they are according to the color of the body.
And the cure of it which is within the rectum, is, that you instruct the sick person to strain: and it be expressed until it comes out of the anus, and appear to you atheists.
Therefore also suspend with hooks: or hold them with your finger.
Then cut them at their roots.
If they are not held by the forceps because of their moisture and softening: then take them with a rough cloth, or with a pad from double wool, and remove them with your fingers.
Then cut them open, and apply some hot powders over them after the incision, so that they may take their place as cauterization.
Or cauterize them according to what preceded in the chapter on cauterization.
Then care for them with the rest of the treatment, until they are healed.
If the old woman does not obey evacuation, then cleanse the sick person with a clyster containing a small amount of biting substance, so that it may wash what is in the anus and obey the exit quickly when the sick person expels it.
If, however, they are external to the anus, then their affair is light, easy: and it is as you capture them with your nail, or you capture them with a hook, and cut them.
Then care for them with that which we have said, until they are healed.
And if one shuns cutting with a knife, then it is necessary that you administer suture of them according to this manner.
Take a thread wrapped and insert it into the needle.
Then draw the athil upwards, and make it pierce with a needle at its root on the other side: and wind two ends of the thread onto the needle in the lower part, and let them be lengthwise: and tighten the athil tightly.
Then knot the thread, and extract the needle.
Do this with all atelis, and let go from them one: nor its own, so that it may run out of it superfluity of blood.
Then put over the anus a cloth soaked in rose oil, or oil of cedar, and place it over the anus: and bid the sick man to rest.
Then let it go, until it falls.
When therefore they fall asleep, care for them with ointment and the rest of healing until they are healed.
On the treatment of fissures.
For many times indeed they happen from drying of dung, and constriction of nature.
When therefore they do not heal, and medicine does not work on them: then it is necessary that you scrape with the point of a spatula, or with your fingernail, until they become moist, and the outer skin which prevents their consolidation be removed from them.
Then care for them until they are consolidated as is necessary.
If they do not knit together: then again dress them with more intense reason than the first, until they bleed much, and then they are scraped, and afterwards take care of them until they heal.
On the treatment of inversions of the alar cartilage, both inverted and not inverted; and of Athelil (cartilaginous growths) and Formicae (benign tumors).
Then take care of it; and if you wish, cauterize it according to what preceded in its chapter.
From the athellium, however, there is one small prominence, rough, filtered, round on the surface of the body.
And many times happen in the hands of children.
And its cure is, that you extend the [afflicted area], and cut it: or bind it with a silk thread: or with hair, until it falls off.
And if you wish, cauterize it according to what has been said before with fire, or with a sharp medicine: and now the athelil are eradicated, both inverted and not inverted with the instrument which I shall tell you about. A sting from an ant is also a small eminence filtered and coarse on the surface of the body, penetrating deep: and when it finds cold in it, it feels like a bite from an ant in it, and it happens throughout the body: and most of it happens in the hands.
And its cure is, that you take a tube from the feather of a goose, or the feather of a strong hawk: and place that tube over the Ant, until the circle of the tube contains it from its parts.
Then roll your hand with a probe until you cut what is around the ant: and place it deep in the flesh, and eradicate the ant from its root. And if you wish, make it with a tube of air, or iron, according to this form.
Let the upper part of the tube be drawn up to a height so that the grip on the finger is relieved and its turning is easier.
And if you wish to cauterize a Fornica according to what was previously stated in the cauterization of Aethil in the chapter on cauterization.
On the forms of instruments that are administered to the bowels in ailments of the anus, and the solution of the belly, and colic.
Chapter LXXXIII.
Sometimes a clyster is made from silver, or from electrum, or from cast copper, or hammered copper.
And sometimes these instruments are made small and large, according to those in which they are administered.
Therefore, what is administered in the cure of young children should be little, and those whose anuses are weak or painful, so also their genitals.
Large enema.
Small bladder.
Its shaft, that is, the upper part in which the uterus is tied, should be wide according to this method: and let there be a distinction so that the uterus may be tied as you see, and its lower end which enters the anus, be closed, that is, not open, smooth, gentle, drawing to subtlety: and on one side of it there are two holes, and on the other side one hole.
And let the width of the opening be according to the thickness of the rays, and a little thicker, and let it be one in which medicines are placed from the bladder of an animal; or from sheepskin, which is according to the shape of a small asphodel: whose root is one palm.
When therefore it is placed in that (the womb), it is tightened at the head with a clyster between two distinguishing constrictions with strong force.
Then give him an enema.
And this is the form of the circle of the uterus here depicted, and the foramen. The quality of administering a clyster with it is this: that you fill the rectum or bladder with medicine, which has been heated according to the amount that the patient can tolerate; and beware that it is not too hot or too cold.
Then the patient is laid on his back and his legs are raised to a higher position; and beneath him there is placed a thing called  *inthan*, that is, leather upon which men lie, or linen.
Then anoint the extremity with oil, or with egg white, or with flaxseed mucilage, or something similar.
Then introduce it into the anus with ease.
Then let the attendant take the womb with both hands and press it vigorously until all that is in the intestine is evacuated. Then remove the clyster and let the sick person raise his legs against the wall. If medicine compels him to an outlet, then let him hold it as much as he can.
And if he sleeps with it all night, it is more useful in healing.
If however you give him enemas in diseases of the belly, and his death is hastened, then repeat the enema until he recovers.
If there are hemorrhoids or painful boils in the anus, then let there be a gentle, subtle enema, from enemas which are used for children.
And this be the form of a fine clyster for that which is strict skin.
On the treatment of wounds of the head without fracture of bone.
Chapter LXXXIV.
I have said in the division of the cure of wounds what was fitting for the book, and I will say here the cure of them with hand, and with medicines according to complement.
Therefore I say that wounds are diversified according to how they are made, and according to the place upon which the wound falls.
The things therefore by which wounds are made very often, are such as a stone cast: or the cutting of a sword: or knife: or a blow with a spear, or wood, or arrow: and similar things from many such.
Wounds that are made according to the places of the body are, such as a wound that falls upon the head, or neck, or chest, or belly, or thigh: and similar ones from those limbs.
And I am telling of the treatments of some wounds, that I may put that reasoning and rule over the rest of the wounds.
And I begin with simple head wounds: for the memory of compositions will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore I say.
When a simple wound occurs in the head and there is no fracture of the bone: consider then, if it is from a stone thrown or something similar, and has only broken the skin: and the wound is large, and fear the bad outcome of a hot abscess: then hurry, and immediately perform a cephalic phlebotomy: and do not delay this: and draw out of it blood according to the quantity of its power: if nothing prohibits phlebotomy, especially if it is blood that flows from the wound little.
And let phlebotomy be performed from the opposite side of the wound.
And let the sick person beware of repletion, and wine, and heavy foods.
If something prevents a reduction, then it should be reduced by food, and it should not be brought near meats, nor wine.
And place over the wound if a hot abscess occurs, a poultice infused in rose oil alone, or with wine in which there is astringency.
If you are certain about the hot boil, then place over the wound, if it is fresh with its blood, and has not yet changed the air, the powder which I will tell you about after a little while: and if it has already changed the air, then place on it some ointment until it heals.
If, however, the wound is large, or is from a sword cut, and similar things: and its lips do not gather together by means of little threads, then gather them themselves with sutures, according to what I shall tell in wounds of the belly about their sutures.
If now a wound has been detected by the bone, and it hangs, and there is no retention of it, except in a small suspension; then cut into it.
Then care for the wound with medicines, and restore in it hard flesh in the place of skin, and instruct the infirm person to be nourished with foods that are thick, such as heads and cooked wheat, until it is like porridge; and similar things.
If you find in the skin putrefaction, and it does not adhere to bone, then cut out the whole putrefaction, and throw it away; then take care of it.
If in these wounds is an artery or a vein from which blood flows, and it is not cut by medicines, then inquire about the artery.
If therefore you find it not cut, then cut it with a Spatula, or bind it.
If necessity provokes when that which we said does not help, then cauterize it until the blood is cut off.
Mode of Powdered Flesh.
Take one part of olibanum, two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of unburnt quicklime: grind the whole thing thoroughly, and sift it: then fill a wound with it, and constrict it well with a good band until it adheres well to it and clots with the blood.
Then bind it above with pads and release it, and do not loosen it while it remains, so that it does not gape open.
For it is not removed from him medicine, until he is healed.
Then care for the rest of the treatment until they are healed.
On wounds of the neck.
Chapter LXXXV.
If a wound occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in treatment between it and a wound on the head when it is simple.
If a nerve of the neck or an artery has already been cut, if it is a nerve, there is no use in curing it unless its treatment is carried out with something that causes strong clotting, such as ziniar and zegi and similar things.
Because they harm nerves and contract them.
And you shall not place anything cold upon the wound at all; because the substance of nerves is cold, and its continuation is with the brain, which is most sublime of the members; and let it be treated as healed with medicines mild, such as chalk washed with sweet water several times infused with oil, or with rose oil, and turpentine, and when it is also washed with sweet water: and other mineral stones, in this way, and moist ointments.
If the wound is large, then administer sutures: or tie together its edges with a ligature.
Then care for him until he heals.
If now the depth of a wound is great, or if there is a cavity in the lower part of it, in which pus has already gathered, then pierce it in a more depressed place within it.
If already cut in a wound is an artery and its blood flow has been followed, then separate, or dry it, and bind it: or cauterize it if necessity requires it.
If now the spondele of the throat has fallen in, or the whole, and the wounds have been healed: then gather the lips of skin with suture above the stem of the throat, and do not touch the throat, indeed make it equal to itself, and reduce it back to its natural figure.
Then tighten it with a proper bandage, and leave it for several days.
Then care for it with an ointment that has astringency and drying properties until it heals.
If the wound has already made an impression on the bone, then examine it; and if there are fragments of bone in it, remove all of them, or as many as you can; and what cannot be prepared, leave it until the wound putrefies, and its discharge separates and is relieved.
If the wound is fresh, then sprinkle powder on it which I have recounted.
If however a bone is seen in the wound, and a fistula forms, then care for it with that one whose memory comes to mind in its chapter.
Chapter LXXXVI.
If therefore wind proceeds from the wound, when he breathes out of it who is ill, then know that the wound is mortal.
If it is not deep and is fresh with its own blood: then do not put powder in it from the first hour, nor bind it, so that the blood is not retained in its depth, and returns to the heart, and kills the sick person; but put ointment on it, and dissolve it twice a day.
If ointment is not present to you, then put into the opening of the wound a worn cloth, so that it may draw out what comes forth from it from the moistures; and make that the sick person sleep upon the wound, so that it may heal which gathers in it.
If now three days or more have passed from the wound, and no spasms occur to the sick person, nor an evil tremor of the heart, nor stricture in breathing, and you see the rest of his dispositions good, then know that the wound is safe.
Therefore care for it itself and with permissions, and the rest of the cure, until it is healed.
If, however, healing is excluded and it is always opened, then know that a fistula has already been made.
Therefore, care for it from its own chapter.
And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut and is simple on the surface of the chest or back: then treat it with what preceded regarding suture, if it is large; or with powder, if it is small.
If, however, he has already made an imprint in the bone, and a fragment has come out of it: then inquire about the wound, and hasten to remove those fragments, if they are separated.
If they are not separated, then leave them until the wound putrefies, for extraction will be easier.
The judgment of accidents of wounds in the remaining members is in the cure as we said.
On wounds of the abdomen and the exiting of the intestines, and their emergence.
Chapter LXXXVII.
The rupture which happens to the belly, is great, and medium, and small.
Therefore, sometimes a large intestine, or number of intestines, emerges.
Therefore it is made with an introduction of them, and their sewing stronger and more difficult.
And a small rupture is also difficult to repair in another way.
Therefore, it follows that the reduction is more difficult if you do not hasten in its introduction to its place immediately; because it inflames, opens, and grows larger; therefore the entrance into it becomes difficult.
Therefore, a middle disruption of ruptures is better because with it the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, as it is in these two kinds.
Know that the suture of the vulva is according to four modes.
Two common sutures are used in the suture of the abdomen, and in the suture of other wounds of the body: and two other sutures properly communicate with the rest of the wounds.
But they are more proper with sutures of the abdomen: and I tell you each one with an explanation, and a declaration. I say therefore, that when a wound is small and something comes out of it from the intestine, and it is difficult to reduce it: then this is because of one of two modes.
Or because of the smallness of the rupture, as we have said; or because there is inflation in the intestine because of the coldness of the air.
When therefore that is so, then it is necessary that you heat it, so that you submerge a sponge, or a humid cloth in lukewarm water alone.
Or boil it in water with squill, and cypress, and cumin, and embrocations with it the intestine until the inflation is resolved.
Sometimes it makes wine which has astringency: and it is better than water alone in resolving swelling.
When therefore you see that the swelling has already been resolved, then moisten the intestine with water in which the quince or mallow has been boiled.
For that the entrance of it may be eased with a small thing.
If, however, his return is excused after this cure, then find in the rupture a little, with the instrument with which hemorrhoids are cut.
And the first cure is better when it is prepared than when it is cut; and no force should be used to cut after necessity and lack of instruments.
Let there be a part of it which is twisted, sharp, and another part of it not sharp, and the thin end be not as fine as that of a spatula, but rather be a little duller; and it is like a caida, as you see.
When therefore the wound is enlarged and enters the intestines, then it is necessary that there be a reduction of it according to its natural form in its proper place, if possible above it: because it is better.
When a rupture is widespread in the lower part of the abdomen: then it is necessary that you make the sick person lie on his back, and place his legs higher than his head.
And if it is in the upper part of the belly, then place its head and breast higher than its lower parts.
And similarly if there is a rupture in one of the two parts of the belly, then put your attention and your consideration always on this, that the part in which is the wound be higher than the other part.
And so it is necessary that you administer this in large wounds and in medium-sized wounds.
In small wounds however, place it as it is prepared for you.
Then make it that there be present among your hands a pious assistant, who shall hold the entire rupture with his hand: and bring together its lips.
Then cover up from that he who follows the suture something after something: and this is the way of common suture of one.
And it is, as you receive an awl, or a number of awls according to the quantity of width of the wound.
Then release from the end of the rupture the quantity of the ring finger, that is, of the doctor; and fix one point with a needle, besides which you insert a thread in the two extremities of the skin, with the two extremities of the fascia that is under the skin from the insides, until you make it penetrate from another part, and you have already gathered together two extremities of skin, and two extremities of fascia: and four orders are made.
Then bind with double thread around the wound, several times from two parts simultaneously, until the two lips of the wound are united by a decent gathering.
Then let go of the thickness of the finger also, and place another point in it; afterwards tie it with a thread, as you did with the first point.
Therefore, do not cease doing this with him as much as you need from the awl until you complete the constriction of the whole wound.
And let the needles be of medium thickness between size and fineness; because fine needles very quickly pierce the flesh: and thick ones are difficult to enter the skin; therefore they ought to be of medium thickness and size.
And it is not proper that a needle be fastened in the two extremities of the skin too much: so that flesh may not be cut quickly, and the wound may not open before its consolidation, and also that they may not be lengthened with the suture, so that the wound may not be prevented from consolidation.
Then cut the end of the awl so that it does not harm the sick person in his sleep: and put small pads made of cloth on every side of them, which will hold the ends of the awls: and let them go until you know that the wound is already healed.
This kind of suture with needles is more suitable for small wounds.
For it suffices in stitching them one needle, or two, or about as many.
The second kind of suture is common, as it joins the extremities with four sutures: two extremities of skin and two extremities of fascia in one place, with a needle on which there lies thread equal in fineness and thickness.
Then when you have pierced with the point these four extremities, withdraw the point from the part from which you began, so that the thread held up from the superior part of the wound may fall: so that it is a suture, like a suture of cloth that is tightened by tightening cloths, and put between each suture the amount of thickness less than that of the smallest finger.
These people know this suture.
And with this suture I treated the wound that had happened to a man in his belly, who had been wounded with a knife, and the wound was one palm wide: and about two palms of the intestine had come out from the middle intestine, and there was a rupture in the middle of the belly.
Therefore I reduced it after having stood the intestine of him outside the wound for twenty-four hours.
Therefore the wound was consolidated in a space of about fifteen days: and I took care of it, and it healed: and he lived after it for many years, converted to his dispositions.
And the physicians had judged that he would not be healed.
And it was a marvel that I did not treat it with ointment.
Because I was in a place where there was no ointment, nor anything of medicines.
Therefore I placed upon the old ulcer a poultice twice a day, and diligently washed it with honeyed water until it was healed.
I will say two kinds of sutures proper according to the account of speech.
And it is, as you begin with a sharp suture: and insert the point from the outer to the inner part.
When therefore a needle penetrates the skin and enters the flesh following the length and width of the whole body: let go of the end of the needle on the side where you inserted it, and make it penetrate into the other end from the interior part to the exterior in the other extremity miraculously.
When therefore you have made it penetrate, then make it penetrate according to this in the same extremity marvelous from the outside part to the inside: and let go the extremity ifac, which is on this side, and make penetrate the point in the other extremity from the inside part to the outside: and make penetrate with the penetration that you make it penetrate in ifac extremity marvelous, which is in its part, until it penetrates into the whole.
Then begin also from this same side, and sew it with its extremity which is on the other side, and extract the point from the skin which has penetrated it.
Then put it back into that skin, and sew its extremity which is on the other side, with this extremity marvelously: and take it out of the skin which is on its part, and make it one piece, and another: and make it one piece after another, until you have finished all its outer part according to this example.
And the sum of this suture is that you make your sutures with skins thinner than those which are skins: so that you bring one end to one extremity of the skin and let it go on the other side until you complete it.
The second kind of suture, as Gale has said.
This speech of his is narrated as if he were to gather together all parts according to the similarity which certain physicians have, so that they gather every part to its own corresponding part by nature; and apply the end of sifac to its other end, and the end of mirach to its other end.
And that is done as I tell you.
You ought to place a sharp point at the end of a trocar near the extremity from the outside, and make it penetrate to the inside in that alone: and let go the two extremities of the trocar.
Then roll back the point and make it penetrate from the outer part to the inner in two extremities, namely on both sides.
Then turn both [sides] over, and also make them penetrate from the inner part to the outer, into two opposite extremities.
And this method of suture is a better suture than the common one, and it is the suture whose previous description was given.
This is therefore also the word of Galen.
And some said.
The suture of the abdomen should be made with two needles.
That is, to introduce into both one thread: and begin with the introduction of a needle, from that which is with you, and make it penetrate to the other side, according to the suture of those who are equally matched skin.
And know that when a rupture is in the middle of the belly, then its suture is more difficult than of the rest of the places of the belly.
The judgment of treatment of a wound is the judgment of the rest of wounds.
That is, because when you obtain a fresh wound with its blood, before air alters it; and you reduce the intestine, and your own, and make it fit: then place over it powder of earth.
If the air has already altered the wound: then place over it some ointment that you have present, until they make pus: and let the strands fall away, and consolidate the skin, and marvel at it.
Then care for it as is the cure of other wounds, until it heals.
If medicines are not present to you, then put upon it immediately, from where it begins to emit pus, an old cloth: and change it twice a day, as I have taught you, until it is healed.
If you fear that the wound will communicate to the principal limbs through injury, then it is necessary to submerge soft wool in oil tempered with warmth, or in rose oil; and place it in the region of the places which are between the groins, and under the armpits.
If he feels pain, or punctures, or putrefaction in his bowels (for this often happens), then cleanse him with a wine clyster, thick, black, warm: especially if the rot has already reached the intestine, and an exit wound has been made reaching to its concavity.
And know that what is from the large intestine is of easier healing; and that which is from those finer ones is of more difficult healing.
The intestine called the jejunum does not receive healing from a wound that happens in it at all: and this is because of its multitude, which is from veins, and its magnitude, and because of the subtlety of its body, and the closeness of its nature to nerves.
If what proceeds from the wound is a zither, and you find it fresh: reduce it according to your reduction, which you use to reduce intestines evenly.
If, however, the space has passed and it is already green or black: then it is necessary that you tie it with a thread above the place which has darkened from it, so that there does not occur a flow of blood.
In the wrist there are veins and arteries.
Then cut what is beyond that ligament, and place two pendant thread ends from the lower part of the wound outside it: so that the traction on top of you may be relieved, and its extraction in case of a zirbi, and the discharge of pus from the wound.
Remembering a wound that happened in the intestines
When rupture occurs in the intestine and is small, it is possible for it to be restored in some people; because I saw someone who was wounded in his belly with a blow from a lance, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old; and a fistula was made, and discharge and flatulence came out of it.
Therefore I made treatment until I was not confident in his healing; and I did not cease to treat him carefully until he was healed and the place was consolidated.
After I saw that the place was already consolidated, I feared for the weak part, that an evil accident might happen to the weak part in his belly: and no evil accident happened to him from that.
And he remained in better dispositions, eating and drinking, and resting, and entered the bath, and exercised in his diets.
And now some experimenters have said that when a wound happens in the intestine and it is small, then it ought to be ligated according to this method.
And it is, as you would take ants of large heads.
Then gather together the two lips of the wound, and place a single ant with an open mouth on top of the two lips of the wound.
When therefore he takes hold of it and tightens his mouth, cut off its head, for it adheres and does not loosen.
Then place another ant near the first one, and do not cease doing this with an ant after each ant according to the quantity of the entire wound.
Then reduce it and suture the wound.
For those heads remain attached in the intestines until the intestines are fed and healed, and no further harm befalls the sick person. And now it is possible to suture the intestine even with a fine thread: which has been taken from the intestine of an animal and attached to it after it is inserted into the needle.
And it is, that you may take the end of this thread from the intestine, and it shall be much un-fleshed.
Then a ligature at its extremity with a fine thread of linen wrapped.
Then introduce that thread into the point, and sew with it the intestine.
Then reduce it back into its parts. And this method of suturing with ants and intestine is only according to the way of trust and hope.
Know that a wound which is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the slender intestines, then there is no skill except subtlety, and there is no cure at all.
On the care of fistulas and carbuncles.
Chapter LXXXVIII.
Know that every wound, or abscess when it grows old and becomes antiquated, and becomes an ulcer, and does not heal, and emits pus always, and is not cut off: then it is called universally in any limb a fistula, and we call it Zuchemen.
And a fistula indeed is truly a knot filtered, hard, white: with which there is no pain, to which there is the concavity of a bird's feather: and because of this some call it Risati, that is, feather.
And there are some hours which are moist, that it emits pus.
And perhaps moisture is divided in certain hours.
And sometimes this humidity is much, and sometimes little; and it is coarse, and sometimes fine.
And I have already said in the division, when I spoke of wounds, that every ulcer which does not heal, and in which no flesh is born, is not because of one new cause.
One of these is because of the small amount of blood in the body; or because of its malice; or because between it and above its lips there is hard flesh, preventing the birth of flesh; or because there is a lot of dirt and filth; or because an ulcer within itself is putrid, and the matter sent to it is of bad quality; or because the medicine is unsuitable in its treatment; or because corruption falling in the region is a type of plague; or because of the property of the region, as happens in Caesaraugusta; where digestion of illnesses is difficult, and the healing of abscesses is delayed by nature; or because it has one bone, or a number of bones.
And I have now shown all these causes and signs of them, and their cures with medicines in division: and it is necessary here that I make you know the cure of Fistula and Zuken, which is done by way of operation with the hand.
Know therefore that fistula occurs in all members of the body.
For among these are fistulas that come to the large veins and arteries, or nerves, or fascia, or to the intestine, or bladder, or to one of the ribs, or to one of the vertebrae of the back, or to one of the joints composed in composition: such as the hands, and feet: and from these there are those that go to the proximity of the principal member, and similar ones.
Therefore, according to this method, fistulas are from ailments difficult to heal and do not receive treatment, and dealing with them is labor and ignorance.
If it is from a fistula of which the depth does not reach these places which I have said: and you hope, and trust in its cure, and wish to reach the knowledge of it, then take a probe of copper, or iron, if the fistula extends in a straight line, and examine it with it.
If there is a winding shape in a fistula, then investigate it with a thin lead probe.
Because lead, because of the softness of its body, is lifted and bent around a curve.
If a fistula has many openings, it is not possible for you to point to it with a probe.
Therefore, make a clyster from those openings out of their openings.
For humidity which you apply with a clyster into it, flows through other openings and runs out of them.
Then inquire carefully according to the way it is possible for you: so that you may know whether there is a bone or a nerve, and whether the fistula's cavity is distant or near: or whether it is one fistula which has many openings, and stay over all of it, with the utmost strength of yours: with your questioning, by whom you question the sick person, and finding pain upon compression with your hand on the place, and similar signs and causes of accidents to abscess.
When therefore you stand over all these things truly, then go to the cure according to confidence: and it is, that you consider then, if there is a Fistula appearing nearby, or in a place safe far from the joint, or from the nerve, or artery, or vein, or one of the places which I told you: then dry the Fistula according to what was previously stated from my narration, and remove what is in it from the filtration, and corrupted flesh, which is born in its opening from flesh, or pus, and similar things: and take care of it until it heals.
If however the fistula is of great depth, and is according to straightness, then it is necessary that you cut it in depth as much as is possible for you.
Then cleanse it from all its corrupted flesh.
Then administer a linen cloth wrapped in sharp medicines: and introduce it as far as the cavity of the fistula which you comprehended with iron: do this several times until the sharp medicine corrodes all that remains in the cavity of the fistula from corruption.
Then restore it with ointments that generate healthy flesh until it heals.
If it does not heal by that means, then cauterize it according to what we have narrated.
If therefore the cause of the fistula is bone, and it is confirmed to you; then inquire into it, and dry it according to what I have told you; if nothing hinders you from a vein, or nerve, or principal member, as we have said.
If therefore a bone is shown to you, and there is something of corruption and blackness in it: then scrape it, until the whole corruption is removed.
Then care for him with it that he may be healed until it is incorporated.
If it does not heal and discharges pus as it used to do: then you will know that you have not arrived at the complete eradication of corruption.
Therefore, cleanse it again carefully, and make a precise reason for it, and purify it with your utmost strength.
Then restore him.
If therefore it heals, it is good; and if not, then you know that that corruption is in the deep distant part of the body, which you have not reached.
Therefore there is no skill for you in it, unless you leave it to nature.
If a small bone is broken, and it is possible for you, draw it together with fine forceps that are suitable for it.
If there are many bones, then make an exact traction of them all, and do not let anything slip from them with your strength.
If something is hindering you from the dampness and there is no fear or mistake in the incision of it, then cut those dampnesses and flesh, if they are there, and free the bones.
If you do not have the preparation to remove the bone from your hour, then place over the wound that it may rot; and dismiss it until it rots what is around those bones of flesh and moisture.
And guard the wound so that it does not close up.
And the section which you cut in your operation should be tightened.
If you are afraid, place on top of it a sponge submerged in sulfur rubbed with oil: or a sponge submerged in Egyptian ointment, or some ointment of viridity.
For when those humidities rot, and the bones separate from them, the removal of them is eased, and their drawing out.
If it is a large single bone, such as the femur or hip bone, and similar to these, and that which has been corrupted from it is a large part, then carefully remove it with the last rasp until the blackness and corruption are removed.
Then restore the wound.
If now what is in it is corrupted, a large part is corrupted, and the corruption has already reached the bone marrow, then it is necessary to saw it, and cut it entirely until the place where the corruption reaches: then care for it until it solidifies. And I tell you, zekken, which happened to a man in his leg: that you may put this same example and help above your operation.
There was a young man, about thirty years of age, to whom pain came in his leg, caused by something that moved into it from within the body, that is, from the insides, until the matter reached the leg, and he had a large abscess: and there was no external cause for it.
Therefore, time was extended with him due to the error of the doctors until a boil opened and many materials gathered with it.
And after the treatment had been applied, until the leg was fistulated, and many openings were made in it: which all emitted pus, and the humors of the body.
Therefore a multitude of physicians treated him for about two years, and there was no wise man in the art of hands until I was called, and I saw his leg, and the materials that flowed from those openings with great flow: also all the body of the man had already wasted away, and its color was yellowish.
I therefore introduced a probe into one of the places of openings, and the probe reached the mouth.
Then I carefully examined all the openings: and I found them to be connected with each other from all parts of the leg. Therefore I proceeded and cut into one of the openings until I discovered the part of the bone: and I found it corrupted: which was already corroded and blackened, and putrid, and perforated until it had penetrated to the marrow.
Therefore I have prepared what was discovered to me from corrupt bone.
And I have shown that there was not in the bone except for that corruption which should be cut away and sawed.
And I had already removed it.
Then I placed a restoration of the wound with medicinal consolidatives for a long space.
And it is not set.
Then I tried to restore it.
And it was not restored.
Then I restored him with medicines, and it was quickly consolidated and healed: and this repetition of the operation on him and its section was not necessary, except because of the disposition of the weakness of the sick man, and the smallness of his tolerance, and my fear for him about death; for he fainted in all hours from the excess of evacuation.
Therefore he was healed with complete healing: and firm flesh was born in the place of the bone, and a good arrangement was made in his body, and his strength returned: and he turned back to his dispositions: and he did not do him any harm in walking at all.
If however a protruding bone in the body has already been broken, then it is necessary to bind it, according to this method: and it is: that you take a ligament and tightly wind it at the extremity of the protruding bone: and command someone who will extend it upward: and place another ligament from wool thicker than the first. Then bind the same over the flesh which is under the bone: and extend the extremity of it so that you draw the flesh downwards: and you will expose the flesh over the place which you wish to suture, so that it does not injure the sawing.
Place a piece of wood, or a board beneath the bone lower in the middle because when you do this, it does not prevent cutting corrupt flesh.
And it is necessary that a lock be placed over the place corrupted for a short time, so that there is no corruption in the concavity of the bone; and that it does not appear in its appearance to the sense, and compels to the lock of itself another vice. If the bone is broken and not protruding, but its part continues with another part, and the corruption is in the middle of it or in a part of it, then uncover the flesh from all sides entirely.
Then place the lower wood.
Afterwards, saw it on the first part, where is corruption, until the serration continues on the other part: and let the serration be according to the length from the corruption a little, as we have said.
If corruption is in the joint, cut into the corrupted joint itself, and saw the bone where it continues from the other part.
If a corruption is in the continuity of two joints, then there is no remedy except scraping.
If corruption is in the breast of the hand, or in the breast of the foot: then the matter in it is very difficult.
Truly it is necessary that you inquire how the corruption appears to you.
And having scraped it, and made smooth according to whatever arrangement is possible for you, and with whatever skill it can be rectified for you, when it does not oppose you, Vein, or Nerve.
And know that the instruments for cutting and saws for cutting these bones are many, according to the location of the bones, and their preparation, and their thickness and fineness, and their size and smallness, and their hardness and their rareness.
Therefore it is necessary that instruments appropriate for each kind of operation be prepared.
And know that these operations signify to you about the kind of instrument with which you will need when it is a matter of study for you over a long time.
And knowledge of the modes of this art is a testimony to the modes of ailments: for then indeed you will find by yourself that which is suitable for it from instruments to every infirmity.
The Form of the Saw.
The form of another saw.
Shape of another saw.
Shape of another saw.
This figure of the saw is depicted correctly. Let its arch be above, its sharpness from iron: and its handle from boxwood, and let it be pyramidal in shape made off-center.
The form of the knife for joints.
Let the head of this razor be, according to the form of the head of a star-shaped bolt: and its points be according to the form of the points of elischetfegi.
And it does not befit, unless they are rubbed with it the heads of joints, when they are corrupted, or bone is wide and large.
Form of the Larger Razor.
Form of the Middle Surgical Knife.
Form of a Broad Scalpel.
The shape of the razor with its concave side.
The form of another fine razor.
Form of a lancet for another curved extremity.
The form of a surgical knife is small and thin.
The form of the rasp with which bones are incised.
The form also of a large scalpel.
This is similar to a chisel, and its extremity is like a saw: it is used in many places for cutting bone.
The shape of a scalpel suitable for the reason that it is perforated from bones.
The extremity of it is triangular, and acute are its extremities.
It comes from India.
And similarly, it is necessary that all things which we have said be done from Rasors, and Incisors, and Saws.
On the incision of limbs, and the setting of bones.
Chapter LXXXIX.
The extremities putrefy, either from an external cause or an internal one.
When therefore you have medicated that corruption with medicines, and the cure does not avail; and you see the corruption encroaching on a limb, which is not struck by anything: then it is necessary that you should cut that limb until where the corruption follows, so that the sick man may escape through that death, or from the evil which is greater defect of the member.
And the sign to which this happens is that the limb is blackened until it is thought to be burned by fire or rotten after the blackness: until that rot reaches what follows that limb and spreads throughout the body.
Therefore, it is proper to make an incision with it, and similarly if the cause of corruption is from the sting of certain venomous creatures: such as the sea scorpion, viper, rattle snake, and similar ones.
If therefore decay or a blow is in the extremity of the finger, then cut into the finger, and do not leave space for the decay, so that it may proceed even to the rest of the hand.
And similarly if it happens in the hand, then cut it from the root of the finger, and do not leave space for corruption until it reaches the base of the arm.
And if it enters there, then cut the arm at the elbow joint. If, however, corruption passes through and you see him around the arm; then there is death in the patient.
And besides that from the cure, the quantity of virtue is administered.
And similarly do this with the foot when corruption attacks a toe, then cut it at one of the joints: and if it seizes the sole of the foot, then cut the whole foot.
If it ascends to the knee, then cut the leg at the knee joint.
If corruption has already come above the knee, then there is no skill in it, except to release and leave the sick to death.
And the way of cutting a limb, or sewing it up is, that you tie a ligament below, which you wish to cut: and tie another ligament above the place.
And let one servant extend a ligature downward: and let another servant extend a ligature upward.
And you separate the flesh which is between the two ligaments, with a wide spatula, until the whole flesh is uncovered.
Then it is incised, or sutured.
And it is necessary that you place linen from all parts, and that the saw does not touch the healthy place: and let there be added to the infirmity a lesion and a hot abscess.
If a flow of blood occurs within while you are operating, then cauterize the place quickly: or put upon it some powders that stop blood.
Then return to your treatment until it is completed.
Then bind the wounded limb with a suitable bandage, and take care of it until it heals.
And I tell you what happened to a man in his foot, this same thing that I tell you.
That is because blackness occurred in his foot, when a burn took place which is similar to the burning of fire: and that corruption first happened in his finger, until it began the whole foot.
Therefore a man healed himself, after he saw corruption had fallen upon the limb with violence of it, which he found from pain and burning; and it struck him at the joint, and he was healed.
And after a long time had passed, the same corruption happened to his index finger of his right hand. Therefore he came to me, and I tried to recover that superfluity with what I had placed on his hand from medicines after the purification of his body: and the superfluity was not found, and it began to move into another finger; until corruption began in the hand.
Therefore he called me to cut his hand: and I refused it, hoping for an improvement from my own part of the excess; and I also feared for his death upon the cutting of his hand.
For the man's virtue was above chance.
After that therefore he despaired of me, he returned to his land: and it came to me concerning him, because he was hasty, and he fell with his whole hand: and he was healed.
And I have not brought forward this account, except that it may be an aid regarding what falls under the kind of this illness: and that it may be a signification which shall signify, and according to which it is carried out.
On the treatment of sinuses and the quality of enemas with medicines.
Chapter XC.
When a boil occurs in certain fleshy limbs and the space of the boil lengthens until it forms a collection of pus: then it is ruptured or perforated, and that which is in it emerges from the pus, and a hollow place remains like a vessel: and the skin which is above it is like a cloth which has already been finely woven: and it does not reach the last stage of corruption, nor does it imprint on the bone, nor on the nerve, nor on the ligament: it deserves to be called a Sinus: and it is not called a Fistula: but if its space lengthens until corruption imprints on any of these members, then it is called a Fistula, or zuken.
And the cure of it is that you cut that skin altogether as it turns back; and especially when it has been made thin, and made like cloth; and trust that it will not adhere to the place because of its corruption.
If you hope that it adheres to the skin, and does not follow from this the last corruption: and if there is thickness of flesh in the skin, then care for it with a clyster. And it is, as you consider to the sinus.
If it is large, and the pus that flows out of it has a fetid odor: then cleanse it with an Egyptian medicine, which is vinegar, oil, and ziniar, equal parts received, are gathered in a vessel: and they are boiled over fire until the medicine boils: and it comes to the thickness of honey.
Then take from that what you need: and dissolve it with water and honey, and give a clyster with it to the Sinus: and tighten its opening, and let the medicine remain there for the amount of two hours.
Then remove it with expression: do this for so many days until the sinus is cleansed and the stench is removed.
And sometimes it is cleansed with water and ashes when that medicine is not present to you; and it is so that you may take the ashes of willow wood or ashes from holly trees; and pour them onto the water.
Then colate it and give it a clyster until you are confident that the sinus has been evacuated.
If the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine or water of ash, then administer a clyster with water and honey to which has been mixed something of ground zinc.
Or cleanse it with a clyster of honey and wine mixed together, because honey has the property of cleansing and washing; and wine makes the sinus adhere, especially when there is an excess of astringency and dryness in the wine.
When you have done this several times and trust that the corruption of the sinus has already been removed: then irrigate it with that which makes flesh grow there.
And it is, that you may receive from the diafinicon plaster: and dissolve it with rose oil, and stiptic wine: or clysterize it with some medicines, and other ointments, whose properties I have written in the treatise on ointments.
If the opening of the sinus is narrow, so that a clyster tube cannot enter; then widen it with a small iron tool; or put a linen cloth smeared with Egyptian ointment or basil oil into it, until it widens.
And similarly if the opening is also wide, then gather its lips together with suture; and release from it the quantity into which a clyster would enter without addition.
And similarly if the opening from which the pus flows is elevated upwards: then dry it in the lower place that is within it, so that the pus may flow from it downwards; for when pus is constricted in the depth of the sinus, it prevents flesh from being generated there.
If it is not possible for you to cut the sinus approximately below it as you wish: then try, that you prepare the limb with preparation which drains pus from it with ease according to how it is prepared for you.
Attempt so that nothing of pus remains therein at all; and take medicinal substances for consolidation which are placed upon the mark, suitable to what you wish.
And spread them over linen cloth.
And let the cloth be of such a size that communication is made throughout the whole sinus.
Then cut with forceps at the direct opening of the sinus foramen, a little wider than the opening of the sinus.
Then extend from the ointments gently over another cloth, according to the amount of the hole: and place it over it in a position distant from the opening of the Sinus, so that the exit of pus from it may be relieved: and do not remove the large cloth, unless after some days once.
He who is above the opening of the sinus is he whom you remove at every hour so that what has gathered there from pus may depart; and so that you may know, whether what runs out of it is much or little, digested or indigested.
And with this consider again the place of the sinus, whether the master feels pain in it himself, or if there is no pain in it, and whether there is an abscess in it, or if there is not an abscess in it.
When therefore your medicine is applied thusly, and you see the material which emerges above the opening of the Sinus, then know that the Sinus has already adhered, or approximates to adherence: then therefore dissolve it in the morning, or on the third day; and when you dissolve the wound, then change the cloth, and renew the ointment. If a subtle virus emerges from the sinus after a long time, then do not despair about its adherence, for its healing is approaching, because there are some men who delay the generation of flesh in their wounds, and there are others who act contrary to this.
If after many days undigested pus exits from the sinus, then know that the sinus does not adhere.
If therefore adhesion of the sinus is delayed, and the matter is prolonged: then add to the drying of the medicines, truly let physicians do so that they be medicines in their substance humid and in their virtue dry: such as ointment of dyafinicon, when superfluity of addition from zegi is added to it.
And from the very last way it is cured, it is, that you take an ointment of diafenicum, and let it be dissolved with rose oil, and heated over it old wine equal in its substance.
Then make it with that, and use it.
And now he does something similar to this action, when you do not have dyafinicon ointment at hand, honey, when you have boiled it until it thickens, and you use it.
Or take myrrh, and aloe, and frankincense: rub it all together, and pulverize it upon honey while it is over the fire.
Then place a strip over the cloth and tighten it over the sinus: and the strip with honey that you have boiled until it has thickened: and pulverize spices on top of it, and place them on the cloth and tighten it.
And sometimes it is administered with long birthwort, and roots of celestial lily, and there is lily; and herb flour, and centaury.
Use these simple ones, or aggregated ones, rub them and also the sieves themselves: and pulverize them over honey which I told you about, and use it.
If the matter of the sinus prolongs and does not heal with this cure: then know that corruption is in its depth: or it already makes an impression on the bones, or on the other hard members, or on ligaments: then cure it with the cure of fistulas, according to what has been said before. On the treatment of a whitlow and a worn nail, and on the incision of an added finger, and sectioning.
Chapter XCIX.
A pimple is an abscess that is born under the nail of the thumb of the hand, or of the foot: and perhaps it is born in the other fingers.
When therefore the matter is prolonged and its treatment is neglected, and it festers with a hot fever: or it rots and discharges pus until it corrodes the root of the nail: and perhaps it rots it entirely, and perhaps the corruption reaches the bone, until it has a foul odor: and the extremity of the finger becomes wide, and its color becomes dark.
When therefore you care for the same thing, with that which we said in division, and your cure does not help: then it is necessary that you cut with a knife all the superfluity which remains from the nail.
Then cauterize the wound after that.
A cautery is indeed valuable.
If however the bone is sound, and the nail also sound, and the additions of the nail already compress the flesh towards the interior, and begin to prick it, and injure it: then you must place a fine radium under the angle of the nail that pricks the flesh, and drive it upwards; and cut that flesh with ease, and place upon that which remains of the flesh from burning medicines, corrosives, until all of it is removed.
Then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
If decay has already set into the bone, then it is necessary to cut open that bone and remove it; for it will never heal while that decayed bone remains.
If you see that corrosion and decay are progressing in a finger, then cut it at one of the joints, according to what has been said before about its recollection.
Then take care of him until he is healed.
If it happens that a nail is rubbed or struck, and there comes upon it a violent pain, then it is necessary to let blood from the one who is afflicted first of all.
Then dry the nail with a sharp spatula and make a transverse incision from the base upwards as desired.
And guard, lest the incision reach the flesh which is under the nail, for you will cause to happen through it a very fierce pain upon the weak, and it will be a cause for the birth of flesh added in its place.
Then care for the place with that which allays pains.
The finger which is born in some hands of men, is perhaps all fleshy: and perhaps there are bones in some of them, and perhaps it has a nail: and some of them are born at the root of the joint, or its birth is in some nodes of the finger.
Therefore, he who is born in certain nodes of a finger, does not move; and he who is born at the joint of a finger, perhaps moves.
Therefore, section of that which is fleshy from them is easy.
That is, as you cut it at its root with a wide spatula.
The treatment of one whose nativity is at the root of the joint is difficult.
Therefore, abstain from cutting it.
In that one who is born in the finger at the last of the knots, then it is necessary that you cut first his flesh with a round incision until to the bone.
Then saw with one of those saws suitable for it.
Then care for him until he is healed.
The consolidation which happens to the fingers together, often happens either from birth of man, that is, it is born with him, or from the closing of a wound, or burning by fire, and similar things.
Therefore it is necessary that he cut that consolidation, until the fingers return according to their natural form.
Then place between them strips of linen or cloths soaked in rose-colored oil, so that they may not solidify quickly, and separate them; or place between them a thin sheet of lead until the place has solidified as it should.
And similarly if it happens that some fingers are solidified with the palm, then cut that consolidation, according to how it is prepared and suits the shape of the limb.
On the Incision of a Tumor.
Chapter XCII.
There are veins that are enveloped, large, full of superfluities melancholic which occur in many members of the body: and most often happen in the legs, especially in the legs of travelers and laborers, and those who carry burdens.
Therefore it is necessary that you administer an incision of the body from black bile several times with a strong excision.
Then the lancet is applied to the basilica of the patient.
The cure of them with iron is according to two modes.
One of them is that they are cut and black blood is taken out.
And another method is, that the vein be lifted up and drawn out entirely.
The section is as follows.
Suture the leg first with hot water until the thick, foul blood dissolves.
Then bind the leg of the infirm from the upper part of its hip, down to the lower part of the knee with a bandage.
Then dry the vein in one place, or two, or three places with a wide incision.
Then dry the nail until it comes out from below until the quantity of blood that you see is sufficient and as much as the strength of the weak person can tolerate.
Thereafter bind it: and command him to abstain from foods that produce black bile; and repeated evacuations and phlebotomy, when the veins are full, and this is harmful to the sick person.
The raising of it is according to this manner.
Remove the leg bone if there are many hairs in it.
Then introduce it into the bath: or embrocate it on his leg with hot water until it becomes red and the veins swell; or exercise him vigorously if there is no bath present, until the limb heats up.
Then dry the skin in a direct vein incision along its length: or at its last part near the knee, or in the lower part near the heel.
Then open the skin with hooks, and excise the vein from every part until it appears to the sense: and at its appearance, you see it red to blackness inclining.
When therefore it comes out of the skin, you see it white as if it were a string.
Then introduce under it a probe until it is lifted and emerges from the skin; suspend it with a crooked hook, gently.
Then make another dry incision near that incision three fingers wide.
Then scrape the skin from the upper part of the vein until it appears.
Then lift it with the rays as you did before, and suspend it with another hook, as you did at first.
Then make another dry incision, or several incisions, if you need them.
Then elevate and cut it at its last section near the heel bone.
Then extract it to the incision which is above it.
And do this until you have removed it from the incision which is higher, or from all higher incisions, until when it exits entirely: then cut into it.
If it does not obey you to be pulled out and lifted up, then introduce a needle with a strong doubled thread, and tie it, and pull it out: or introduce under it a Rod: and revolve your hand to every part until it comes out.
And beware, lest it fall.
For if it cuts, it will be difficult for you to remove it well, and it will enter upon the weak from it harm.
When therefore you have extracted it whole: then place over the wound's place linen submerged in wine and rose oil, or oil: and take care of it until it is healed.
If the vein is contracted, having a twisting that winds around to parts, and is not as we have said according to straightness, then it is necessary for you to feel over it to every part of its twisting, and the places of its winding.
Then suspend it with hooks until you have raised it entirely; and be careful at the incision that you do not cut a vein or wound it; for it will be difficult to raise or remove it from you.
Therefore, keep your prudence.
The shape of an incision that heals a grapevine.
Form of the Blind Pouch
It is not as troublesome as the others [surgical instruments], nor is it sharp at its extremity so that it does not wound a vein; and it has great flexibility, smooth: for if it were fine, it would wound a vein with its fineness; indeed let its excess be of thickness, just as we have said.
On the Extraction of the Vein of the Leg. Chapter XCIII.
This vein is generated in the legs in hot lands, like those of Alizegi, and Arabia, and in dry, hot lands with little tenderness, that is, in which no grass grows nor trees.
And perhaps it is generated in other places of the body besides the legs.
And its generation is from decay that happens under the skin, just as it happens inside bodies of snakes and roundworms and worms generated between skin and flesh.
And the sign of the beginning of this vein's injury is that a fierce inflammation happens in the leg.
Then the place is cut.
Then begins the vein to come out of the place of that incision, as if it were the root of a plant, or an animal.
When therefore the extremity appears, then it is necessary that you wind around it the piece of lead, whose weight is from a drachma to two drachmas and tie it: and let go the suspended lead from the leg.
Whenever therefore something comes out of it to the outside, envelop that thing in lead and tie a knot in it.
If it is prolonged much, then cut a part of it, and wrap up the remainder.
And do not cut it root and branch before it comes out entirely.
For if it cuts, it contracts and enters into flesh; and it causes a boil to happen, and rot in the place, and a bad ulcer.
Therefore it is necessary that it be gently treated and extracted gradually until it comes out from its last part, and nothing of it remains in the body; and from this vein it emerges in some people which is in length five palms and ten.
And now it has come to me, because a man came out of twenty palms.
If it happens to you at the time of your treatment: then introduce a rod into its hole, and perforate it with a long hole, with the body, until everything that is in it of matter is evacuated: and administer the rotting of the place with medicines for several days. Then care for its cure as a boil.
And this vein indeed sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears in the joint of the foot, or in the foot itself: and many openings occur to it, and a branch comes out from every opening.
Therefore, treat the wound, as we said in the division, and with what has been previously stated.
On incisions over worms generated under the skin, and it is called a cow's ailment.
Chapter XCI
This ailment is called among us  in a certain land the "ox ailment": because it often happens to oxen, and there is a small worm that is born between the skin and flesh.
And it travels throughout the whole body, ascending and descending: and it is shown to the sense in its walking from limb to limb, until it breaks wherever it breaks in the skin, and exits.
And its generation is from the corruption of some humors.
As worms and serpents, that is, roundworms and pinworms, occur in the belly.
And it is feared from its malice.
For when he enters into the body and is elevated to the head and reaches the place, then perhaps he opens it and goes out and destroys the eye: and this happens many times.
When therefore you wish to cure him, and to extract him, then it is done only when he walks, and appears to his senses.
Therefore, you must bind what is above it and what is below it with a strong ligature constriction.
Then dry it over itself, and extract it.
If it goes deep into the flesh, and you do not find it, then place a cautery over the place with fire, until it dies.
And the greater thing that is feared is its corruption, which corrupts the eye, as we have said. If you see that it has arrived near the eye in the head, then tightly bind the eyebrow below it with a good bandage.
Then dry it above itself, and remove it.
And it is necessary that the sick person make use of purification of his body, with medicines dissolving bad, putrid humors.
And let him beware of foods that produce decay.
On incision for Nakir's illness.
Chapter XC.
This illness is called Nakir in our country: and it is a pain that happens in certain limbs: then it changes from limb to limb.
And I indeed have already seen it, as I tell you.
I was called to a woman who was ill with some wounds.
And he uncovered his arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm's tendon.
And after one hour had passed, I saw one inflation moving with a worm, as a worm moves, ascending to its shoulder more quickly than it could: so that it was like living silver when it runs from place to place.
Therefore pain departed from that place and was fixed in the shoulder.
Then he sat for one hour, and it ran into the rest of the body until it reached the other arm.
Then he told me that he was rolling over his whole body, as I saw.
I was amazed therefore at the speed of its transference from limb to limb.
And indeed before that I had not seen this illness with my eyes in this way according to this manner.
Nevertheless, I have seen many who find pain to be transferred from limb to limb; and I have not seen it with my own eyes, as I saw it in a woman.
And I do not think it is otherwise, except because the woman was from those who have veins of the dry body discovered, hence therefore appears to the sense that lightness transformed.
And it is necessary that they not appear according to this reason in those who are delicate and with moist bodies, of hidden veins.
When therefore you wish to cure it, and the patient feels that pain: then if it appears to you as we said, then tightly grasp above it, and below it quickly: and dry above it until that windiness is expelled by constraint: and cauterize the place.
If you do not see it with your own eyes, then treat it with a bodily purge and with that which expels wind and flatulence, and treats them with foul pills and pills of saffron, and similar things.
On the Extraction of Arrows
Chapter XCVI. Arrows differ according to their kinds and according to the places in which they fall from the body.
Their diversity is: because some have large points and small ones: and concave and deaf ones.
And there are those which have three angles.
And from those who have tongues.
And from those which have stars.
Those which are according to the limbs in which they fall, are according to two ways.
Or indeed members are from the principal members concave, such as the brain and heart and liver and lung and kidneys and intestines and bladder and similar things.
When therefore it falls into any of these limbs, and the signs of death appear to you, which I tell you after, then it is necessary that you avoid the extraction of that arrow from them, for death follows him in whom it is, in many arrangements.
And when these signs of evil do not appear to you, and the arrow is not hidden in the depth of the limb, then draw it out, and care for the wound.
When a dart falls into the brain and enters through the opening, and exits through the soft part above the brain, these are the signs: because violent vomiting occurs from it, along with dimness of vision, vertigo, redness in the eyes, swelling, redness of the tongue, spasms, confusion of the mind, and vomiting of bile.
And perhaps blood may issue from the nostrils, or ears.
And perhaps speech is cut off, and the voice is destroyed.
And moisture white, like a poultice, emerges from the wound's location.
And there comes forth from it a discharge like water from flesh.
If therefore these signs appear to you, then abstain from treatment, and remove the arrow if it does not exit.
The signs of an arrow when it falls into the heart are: that it is near the left breast, and he feels as if it were fixed in a hard thing, not in an empty one.
And perhaps the movement of an arrow is similar to the movement of a pulse: and blood runs out of the wound black.
And following this comes coldness of the extremities and cold sweat, and fainting.
Therefore know that death comes without a doubt.
And the sign of an arrow wound to the lung is the exit of frothy blood from the wound: and the vessels that follow the neck become inflamed, and the color of the sick person changes.
And he expires great, high spirit: and seeks the attraction of cold air.
If an arrow falls into the covering of the chest, which is near the ribs, a great sigh comes with intense pain, and all the limbs of the shoulders move.
And if an arrow falls into the stomach, then perhaps something indigested from food will emerge from the wound.
And if an arrow falls into the abdomen and is fixed in it, something of excrement comes out of the wound, or a part of the intestine which has already been torn.
There is therefore no hope of cure for it, nor in the removal of the arrow.
If an arrow falls into the bladder and urine flows out, and something proceeds from it to the outside, and the pain is stronger over the weak one: then you know that it is mortal.
The remaining members, such as the face, and neck, and throat, and spatula, and helper, and vertebrae of the back, and collarbone, and hip, and leg, and similar members are healed according to many arrangements: when it does not find the artery, or nerve: and it is not a poisonous arrow.
And I tell you what I saw of these arrows, so that you may signify by it your cure.
This is because to a certain man an arrow fell into his lacrimal gland of the eye, at the root of the nose.
Therefore, I extracted it from the other side, under the fat of his ear: and he was healed, and no harm came to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew, which had fallen into the fat of his eye under his lower eyelid: and the arrow was already hidden, and I did not remove it except for its small end, with which it adhered to its shaft: and the arrow was large of the arrows of the Turkish bows, with a mild iron, in which there are no ears.
Therefore the Jew was healed and no evil happened to his eye. And I extracted another arrow from the throat of a Christian.
And there was an Arabian arrow, and it is that which has ears.
Therefore I followed her along within two guides; and now she was submerged in her throat.
Therefore I carefully removed it until I extracted it: and Christian was healed.
And I extracted another arrow from a man who had fallen into his belly: and we thought that he would die from it.
After thirty days had passed, and nothing in his condition had changed, I cut above the arrow: and I devised a plan upon it, and extracted it: and he was healed, and no misfortune happened to him.
And I saw a man whose arrow had fallen on his back, and the wound was consolidated upon it.
After that, after seven years, an arrow came out at the root of his hip.
And I saw a woman to whom an arrow fell into her belly, and the wound was consolidated on her, and the arrow remained inside her; and she was not changed in any of her dispositions, and the woman did not find harm to her in any of her natural operations.
And I saw another man to whom an arrow fell into his face: and the wound was consolidated, and it remained, not finding much pain for him: and similar things to these many.
And I removed an arrow from a man of the king's princes, which had fallen into the middle of his nose, and already had slanted to the right side a little: and the arrow was completely hidden.
Therefore I was called upon to treat him after the arrow wound for three days.
I therefore found a wound from an arrow very tight.
Therefore I inquired about it with a subtle probe, and I did not feel it: and he himself was finding pricking and pain under his ear on the right side.
Therefore I hoped that the prick was from the tip of the arrow.
I therefore applied a dressing to the place with a poultice that had the power of attraction and digestion, trusting that the place would fester, and there would appear a sign like an arrow so that I might cut across it: but it did not happen in the place, an accident indicating that the arrow followed the place.
Therefore I diligently applied a plaster to it for many days; and no accident occurred, and the wound became solid in the meantime; and he remained weak from its extraction for a space of days, until one day he felt an arrow inside his nose.
And he told me that.
Therefore I placed upon the wound a medicine sharp and corrosive for many days until it was opened: and when I probed it with a probe, and felt the subtle tip of the arrow adhering to the wood.
Then I added to the opening of the wound that sharp medicine, until the extremity of the arrow appeared visibly to us; and about four months passed with him in that time.
Then after the wound was enlarged, and it was possible for me to introduce forceps into it, and move it, and it did not obey to come out: then I did not cease to be subtle and ingenious over it with ways of ingenuity, until on one day I began over it with forceps made properly, according to what will come in the form of them at the end of the chapter, until I extracted it.
Then I restored the wound.
And indeed physicians judge that cartilage of the nose is not restored.
Therefore, I restored it, and the wound was consolidated, and the infirm person was healed in complete health: and nothing harmed him at all.
And I tell you the quality of the extraction of certain arrows: so that you may place that rule and meaning above what I have not said.
Because the parts of this art and their distinctions are not contained with the narration; nor does that book contain it, and a wise artificer compares little to much; and what is present to what is absent; and he finds a new operation and a new instrument among the descents of foreign things of this art when they occur.
Therefore I say that arrows do not come out of limbs where they are fixed unless according to two modes. Or by drawing it out from where it entered.
Or conversely of the other part.
And that which goes out where it entered, is either an arrow going into fleshy place: and it is drawn and comes out.
If it does not obey to be brought out within the hour in which it falls: then you ought to let it go for several days, until the flesh which is around it putrefies, and the attraction of it is lessened, and its exit.
And similarly if it is lodged in the bone and does not yield to you for exit, then leave it also for several days: and repeat it with traction and motion every day until it exits.
If it does not obey you at the end after days, then it is necessary that you perforate around the arrow in the bone itself from every part with a subtle borer until the arrows are amplified.
Then draw it out, and remove it.
If however the arrow is fixed in the bone of the head and has already progressed into one ventricle of the brain, and certain of those accidents which I have said appear from the sick person, then abstain from drawing out the arrow, and release it until it may be equal to be removed after days.
For if an arrow has reached the liver, then death does not delay him.
And if the arrow is not fixed, only in the bone and does not penetrate to the fascia, and remains weak for some days, and nothing happens to him from those accidents, then the minds are in the drawing of the arrow and its extraction.
If however it is fixed tightly and does not obey you to be drawn out: then administer a leech around the arrow's circumference, as I have told you; then care for the place until it heals.
If, however, the arrow is already hidden in the place of the body and it is concealed and hidden from sense: then seek it with a probe.
If you feel it, then draw it out with certain instruments which are suitable for its drawing out.
If however you cannot pull it out because of the constriction of the wound, and because of the length of the arrow deep within: and there is no bone, nor nerve, nor vein there: then find over it, until the wound enlarges, and it is possible to extract the arrow.
If the ears are being held closed, then free the fixed flesh within them from every part, with every effort that you can, and with efforts, if it cannot be done over the protrusion of flesh in the fracture of the ears, and their twisting, until it drains.
And when you administer the extraction of an arrow, wherever it is, then use the twisting of your hand, with forceps to all parts, until you make it come out: and with the most subtle last subtlety, so that the arrow does not break, and its attraction becomes difficult for you, and its extraction.
If you are not able to work on it for one hour, then dismiss her for several days until those around it putrify.
Then repeat this: for if the wound is relieved. But if a bleeding contrary to you does, then administer that which we said from the cure in its chapter: and guard your strength from cutting the vein, or nerve, or tendon.
And administer the mind in every way that is possible to you for the release of the arrow; and let it be with ease, and tranquility, or slowness, and firmness, just as I have told you.
And it is necessary that you do when you pull out the arrow, that the weak be according to the figure, according to what was with the case of the arrow in itself.
Because it is more helpful.
If that is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you from the figures.
The arrow that comes out from the opposite part of another, or something already proceeds from it to the exterior: or makes a convexity of the extremity of the arrow by feeling from the upper part of the skin close, and you see it protruding: therefore dry above it, and let the section be according to the quantity which the forceps take in it.
Then draw it out: for indeed it becomes easy to exit.
If it is held in the bone, then turn your hand according to the roundness until the arrow presses into the bone and enlarges itself; then draw it out.
And if not: dismiss her for a few days; then repeat it, until it comes out.
If a wood of the shaft is in it, then drive it out with that.
If a wood has fallen, and you wish to administer force: then introduce an instrument into it with a concave part, so that the concave part of it enters into the tail of the Arrow; then drive it in together with it.
If, however, the arrow is concave, then drive it in with an instrument entering into it.
For the arrow is lifted up by this.
If the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary to cut out all the flesh where the poison is; if that is possible for you.
Then care for it as is fitting.
If a dart is falling into the chest, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the side: and it is near because you touch it with your fingers, and it is possible for you to cut above it: then cut, and be cautious about the incision of the vein, or nerve, and extract it.
Then suture the wound if you see it, and care for it until it heals.
And this is the form of Forceps, with which arrows are removed.
Let the extremities be like the beak of a bird, which is made like iron: when they seize upon an arrow, they do not let it go.
And many kinds are made from them, great and small, and medium, according to the quantity of magnitude of the arrow, and its smallness, and the width of the wound, and its constriction.
Shape of the concave implement.
And the shape of the impeller for deafness.
This is for the end of a hard bone as if it were a radius, so that its entrance may be eased into a concave arrow and driven with it.
The extremity of this thrusting tool is concave like a bird's feather, so that the entrance of the arrow into it and its impact may be eased.
On the incision of veins.
Chapter XCVI. There are thirty veins that are customarily bled from in the body.
Of these there are sixteen in the head: two pulsatile veins which are behind the ears, called two Herbae; and two arteries which are in the two temples appear; and two veins which are in the two lacrimals of the two eyes, which are called Aspicientes; and a prepared vein in the middle of the forehead; and a vein which is at the extremity of the nose.
And two gullies which are in the neck.
And two veins which are in the upper lip of the mouth.
And the two veins that are in the lower lip.
And these are the veins that are called Algecherich.
And two veins that are under the tongue.
The veins that are cut in the arms are five veins in each arm.
One of these is Cephalica, and it is from the side of the neck: and the common people call it the vein of the head.
And Fuscous.
And it is the Middle vein, and it is composed of the branch of the Basilica and the branch of the Cephalic; and the common people call it the vein of the body.
And Basilica, and it is placed in the domestic side: and it is also called Titillicaris.
And the common people call it a vein of the belly.
And the cord of the arm is placed upon the furrow, and it is that in which a vein is opened, and it is that which appears above the thumb at the incision clearly.
And Salvatella: and it is a vein which is between the annular and smallest: and it has two branches.
And in the leg and in the foot are three veins.
One of them is which is under the curvature of the thumb from the shady side.
And the second is the Saphena: and its place is at the heel from the inside side.
And the vein Nesse: and its place is at the calcaneus from the side of the heel.
And in the other leg are three veins similar to those.
On venesection of two veins behind the ears.
Venesection of the two veins that are behind the ears is beneficial for old catarrh, and migraine, and headaches, and old head ulcers.
And the quality of bloodletting is as I have said.
And it is, that the head of the sick person be shaved; and the back of the head be rubbed in the place of two veins with a rough cloth by good friction.
Then let the weak person tighten their neck with a clout until two veins appear.
And their places are behind the ears in two depressed places of the head.
Therefore seek them out with your finger, and where you feel their pulse under your finger, there mark it with a heated seal.
Then take a surgical knife, and it is called Incidens.
Then introduce it under the skin until the lancet reaches the bone.
Then lift your hand with the vein and skin upward, and cut the vein with the skin with an incision.
And let the length of the incision be the quantity of two joined fingers, or about that: and make it bleed as much as you wish.
Then bind it with small pads, and release it, until it heals.
And now he proceeds at the beginning of the book on the incision and cauterization of them.
On bloodletting of two arteries at times.
Of the two veins that are in two times of phlebotomy, the benefit is for ancient migraine; and to a bad cold; and to constant eye strain; and for acute effusions poured into the eyes. And the quality of phlebotomy is as I tell you.
The weak person tightens his neck greatly, until two veins appear to the sense with manifest appearance: and their pulse is shown under your finger.
Then indeed with inlay signs.
Then raise the skin from above with your index finger, and introduce the cutting knife underneath, and raise the vein from above.
And cut it as you did in the other two veins: and make it flow blood according to the quantity of your need. Then untie the constriction of the patient, and place your finger upon the vein for one hour.
Then place over the same cotum and pads, and tighten it above with a strong constriction: and release it until it heals.
And now has preceded the remembrance of them, and their incision, and their extraction at the beginning of the book.
On phlebotomy of the frontal vein after cephalic phlebotomy.
A wound from a vein incision of the forehead is after a cephalic phlebotomy, to old aches of the face: and to headache, and redness: and foul ulcers.
And the quality of bloodletting is, according to what I tell you.
The weak man supports his neck with a stick until the vein appears.
Then take the instrument which is called a Fossorium.
This is its shape.
Place a sharp point which is at the head of the Fossa upon the vein itself, and strike upon it with a comb, or with some other thing in this manner: and let blood flow according to the quantity that you wish.
Then close up the wound of the patient and bind it until it heals.
And sometimes it is opened with a wide vein-cutter.
However, it ought not to be a sharp-edged incision of the extremity, like the rest of the incisions, but rather one of a broad edge.
And the lancet should be applied across it, because the bone is close; and perhaps the lancet will break when it is fine.
On bloodletting of the veins in the two lacrimals.
A wound of two veins which are in the two lacrimals of the two eyes is to the eye from scabies and redness: and it is painful in the eye, and pains in the face.
And the quality of the bloodletting is that the weak one ties their neck with a rope.
Then he will cut the vein and you shall stand over his head.
And let a phlebotomy be made transversely along a short length, with a small lancet, not too wide, for there is no flesh in the place.
If the lancet is too fine at the extremity, it may perhaps break.
Then make it flow out of the blood as much as is necessary for you.
And place upon them a pad, and bind them together at night one, and unbind them.
On bloodletting of the veins of the nose.
The bloodletting of the veins of the nose is brought about by acute fever and violent phlegm and pains of the face, such as a migraine, and redness which happens on the face, especially when it is old.
And the quality of his phlebotomy is that the sick man tightens his own neck.
Then hold his nose with your left hand, and take a fine, long lancet, and place it in the middle of his harelip, between that which distinguishes the nose according to straightness.
Because the vein does not appear to the sense there, and because blood begins to flow immediately.
And it is necessary that you put your hand last with a lancet and make blood flow according to your need.
Then bind it tight at night with one bandage.
It is indeed restored quickly.
On the phlebotomy of veins according to Guy de Chauliac.
The use of two veins for phlebotomy is good for the constriction of breath, and the beginning of leprosy, and melancholy illnesses, and sores that are bad, and ulcers that are corroding, that is to say, those that are caused by herpes.
And the quality of  phlebotomy of them is that it should tighten weak under both in his neck with a bandage: and let the artificer stand over the head of the infirm, and let the infirm be sitting on a seat.
Then the phlebotomist makes a vein incision of moderate length.
Then draw out from the blood a moderate quantity, or according to what you see is necessary for that.
Then do similarly with the other vein.
Afterwards, dissolve the ligament, and tightly bind two veins in the middle section: so that the patient does not bleed excessively.
And let her be released until morning.
A wound is healed.
On bloodletting from veins, by Al-Gebar.
The veins of Albucasis are a help for phlebotomy: because it brings relief to the mouth from alcohol and gum disease; and ulcers that are bad; and fissures of the lips, and bad ulcers, even those which are in the nose and around it.
And the quality of bloodletting is that you make the sick person sit before you: and bind his neck with a cloth.
Then roll back the lip and look at two veins: one is from the right side of the lip, and the second from the left side of it: and the demonstration of both is by the blackness of both.
And this is true: for in the circuit of them are veins small and black.
Therefore, make both incisions with a cutting. If there is doubt about you, and you do not know which of them it is: then attend to the incision of the greater ones, and those more manifest.
And similarly do this with the two veins that are in the upper lip: and very much indeed is it customary to do so: and cut the two veins that are in the lower lip.
On Phlebotomy.  Veins under the tongue after cephalic phlebotomy.
Of the two veins which are under the tongue, a benefit from phlebotomy is this: that cephalic phlebotomy is good for inflammations that are in the throat, and for pain of the uvula, and for pains of the mouth.
And the quality of phlebotomy is such that the sick person should sit between your hands before the sun: and elevate his tongue, and look under his tongue on one side for a vein, and on the other side for a vein; and the color of both sloping towards blackness.
Therefore cut both veins: and guard, so that you do not put your hand at the last in cutting the veins.
For under it are arteries, and perhaps there will be a flow of blood from those arteries.
On the three veins in the elbow.
The veins that are cut in the arm, of which the practice of bloodletting is customary in all men, there are three.
And bloodletting is done according to two modes.
Or by pricking with a broad myrtle-wood lancet: or an olive tree to the fineness of the slope: or cutting with a knife lancet, and this is Alnesil.
And this is its shape.
Thus Al-Zahrawi is, which is suitable for the cutting.
And among these there are broad and fine kinds, according to the width of the veins and their constriction. The form of the phlebotomy knife should be broad, as you see.
And it is appropriate to open the concave, full, emerging, apparent, thick veins, and those which contain thick, turbid blood.
And this lancet is of lesser width and more delicate tip.
And it is fitting for phlebotomy of the veins delicate, which contain blood fine and yellowish.
On Phlebotomy in Basilica
The basilica, which is one of these three veins, is helpful for bloodletting. Because it draws blood from ailments that are in the throat and neck, because it follows the chest, and the belly: and it behooves the phlebotomist with the phlebotomy, that he beware, and be above fear from it for under it is an artery.
If therefore he errs, and adds in the incision of a vein, he will cut that artery, and there will be a flow of blood.
Therefore it is necessary that she be not lanced with a sharp lancet; rather let it be cutting with an Alnesil.
If Basilica does not appear with manifest appearance, then it is necessary that one take the same from elsewhere and change it to another, or seek out some branch of it; or cut a vein in the arm instead of its place.
For it is manifest and dry it with the phlebotome Anesil, as we have said.
If you wish to perform phlebotomy on him, then it is necessary before the constriction of the arm, so that you touch the place until you know the place of the pulse.
Then signs over the place with wax, then the arm, and dry the vein with a concave incision with the Alnesil lancet, as we said.
And take care that the blow does not fall through the space from the place of the artery.
And when you see, when you tighten the ligature, an inflation at the place which you marked with the cautery, then that inflation is the inflation of the artery: therefore avoid it.
If you see blood rising in phlebotomy like a boy's urine, and it is thin blood, red: then you know that it is from the artery's blood.
Therefore hasten, and place your finger upon it for a long space, then remove your finger.
If therefore blood is cut (for it is often cut), then bind the arm and let it go: and let the sick person beware of movement of it: and be above his fear.
And let it not be moved for several days until it is healed.
If blood does not cease flowing and overcomes you, and medicine is not present at the moment for you, then cut the artery if it appears to you.
For its extremities are contracted, and blood is cut off.
Or take a piece of fisetum bark and pound it fine; take half of it, and bind it over the place of the vein constriction appropriately, with a ligature and pads until the next day.
Then if the blood is cut off, it is good.
And if not so: then care for it with him whose predecessor was remembrance of the place of dust cutting off blood flow: and the cutting off of his blood is not difficult in many dispositions, because of the small place of the wound, and the possibility of tying from the arm.
On the vein for bloodletting, the Fusca.
The veins of the arm are beneficial for bloodletting, because they draw blood from the upper part of the head and lower part of the body: because it is composed of the Basilica branch and the Cephalic branch, as we said.
And it is fitting for the phlebotomist that he be above fear from his phlebotomy, for under it is a nerve.
If therefore he adds in the puncture of phlebotomy, and finds a nerve, it happens in it numbness, and difficult becomes its healing, and perhaps not healed fully.
And this nerve appears many times to the sense.
If it is hidden in some men and is subtle and does not show itself: then you must place your phlebotomy there where you will make the incision with the Alnesil and deviate the nerves with your strength.
If a vein is between two nerves, then find the vein in length.
On the cephalic vein.
The phlebotomy of the cephalic veins is a benefit because it draws blood from the head and brings it to aid eye ailments.
And it is necessary in this vein properly, if you wish, that a phlebotome be used to puncture it with an olive-wood phlebotome, or with a myrtle-wood phlebotome: because it is the safest of all veins, because there is no artery beneath it, nor a nerve. Nevertheless, it is fitting for you in phlebotomy, that you avoid cutting the head of the lizard only with the lancet, and seek a softer place: and it does not harm him if, when the first percussion is not found, to repeat over it with the lancet several times. Nevertheless perhaps a boil may arise in certain men when it is not cut out in the first percussion, but it does not harm him in any way.
On the usefulness of phlebotomy, and the precautions to be observed in it.
The quality of phlebotomy, and its accidents from it, which you ought to consider in its correction.
First of all, it is important for you to know that phlebotomy is not administered unless it is for the preservation of health and its persistence, and caution against the arrival of illnesses.
And that a phlebotomy is made in one of the three veins which are in the elbow, namely Cephalic, and Black, and Basilica.
And that venesection may be performed at the beginning of Spring on an empty stomach, in summer, and in autumn, and in winter after a meal, when signs of fullness appear.
And a bloodletting should be performed on the first day, or on the third day, after three hours have passed.
Bloodletting, which is administered in illnesses, does not have a determined hour: but when it provokes convenience and necessity to that, at night, or day, and at every hour, and at every time.
And it is not right that boys should be bled until they reach fourteen years of age.
A pregnant woman should not be bled except from the fourth to the seventh month.
The elderly, who have passed sixty years, should not be bled.
When therefore someone wants to undergo phlebotomy for any reason, it is necessary that he cleanse his bowels before phlebotomy with a gentle enema if there is much feces retained in them: so that the veins at phlebotomy do not draw up putrid superfluities from the intestines harmful to the principal members.
Nor should a patient who is vomiting be bled, that is, suffering from nausea, nor one who has been drinking too much, nor one who is recovering from drunkenness, until that is removed from them.
Nor one with dropsy.
And let phlebotomy be avoided again after colic passion, and vomiting, and flux of the belly, and multiplication of intercourse, and labor, and exercise, and vigils, and fasting, and all that dissolves the strength from the body or animal.
Then consider the subtlety of humors before that, if blood is thick with food and drink, and medicines: if it is possible for it.
Then he should enter the bath, if nothing prevents him; or he should exercise in some way, so that the blood may be made more subtle.
And place his phlebotomy in his chest, around the third day, as we have said; and try, so that his chest may be emptied on that day of all animal bad accidents: such as constriction, and anger, and fear: and from all bodily accidents, such as labor, and punishment, and superfluity, and those similar.
And let him make his seat to be present with things of which use men have grown accustomed from fragrance, and smell, and frolic, and similar ones in the amount of possibility.
Then let the bloodletter sit on a stool which is higher than the patient's bed; afterwards he shall draw out his arm and rub it with his hand two or three times.
Then tighten the ligament with corrections, and wrap it twice.
And let the constriction be moderate, because when a constriction is unequal, either by excess in the constriction, then it prevents the course of blood; or in softening, then it also prevents the course of blood.
Then after the constriction, it is necessary for the one cutting to rub his hands together until the veins swell and become evident to the sense.
Then the surgeon removes the leech with a little oil, properly old.
Then he places his index finger of the left hand over the vein in the place where he wants to perform phlebotomy, lightly: so that the vein does not escape and the percussion may fall.
Because the vein is like a fleeing string in phlebotomy; and from them is that which is full of windiness; and when you place the phlebotomist upon it, it contracts under the phlebotomist, and the phlebotomist is deceived, and does not open the vein; and if he opens it, it is strict; therefore it is necessary that the phlebotomist be firm and solicitous in all these things.
Then he puts down the lancet.
And if not, then repeat this under another place a little below it, or above it with haste; if the place does not suppurate.
If it is suppurating or a weak person flees, then dismiss him on the day or two days, and do not tie a bandage tightly.
Perhaps it will draw a hot abscess.
He should not enter a bath.
Then he would repeat bloodletting, if he wished.
If the opening is small, or blood flows gently: and you fear that the quantity of blood which you desire will not come forth; then repeat the incision into the wound according to straightness, and add little to the operation.
And do this with haste, before the place becomes closed up, for a closed place is found in many men at the time of a minor operation.
If therefore you see the abscess itself, then do not return upon it at all, for it excuses nothing before you. And place over it something of the oil of feces; because it will alleviate the course of blood.
And it is better in this place than oil itself, and than the rest of the olive.
And similarly administer the feces of oil in all your bloodletting, wherever you cut veins to prohibit the flow of blood; and they make this from tyriaca alfarach, and sagzenea, when it is placed over the place from one of them.
Blood is refined and dissolved when it is thick.
If a large abscess occurs at the site of incision, which often happens, especially to those who are not routinely bled or have only a small vein opened, then quickly place a sponge soaked in hot water and salt over the area and bind it for one hour, because it will loosen.
And it is necessary that you do this after the blood has exited from the very vein, with its completion, or from another vein.
And abscesses and swellings frequently occur in bloodletting at the Basilica.
Therefore place your hand upon it, then if you find softness at your compression upon it, then that prominence is bad.
Therefore, take care that you place something upon it from what we have said.
For perhaps blood will flow from it of the artery.
But make a plaster for him with that which has astringency, that the place may be closed.
Then care for him with the rest of the care until he is healed.
And it is necessary that you extract from every man according to the quantity of his virtue.
And what appears from the color winning over blood.
For if the blood is black, then let it flow out until it turns red; and similarly if you see it thick, then let it flow out until it becomes thin; and similarly if it is sharp, until its sharpness is removed.
And he who is full, strong, and needs bloodletting only once, let the incision of the vein be widened, and let the phlebotomy be broad; and in him who is weak, let it be the opposite of this.
And it is necessary that he extract it with a probe, and that the hole be narrow; and it is better that what is administered in bloodletting of the vein is a transverse section, not a puncture.
And this method of bloodletting is safe from the flow of blood, and from the cutting of the nerve: and it is more praiseworthy, and safer than bloodletting across width and length.
And to one who is accustomed to fainting during bloodletting, it is necessary that before bloodletting he eat bread slightly soaked in pomegranate juice or boiled grains, if heated: and draw out his blood in three or four ounces.
And if it is of a chilled constitution, then let him take before phlebotomy bread soaked in syrup of myrrh, or in a syrup of honey flavored with spices, or in an aromatic fragrant syrup.
If fainting occurs during bloodletting, and the cause is the exit of much blood, then it is necessary that he should take in a drink of meat water, and a subtle fragrant syrup; and use aromatics with sea salt, and liniment his chest with it; and use the rest which we have said in the division in the chapter on fainting from evacuation.
He who wishes to bleed his arm and release his blood the second time: it is necessary for him whose phlebotomy is due to excessive evacuation and whose strength is weak, to release his blood gradually according to the amount of strength in continuous days.
Whoever wants to drain his arm and loosen his blood second, and his body is strong: then let him do it after seven hours, or nine from his first incision.
Whoever wants to draw blood from his body to the opposite part to which it declines: it is necessary for him to be bled on the second or third day.
In whose body there is much blood already heated, and it becomes sharp, and makes fever happen: it is necessary that the blood should leave from it in one vein, and a large quantity be drawn out of it; and the opening should be enlarged until syncope occurs; after you have kept all the conditions of phlebotomy; and so that you place your hand upon his pulse at the course of the blood, so that death does not happen instead of syncope.
Many times indeed it happens that the phlebotomist is ignorant, and negligence falls.
And it is not necessary when you want to loosen the arm and loose the blood a second time, when already the opening of the vein is closed and difficult exit of the blood is made, that you press upon it with vehemence, and quickly stretch out the cupped vessel.
For that is a grievous evil, indeed let it be left alone until it is opened by a second incision.
Or remove with the sharpness of a phlebotomy instrument that which has clotted from blood at the opening of the vein, and place upon it something dissolved salt in water.
And place upon it something of tyriaca alfaroch, or sagzenea, and place it with a gentle compression, until the blood flows out.
If a vein has already been opened in an abscess, then let it be left open and not tied up until the abscess sits.
If necessity compels bloodletting a second time and there is no excuse, then either the phlebotomist should cut above that place or in another arm in another vein.
The brachial vein is cut at the site of Fuscca and Baslica, if they are not found and are hidden, because it is composed of them.
And the quality of bloodletting is that the sick person should put his hand into hot water until the vein becomes red and appears plainly.
Then it is bound over itself with a bandage of moderate constriction in the middle.
Then the incision is made with the lancet according to transversal direction, not lengthwise or laterally; and let the opening be wide, and let your incision be such that it cuts across the joint of the hand for a short distance.
And indeed very much blood flow is put in warm water in time of winter.
And bloodletting from this vein is healthier than all veins, because there is no pulsating artery beneath this vein, nor a nerve.
A bloodletting of the right hand of Saluatella is beneficial for liver ailments.
And the quality of phlebotomy is that you tie a vein with a band on the hand, or with your own hand, after you have put it into warm water until the vein swells and becomes apparent to the sense.
Then with the lancet crossing it.
And if you cut it entirely, it will not harm him in anything.
And preserve, so that you will not bring your hand to the vein cutter at last.
Under this are the nerves of the fingers stripped of flesh.
Then again the hand to the warm water, and let blood run in it.
For if you do not repeat it in hot water, the blood clots in the opening of the vein, and its course is prevented.
When therefore you have extracted from the blood the quantity of necessity, then place upon the vein oil and salt: that it may not solidify quickly.
And similarly, it is necessary that you do with every strict branch.
The incision for phlebotomy from the left hand is because it is connected to spleen ailments; and similarly do so in phlebotomy as you did in the second equally.
The benefit of cutting the saphenous vein is for ailments that are in the lower part of the body, such as pains of the womb, and retention of menses, and infirmities of the kidneys, and ulcers of the hips and legs, old, and similar illnesses.
And the quality of phlebotomy is that the sick person puts his foot into warm water, and he makes friction upon it until the veins become swollen, and binds above the joint of the foot with a bandage.
And indeed veins are located at the heel bone, appearing towards the thumb: and they branch out from it on the face of the foot many branches.
Therefore, the phlebotomy is performed in the larger branch of the vein, or at the heel in its cluster; because it is better and more salutary.
If one cuts the vein on the face of the foot, then carefully cut away from the nerves that are below it on the face of the foot.
And place your incision for venesection as you wish to make it transversely, and let the scalpel be Nesil.
If the outflow of blood is prevented, then immerse the foot of it in warm water: and let the blood flow into it until it is evacuated.
If the vein cutter errs in the first attempt, then return with phlebotomy to the upper part for a short time, because the place is safe, and do not fear malice from it when you are careful of the nerves, as we said.
And similarly with the saphenous vein of the other foot equally.
The location of the Sciatic veins, as we have said, is at the heel from the inside side.
And the benefit of bloodletting is for pain in the hip, when it is because of hot blood.
And the quality of phlebotomy is that the sick person should enter the bath and hasten: and he should bind his leg from the side of the hip to above the heel with a thin cord four fingers wide, for it does not appear otherwise.
When therefore it appears, then the phlebotomist shall cut it according to what is possible for you, or according to the direction; and it is better, or that you cut it with an incision, or sever it with a section.
For its location is safer, and it is hidden in many people's bodies indeed.
If you do not find it, and it does not appear at all to the sense: then the phlebotomist will take some branch of it, and that which appears on the back of the foot, and towards the ear; and be careful from nerves, and make it run out of blood in the quantity that you wish.
Then loosen the constriction, and place over the site of the incision skin, and bind the area.
It heals quickly indeed.
On Wind-letting and its quality of use.
Chapter XCIII.
Instruments are made from horns, and from bronze, and from glass.
And indeed punction is done according to two modes.
With scarification, and drawing of blood: and another is venesection without scarification. And this kind of suction which is without incision, is according to two modes.
Or it is with fire.
Or it is without fire.
And there are fourteen places in the body which are treated with cupping and incisions and blood letting.
There is one that is named Alnocrati Ventus and it is in the rear of the head: and Alkehel and it is in the middle of the neck: and Alhagdahim Ventose, and these are two laminae of the neck from two parts simultaneously: and Ventose of the mind, and it is under the mandible in the lower mouth: and Ventose of two spatulas: and Ventose Alachosos above the end of the tail: and Ventose of two focilium, and these are the middle of the two arms: and Ventose of two legs: and Ventose of two tails.
And indeed ventosa does not draw blood from veins dispersed in the flesh, and for that reason virtue does not fall from them, as is the case with phlebotomy.
It is not necessary to administer cauterization, whether with fire or without fire, in certain illnesses that arise from fullness, until the entire body has been evacuated.
If necessity compels us to perform venesection because of sickness or habit, we administer it at any hour, at the beginning of the month, at its end, and in the middle, and at any time whatsoever.
It is because among men, when blood multiplies in him until it needs to be drawn out through venesection, he finds heaviness in his head and a headache.
And of these is he who found suppuration and redness on his face, head, and neck.
And among these is he who finds itching in his face, and forehead, and dimness, and dullness in his eyes.
And there is one who cuts the place of his windpipe. And there is one whose laughter is multiplied.
And of these is one who finds a taste of blood in his mouth; or his tongue becomes ulcerated and he spits out blood.
And there is one whose sleep multiplies.
And among these are those who see in their sleep blood and redness, and wounds, and things similar to these. When therefore we see something from those things, and properly if it is in the third week of the month: we prescribe then that ventilation be done, after two hours or three have passed. A wound of the neck from a sword thrust is: because it carries to the weight on the head, and what flows forth to the eyes.
