After I have completed this book for you, O Sons, which is the last of medical science with its completion and I have finished it in its entirety, after its expositions and its declarations, it seemed to me that I should complete it for you with this Tractate which is part of the operation, that is, surgery with the hand.
Because surgery with the hand is in our region and time completely absent, until perhaps the knowledge of it perished, and its trace was cut off: and there remained from it, except for small descriptions in books of ancients, which were altered by hands: and errors and hesitation happened to them, until their intentions were closed, and the power of him was extended: It seemed to me, that I should revive it with the arrangement of this Treatise in it according to the way of exposition, and declaration, and abbreviation: and that I should come with the forms of instruments cautery, and the rest of the instruments of work: when it is done from the addition of declaration, and from the preparation of it which is necessary.
The cause why a good artificer is not found in our time with his own hand is: because the art of medicine is long, and it is necessary for its author to exercise himself before that in the knowledge of anatomy, which Galen narrated, until he knows the attachments of the members, and their forms, and their conjunctions, and separations, and has knowledge of bones, and nerves, and tendons, and their number, and their exits, and the pulsations of veins, both quiet and moving, and the places of their exit.
And because of this Hippocrates said that a name with a name is much, and with work little, especially in the art of the hand.
We have now spoken of that at the beginning of this book.
For whoever is not learned in what we have said about anatomy, he will not be able to purge himself, but rather fall into error, by which men are slain: just as I have seen many of those who form themselves from this knowledge, and boast of it without knowledge, and without experience.
That is, because I saw a foolish physician follow an abscess on the neck of a woman, and he cut into some arteries in her neck; therefore, blood flowed from the woman until she died between his hands.
And I saw another physician who dared to extract a stone from a man who had advanced in age, and the stone was large. Therefore it came to him, and he extracted it with the fragment of the bladder. Therefore the man died on the third day.
And I indeed had been called to remove it; and I saw from the size of the stone, and the disposition of the patient, that he would die.
And I saw another physician who was receiving a stipend from a certain Duke in our land for medicine: and it happened to an eunuch, black, who was with him, a fracture in his leg near the heel: and the physician hastened with his ignorance, and bound the fracture above the wound with splints, and nails, with a strong bandage, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
Then he completed it according to his desires. Afterwards he dismissed him for some days, and ordered him not to loosen the ligature. And he stood thus until the abscess came to his leg, and his foot, and it came to ruin.
I was therefore summoned to him: and I hurried to loosen the ligament: and tranquility followed, and he was freed from his pains.
Nevertheless, corruption was already confirmed in the limb: and I could not restrain it.
Therefore when corruption has ceased to wander through the limb until it has perished.
And I saw another physician who lanced a cancerous abscess: and it was ulcerated after days, until the malignancy of it had increased with its lord.
That is, because when it is a pure cancer from the humor of melancholy, then it is not necessary that it come to it with iron at all, unless it is in a limb which can bear to have the whole thing cut off.
And therefore, sons, it is necessary for you to know that surgery with the hand is divided into two divisions: namely, surgery which is accompanied by health; and surgery, with which there is danger in many dispositions.
And I have now aroused in every place of this book, where there is an operation, a terror and fear.
Therefore it is necessary for you, that you avoid it, and halve it: that they may not find a foolish way to speak, and to dishonor.
Therefore, take the measure with care and protection, and your patients with ease and firmness, and use the best way leading by the grace of God to salvation and a praiseworthy succession: and dismiss terrible illnesses difficult to heal: and remove your souls from that which makes you fear, so that hesitation may enter upon you in your faith and your well-being.
For it is more enduring for your glory, and more sublime in this world, and finally to your quantities.
For Galen indeed said in some of his precepts. Do not treat a bad ailment: so that you are not called a bad physician.
Now however this treatise is divided into three chapters.
First Chapter.
Of cautery with fire, and cautery with sharp medicine, a chapter, and ordered from the head to the feet, and the shapes of instruments, and cautery tools: and all that is necessary in the operation.
Chapter Two.
Of incision and piercing, bloodletting and punction, and wounds: and the extraction of arrows, and similar things to these: and the whole chapter, arranged according to the forms of instruments.
Chapter Three.
On restoration, and dislocation, and healing of torsion, and similar things:  a chapter arranged from head to foot, and the shapes of instruments.
But before we remember the operation with him, it is necessary that I say the quality of his aids, and his harms: and in what complexion he is shown.
Therefore I say that discourse on the quality of cautery and its use is a lengthy and subtle science, and a hidden secret.
Even many wise men spoke on this subject and disagreed about it; and for my part, I find it enough from their words, fearing an extension.
Therefore, I say that cauterization is effective universally for every condition, which is with matter and without matter, except for two conditions, which are hot condition without matter and dry condition without matter.
When the complexion was warm and moist they separated with the material. Some have said that a cautery is helpful in this. And others said the opposite of this, namely that cauterization is not suitable in illness which is from heat and dryness; because nature is heat, and it is unsuitable that it be healed from hot and dry disease with heat and dryness.
And he who says the opposite of this said: that by cauterization healing is done in every ailment hot and dry that happens in the bodies of humans: because when you compare the body of a human and its humidities to the complexion of fire, you find the body of a human cold.
And I indeed say by his saying: because from experience already it has shown itself to me many times.
Nevertheless, it ought not to come to pass that one should undertake this, unless he has already been tested and trained in the last exercise of the chapter on Cauterization, and has recognized the diversity of human complexions, and the disposition of illnesses in themselves, and their causes, and accidents, and the space of time for them.
Of the remaining complexions there is no fear: and especially in cold and moist ailments. For now all physicians have come together on these matters; and they did not disagree concerning the help of cautery in them.
And know, sons, that from the secret of healing by cautery with fire, and its goodness over cautery with burning medicine is this: because fire is simple, whose action does not reach except to the member that is cauterized; and it does not harm another member joined with it, except with little harm.
The action of burning in medicine comes to that which lengthens from the limbs; and perhaps it causes pain in the limb to occur that is difficult to heal, and perhaps it kills.
Fire, however, because of its subtlety and goodness of substance, does not do this unless it is excessive.
Now indeed it has been made known to us by experience, because of the length of service and study with the art, and standing over the truth of things: and for this I excuse myself from the length of speech.
And if it were not so, because it is not permitted to me in this book of mine, to bring to you the hidden secret by fire, and the quality of its operation in bodies of its expulsion, which expels diseases with a philosophical demonstrative discourse, that would agree with your minds.
And know, sons, that they disagree about the time in which cautery should be done, and put forward a better time for truth.
And I say that cauterization is fitting at all times; for the harm arising from time is submerged in the benefit which is drawn with cauterization. And especially if the cautery is for pains from necessary pains, strong and urgent, which do not tolerate delay; because it is feared from them that an evil may happen which is greater than a small harm caused by the time passing.
And do not let it enter your minds, O sons, that which is not feared by the vulgar and foolish physicians, namely that in illnesses that are healed by cauterization, there is not always a return; and they put forth this as a consequence, and the matter is not as they think: because cauterization is not otherwise than medicine, which alters complexion, and dries up the humidities which are the causes, wherefore pains occur.
However, cauterization is superfluous over medicine because of the speed of its health and the power of its operation, and the intensity of its dominion: and it is possible that illness may return after some time according to the constitution of the sick person, and the location of his illness, and the virtue of him, and what is prepared in his body from the aggregation of superfluities in him, and what comes to him in its acquisition from foods, and similar things from causes, unless illness occurs in which cauterization is administered.
Pain that is slight in a limb due to few excesses and moistures, such as the pain of a tooth, because of the pain, and similar to it, for it is possible that the pain does not return there. But that is done in few cases.
But the common saying that cautery is the last resort of medicine is a true saying: not for what they intend by it; because they believe that it is not a cure that compares with medicine, nor with anything else after the occasion of cautery.
The matter is contrary to this, and the intention, that cautery is the last of medicine, is not so, except when we administer modes of treatment in some illnesses, and those medicines do not help; then, at the end of the matter, we administer cautery, and it helps: therefore, it falls that cautery is the last of medicine, not according to the intention which the common people and many foolish physicians understand.
The ancients said that a cautery with gold is better than a cautery with iron: and they did not say this except because of the equality of gold, and the sublimity of its substance: and they said that it does not make pus the place of cauterization. But that is not absolutely true; for I have already proven it, and found that it does not do that in some bodies without others.
And a cautery with itself is good, and better than with iron, as they have said. However, when you heat the cautery with fire from gold, it is not clear to you when it is heating according to the quantity that you want, because of the redness of the gold: and when it approaches to it coldness, and if you add fire above it, it melts in the fire, and turns into sheets.
Therefore the artificer comes from that into employment: and for this reason cautery is made with iron among us more quickly and nearer, from rightness to operation.
And I indeed have arranged this Chapter on Cauterization, according to chapters; and I have arranged them from head to foot: so that they may help the one who seeks what he wants from it.
Chapter II.
This applies cauterization to the domain of moisture and coldness over the brain: which two are causes of inflammation, and multiplicity of flow of humors from the head to the parts of the eyes and ears, and multiplicity of sleep, and toothache, and sore throat: and universally all illness, which happens from coldness, such as paralysis, and inflammation, epilepsy, and apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
The method of cauterization is that you should instruct the sick person: that first it be evacuated with a medicinal solution cleansing the head for three nights, or four, according to what the strength of the infirm and his age and his habit require.
Then command him to make his head shave with a razor. Then make him sit between your hands square, so that he has now placed his hands on his chest.
Then place the root of your palm over the root of his nose between his eyes. Whenever therefore your middle finger shall have passed over it, mark that place with an unbleached one.
Then cautery with olive oil fire: this is its form.
Then place it on the marked spot with the unfastened, descending part so that your hand may be gradually tightened, and you turn it. Then lift your hand quickly, and look at the place.
If you see already exposed from the bone the quantity of alkiel, or the quantity of zeuherbi, then elevate your hand. And if not, repeat your hand with the iron itself, or with another from itself if it becomes cold: until the bones which I told you appear.
Then take some salt, and dissolve it in water, and drink it into the wound, and put it over the place: and leave it for three days.
Then place upon it a cloth soaked in butter, and let it remain over the site until the fire's scurf is destroyed. Then treat it with ointment of four drugs, until it is healed.
They have said that the more a wound remains open, the more it emits pus, and therefore it is better and more helpful.
And some of them said that the skin should be cauterized up to the bone; and the cautery should be held until something of the thickness of bone is burned away.
Then it is scraped after that which has been burned from bone, then it is cared for.
And others say that it is necessary that with the cauterizing iron one should arrive at the utmost, until it impresses into the bone a form, so that the bone falls off, which happens as in the shape of a chisel; or an instrument which women put on the small alphabet infusion; and they believe that vapors of the head are exhaled from this place, and the wound be left open for a long time.
Then it is cared for until it consolidates.
To me, these two kinds of cautery do not appear at all except in certain people according to the way of fear.
And to dismiss him, in my opinion, is better for his health.
The head is weakened by the disruption of its natural continuity, as we have demonstrated in the other limbs: and especially when the body of a weak patient is naturally debilitated. And indeed the first kind of cauterization is safer and better for me, and I use it; therefore operate with it in safety.
Chapter III.
When a chronic pain occurs throughout the whole head: and it continues in the sick person, and he uses pig fat, and ointments, and head purges, and oils, and emplastrum. And especially if it has already been cauterized with one cautery, which we have described, and it does not help anything from those: then consider. If the head of the sick person is strong by nature's creation and not weak, and it finds intense cold, then cauterize with a cautery beneath it a little. Then cauterize it on every horn of his head with a cautery, so that it does not penetrate the skin, and uncover from bone the quantity which we have narrated. And cauterize him with one cautery on the back of his head, in the place which is called "was": and it is a place where a ventouse is placed; and elevate your mattress here, and do not uncover the bone. For he found himself in pain because of this, and it was different from the pain of other cautery burns on all parts of the head.
And I shall say this regarding the cautery: and it ought to be a cautery for cauterizing the horns of the head, and the nape of its neck with a finer cautery than that used for cauterizing the middle of the head.
Chapter IV.
When there is pain and swelling in the head, or pain extends to the eye, and the head is cleansed with purifying medicines, and the rest of the treatment, which I have said in the divisions of diseases, is administered, and this does not benefit at all; then cauterization is done in it according to two modes: either cauterization with a burning sharp medicine; or with iron.
A cautery with a sharp and burning medicine is, to take one tooth of another, and to scrape it, and to cut off the extremities of it from both sides. Then cut a place of pain in time with a wide lancet, until a place is made under the skin, in which the tooth is caught.
Therefore introduce it into the very skin, until it is covered; then bind over it with a little poultice of a decent constriction, and let it be for fifteen hours; then unbind it, and remove the one, and leave the wound for two or three days: afterwards put upon it a pad immersed in butter, until a place produces pus; then care for it with ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish to do this with certain medicines that burn, which I have written about in the twelfth treatise, on Burning Medicines.
Cauterization of it with iron, is according to this manner. Burning cautery, whose form is this.
And it is called Claulis: because the shape of its head is like the shape of a key, in which there is some curvature, and in the middle of it is a small eminence.
Then place it over the spot and hold your hand: and you revolve the iron gradually with speed: and let the quantity which is burned be as the thickness of the skin. And lift up your hand so that the artery below is not burned and blood does not flow.
Then soak a cloth in salt water, and place it over the location, and leave it for three days; then put the cloth with butter on top: afterwards, care for it with ointment until it heals.
And if you wish, cauterize this headache with the second end of the cutting instrument of the cautery. And be cautious about an incision of the artery in this headache, not one that is old properly.
On the manner of cauterizing in ancient headache.
When you treat a headache, with that which we said from the previous treatment, and that which we said in the divisions of illnesses, and it does not matter for treatment: and you see from the illness that what we said from the first cauterization with medicine, or with cauterization with fire, is not enough, then it is necessary to use a knife cauterization until it whitens. After which mark signs on the place of pain with a line, whose length is half a finger, or almost that: and put your hand in one vice, and squeeze it until you cut the artery and reach the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to avoid the continuation of the mandible, which moves during chewing, lest it be burned on one side or the nerve that moves it, whereby spasms occur.
And let there be care and watchfulness of the flow of blood from the artery that has been severed. For in its cutting there is fear, and especially to he who does not know what he does, and is not studious nor experienced: and abandons the operation with him first of all.
And I shall come with a remembrance of the regimen of the flow of blood from an artery according to its mode, and in the place of this book.
If you see that from illness, the cautery does not suffice for him, and you see the body of the infirm enduring the cautery in the middle of the head, as we have narrated, care for the wound until it is healed.
And if you wish, administer a cautery, which we said in the chapter on extracting an artery with a cautery having two blades. For indeed cauterization is better this way and more effective.
On the mode of cauterization for ear pain.
When pain occurs in the ear from cold, and it is treated with decoctions and the rest of the cure that we have said in the division, and the pain does not go away, then cauterize with fire; and this is called a Point, whose shape is this.
Then the points with it after its ignition on the circumference of the whole ear, as it rotates: or on the circumference of both, if pain is simultaneously in both. And elongate yourself with a cautery from the root of the ear a little, after you have marked the places with encaustic; and let the quantity of cautery be ten punctures in every ear, and so forth.
Then take care of the wounds until they are healed.
On the manner of cauterization in a torture.
Chapter VII.
A torture which is cured with cauterization, is nothing but from kinds which happen from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of illnesses.
And avoid cauterization of the kind that comes from drying and spasm of the nerve.
When you treat this type of earache with leeches and head washes and gargles, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary to cauterize the diseased person with three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear, and a second a little lower from its time, and a third at the junction of the two lips.
And place your cautery on the opposite part of the weak. For softening does not occur unless in a part that appears healthy.
And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize it with the cautery in the direct extremity of the upper earlobe below the corner of the head slightly: and at another time: whose length should be according to the length of the finger. And place your hand with the cautery until half the thickness of the skin is burned.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a kind from the knife, whose shape is preceded: however, it is not too refined, as you see: and it ought to be a knife in it of superfluous thickness little.
Then care for the place, with that which preceded it: until it is healed.
On the mode of cauterization in old apoplexy.
When apoplexy has aged, and you have treated it with what we said, and your treatment is not effective, and the sick person does not have fever, then cauterize him with four cautery burns on top of every horn of his head, and with a cautery in the middle of the head, as we said before, and with a cautery on the back of the head, according to what preceded: and the manner of the cautery let it be according to what preceded.
It is also cauterized with a cautery over the opening of the stomach: and this is more ultimate.
Then it is cared for, with that which preceded.
Chapter IX.
It is necessary that in a drink are given first to the infirm large amounts of hyer and purifying pills for the brain.
Then shave the head of the sick person entirely, and place on the back of his head a plaster of synan described in the treatise on plasters: and place it repeatedly.
This, indeed, is the manner of cautery, and do it according to the same order which I said there.
If therefore it is healed through that, it is good. If not, then make three cauteries on the back of his head, which are descending from the upper part of the head to the lower part of the eye: and place between each cautery the thickness of a finger.
Then care for cautery, as that which preceded.
If, however, you wish an addition, and the patient is weak and enduring it, then make a cautery in the middle for him. If you want an addition: then cauterize it over two horns.
Then care for him until he heals: let the cautery be olive oil according to the form which has been previously stated.
On the method of cauterization in Paralysis, and softening.
Chapter X.
You must proceed with the purification of the head with shears, and with what we have said.
Then scrape the head of the sick person; afterwards cauterize it with a cautery in the middle of the head, and with a cautery over every horn of the head, and with a cautery over the back of it, and with three over the vertebrae of the neck.
If, however, you need to soften the body in illness with many of these things, and he is weak and enduring, and the illness is strong: then burn him with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and the last one with a cautery, until it burns from the skin most of it, and raise your hand. Then care for it until it heals; and so apply the cautery of Albucasis.
On the method of cauterization in Epilepsy.
An epileptic is not cauterized, unless his epilepsy is from phlegm.
Therefore it is necessary that you cleanse the brain of him first with a pigskin, and with the rest of the care which we have said in the division: when he is greatly ill, or is enduring in the acceptance of medicines.
If it is a boy who does not tolerate medicines, then a gargle and cleansing chewing are administered to the brain, before that many days with improvement of foods.
Then shave his head, afterwards cauterize it with one cautery in the middle of the head, according to what preceded in manner: and with another cautery in the back of his head, and over every horn of his head with a cautery. If the patient be strong but enduring, then cauterize him with cautery as I said in treating paralysis and softening of the body over the vertebrae of the neck and vertebrae of the back: and let the cauterizing oil be according to the measure which preceded.
If however the boy is weak, then place a fine cautery, according to this manner.
On the manner of cauterizing in Melancholia.
When the cause of melancholy is corrupt humors and thick phlegm, then cauterize it with cauteries which we said are used for those having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is an excess of descending humors, and the body of the sick person is humid, then give him in a drink that will purify his brain, according to what preceded in the division; then shave the head of the sick person, and afterwards make a poultice properly made from linen, like a circle.
Then place it in the middle of the head: and the weak one sitting square shall be held from every part.
Then apply this ointment. It is better from old sheep butter. And heat him over a fire with temperate measure of heating which the finger can tolerate when it is introduced into it. Then evacuate it in the middle of his head in a circle, and let it go until it cools.
Do this for the sick person once a week, with the rest of his good regimen, until he is healed.
Or if you wish, cauterize it by making small punctures in it most of all, besides which hold your hand with the cautery; indeed let it smell.
For this kind of cautery moistens the brain with quality.
Then place upon it a cloth soaked in butter, or chicken fat.
On the way of cauterizing in descending water to the eye.
Chapter XIII.
When you are told the beginning of water in the eye by the signs which I have said in the division, then begin and wash the sick person's head with it so that it may cleanse him.
And guard him from all moisture, and make him sit in a bath, fasting for several days.
Then order him to shave his head and cauterize it in the middle of his head. Then cauterize it over the two temples with two cauteries, if there is a beginning of water flow into both eyes at once; or from one side, if there is a beginning of water flow in one eye; and cut off with a cautery all the veins and arteries that are under the skin: and let the cauteries be long in the width of the temples; and beware of the flow of blood.
If you see something from that, then immediately cut it away with whatever medicine is possible: and I will come with the wisdom which is in the extraction of arteries, and their cutting, and care from the flow of blood.
And sometimes it is cauterized in the neck, under two bones, with two last produced cauteries.
On the method of cauterization in ancient tears.
When the tears of the eyes are ancient and continuous, and they are above the veins and arteries that are on the head outside, it is verified that this is from the superfluities cold, phlegmatic: then cauterize with the cautery same as I narrated in the beginning of the descending water, the cautery in the middle of the head, and two cauteries above the two temples, and two cauteries in the neck under the two bones. And if you need to add something, then cauterize it on all sides of the eye carefully, above the eyebrow tip with a small cautery.
On the method of cauterizing in a fistula of the nose.
When you treat this, with that which we said in the division, and the treatment does not help: then hasten, and give to drink three nights of a decoction of rue; then shave his head, and cauterize it with a medium cautery, with an olive cautery. Then cauterize him with a two-pronged burning iron, above two eyebrows under little hairs.
And guard against the artery, lest you cut it.
And this is the form of the cautery of Claudius.
On the method of cauterization in softening the eyelid.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by pain or moisture: then cauterize the eyelid with one cautery, with this lunar cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize it above the two eyebrows a little with two cauteries in every part: and let them be lengthened from the two temples: and let the length of every cautery be according to the lengths of the eyebrow: and do not bring your hand with the cautery to the end, but according to the quantity which is burned the third eyelid.
On the manner of cauterizing the eyelid when hairs are inverted and piercing the eye.
Cauterization is done in two ways: either with fire cautery or with a burning medicine cautery.
When using cauterization with fire, command the infirm person before it to shave his hair if he is of those who have it trimmed, until they are lengthened and made equal. If they pierce him at his birth place: then bind his eyes with a piece of cloth, that they may not move until they are born.
When therefore they are born and made equal, then put the head of the sick person in your bosom: then mark above the eyelid of his eyes with a cautery, a mark which is according to the figure of a myrtle leaf: and let the beginning of the mark be near the hairs.
Then place a soaked sponge in the albumen of an egg: or in flaxseed mucilage over the eye.
Then a fire cautery, whose form is this.
Then burn over the figure which you marked out in many lines until the skin surface is burned, which is like the shape of a myrtle leaf, altogether apparent properly.
And the sign of the health of your work is: that if you see the eyelid already contracting, and hairs being removed at the point of the eye.
Therefore raise your hand then: and let him go for three days.
Then put on top of it a compress with butter until the scab is removed. Then care for it with ointment until it is healed.
If something returns of the hairs after an hour, and the eyelid softens: then repeat the cautery over that place, as you did at first.
If hairs are in the lower part: then cauterize it until it is raised to its natural place: and it should be equal so that the hairs do not prick the eye.
It is as if you should instruct the sick person to shave off hair until they grow long and equal. Make from cloth a form of myrtle leaf.
Then take from known soap and from unsoaked lime, one ounce each; then rub them together well, and make it with haste so that it does not cool. Then from the paned out of it onto the parchment which you made like the form of a myrtle leaf, and place it over the eyelid of one eye, or two. And place under the eye a poultice soaked in egg white: and the head of the sick person be in your bosom.
And place your index finger upon the medicine, and press it for a short while. And you shall move it whenever the sick man feels the bite of the medicine; because he finds its bite like fire.
While therefore he persevered in this which he himself invented biting, then dismiss medicine, and move it with your finger. When therefore the biting has quieted, then remove the medicine, and wash the eye with water.
And consider then, if you see the eyelid elevate, as it elevates with contraction with fire, or with incision, it is well: and if not, then repeat over it from medicine on the place where the medicine does not imprint, and does not darken, until your operation is equal, and the eye contracts.
Then place upon it a cot with butter until the burned skin is eradicated. Then care for it with diaphanic ointment, or another, until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you in surgery, that you guard carefully, lest anything from the medicine fall into the eye.
If the eyelid softens after days, and something fights from the hair in the eye, then again apply medicine to that place which softens from the eyelid properly, just as you did at first. Then take care of it, until it heals.
And this is the form of the myrtle leaf.
And know that the eyes of humans differ in size and smallness. Therefore, according to that, let your consideration be this: and the way of righteousness is not hidden from him who has a study of this art.
On the method of cauterizing in a lacrimal fistula.
When you treat a fistula, as we have said in the divisions of illnesses, and your treatment is not effective: then, it is necessary that you cauterize it according to this method.
Tell the sick person to place their head in your bosom and have a servant hold his head between his hands so that it may not be moved or shaken.
Then place a poultice of infusion in the albuginea of the eye, or in the mucilage of psyllium over its eye; then apply fire cautery, whose form is this.
Let it be concave, like the form of a goose feather quill from one end, with which cautery is made; and if you wish, let it be penetrating to the other end, and if you wish, let it be bent upwards.
However, this is better for your work.
Then express a fistula, if it is open, and remove the pus from it, and dry it up; and if it is not open, then open it, and remove its pus.
Then place a cautery heated very hot on it.
And hold your hand with it for a little while near the cautery from the eye to the part of the nose, so that your hand does not stray or disturb the sick one: and put the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
If therefore you come in the beginning of your cautery up to the bone, it will be well. And if not: then repeat the cautery once, or twice, if it needs it: and let it alone for three days.
Then place a poultice with butter and take care of it with an ointment that dries until it heals.
If he has passed forty days and it is not healed: then put on top of it a sharp corrosive medicine, until the bone is uncovered; and scrape it according to what comes in its chapter.
And there is another method of cauterizing a fistula, which some first said. Pay attention to the location of the fistula, and find it; then put into its fissure a fine bed, that is, a fine cannula, whose form is this. And pour into it the quantity of a drachma of lead melted, and hold your hand with a good retention cane, and do not move the patient at all, so that it does not run, or the melted lead comes to his eye.
And it is necessary that you place over the eye of the infirm a poultice infused in albumen of egg, or in water.
For lead, indeed, burns the place of a fistula, and heals it with miraculous healing.
If the fistula is healed, as we have said from cautery and treatment, it is good. And if not, then it is necessary to administer a hole in the nose, and to reduce the fistula to the course of the nose, according to what will come in its proper place for itself.
On the manner of cauterizing in fissures of the lips.
Very often fissures occur in the lip, which are called pili, and especially in the lips of children.
When therefore you care for these fissures, as we said in the division of ailments, and the cure does not help, then with a small knife-shaped cautery, according to this form, fire.
And let its concavity be according to the sharpness of a knife.
Then place it burning quickly into the very fissures until the cautery reaches the depth of the fissures.
Then care for him with a poultice until it heals.
On the mode of cauterizing in a mouth fistula.
When an abscess occurs at the root of the gum, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth: then it makes pus, and it breaks; afterwards it matures, and pus runs, and a fistula is formed: then cure it, and the treatment does not help in it, then it is necessary that fires cauterize according to the quantity which takes into the fistula. Then introduce it burning into the fistula's opening, and hold your hand until the burning iron reaches its depth and end; do this once or twice.
Then take care of him after that, as we have said about the cure up to when he should be cared for.
If therefore the pus is cut away and it heals, it will be good. And if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place, and remove the corrupted bone according to what comes in its head.
On the method of cauterizing in gums and softened teeth.
When the gums soften because of moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines, and it does not help: then place the head of the sick person in your bosom.
Then apply the burning cautery, which will come in the shape following this, so that you place the tube over the tooth: and quickly insert the ignited cautery into it: and hold your hand for a short time until the one suffering feels the heat of fire has already reached the root of the tooth.
And lift your hand: then repeat cautery several times, according to what you wish.
Then the sick person shall fill his mouth with salt water and hold it for one hour; and he shall spit it out.
For when a tooth is moved, it is set firmly, and the gums are softened and tightened, and the corrupted humidity is dried.
On the mode of cauterization in toothache.
When pain in the tooth is caused by cold or there is cold within it, or a worm, and healing does not help with medicines; then cauterization is done in the tooth in two ways: either cauterization with butter or cauterization with fire.
The cautery with butter is thus made, take clarified butter and melt it in an iron ladle or pan. Then take a swab and wrap it around the end of the limb. Then immerse it in boiled butter: and place it on the aching tooth quickly, and hold it until it cools: then repeat it several times, until the virtue of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, submerge wool or a cloth in cold butter, and place it over the aching tooth: and place on top of it burning iron until the fire reaches the bottom of the tooth's cavity.
The cauterization of it with fire is, that you may apply to a tube of air, or a tube of iron. And let there be something of thickness in his body, so that the sharpness of fire does not reach the bone of the infirm.
Then set the cautery to fire, whose form will come: and place it upon that tooth: and hold your hand, until the cautery cools.
Do this several times, for the pain will be removed, either on that same day or another day.
And it is necessary in the cautery's application, that the sick person fill his mouth with good broth and hold it for one hour; then he should spit it out.
And this is the form of cautery.
Cauterize with whatever extremity you wish according to what is possible: and this is the form of the Cannula.
On the manner of cauterization in strophuli.
When the strophulae are from phlegm and from cold humidities, and they are not obedient to digestion by medicines, and you wish to hasten their digestion, then a concave cautery fire whose form is this:
Having two open ends so that smoke may exit at one end when cauterizing from the other end: and place it lit upon the abscess once, and again, if needed, until it reaches the depth of the abscess.
If the abscess is small: then place cautery according to the size of the abscess.
Then dismiss him for three days and place over it a poultice infused in butter until that which was burned by fire is removed.
Then care for it with toothpaste ointment until the shape of the tube heals.
On the method of cauterization for hoarseness of voice and constriction of breathing.
When humidity accumulates above the lung canal, and especially when it is with a cold constitution, then it is necessary that the sick person be evacuated first with medicines of solutions.
Then cauterize it at the root of the throat, in a depressed place: and beware, lest you come with the cautery to the throat, nor into the skin, unless something of it.
Then cauterize him with another cautery at the junction of the neck at its last vertebra; and let the cautery be clamped according to the manner which preceded.
Then care for him as before, until he is healed.
On the mode of cauterization in illnesses of the lungs and cough.
When a cough and lung ailment are due to cold humors, and the patient does not have fever or consumption, and the ailment is old: then cauterize him with two cauteries above the fork in low, soft, hollow places. And with another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two nipples: and let the cautery be a tube according to the form which preceded.
And if you wish to cauterize your wound by pricking with a cautery called 'Punctum', whose form precedes in the pricking of ear pains: and let there be points from thirty points up to almost others.
Then take care of him with that which preceded, until he is healed.
And now let there be a cautery having three branches: according to this form. Therefore it should be relieved with it cauterization, when you make with it once three cauteries.
Chapter XXVII.
When the head is dislocated because of humidity and it does not return to its place within an hour after its dislocation, until it has become accustomed to returning, then it is dislocated with a slight movement, which happens as we have already testified, then it must be reduced back into place. Then the sick person is laid on their back, or on their sound side. Then raise the skin that is in the inner Tilici to the upper parts with your left hand fingers: and if the joint is dislocated inwards.
Then with a cauterizing fire he has two instruments. Its shape is this.
Then cauterize the skin until it penetrates to the other side, and the figure of cauterization will come with four cauteries.
And sometimes cauterization is done with a cautery having three cords, therefore the figure of cauterization then becomes six cauteries: and the cords are according to the subtlety of the thread.
And this is the shape of a cautery having three handles.
And sometimes one is added above this mode, wherefore there are eight cauteries.
Then put on top of the cautery crushed leeks with salt. Then make the injured person lie still so that the limb is not moved for a while until it has strengthened.
And if the dislocation is upward, and this rarely happens, then cauterize it above the shoulder with a single cautery, or with many cauteries by puncturing.
For the joint is strengthened and humidity is removed: and the infirm is healed.
On the manner of cauterizing the stomach.
When cold and much moisture occur in the stomach until it is drawn out of its composition, and phlegm multiplies to it, and continuous treatments are applied, and it does not help: then it is necessary that the sick person be laid on his back, and stretch out his legs, and hands. Then cauterize with three cauteries, a cautery under the ear of the breast the size of one finger with a clauili cautery, and two cauteries below from both sides of one cautery, until the figure of the cauteries becomes triangular. And make it extend between the two so that they may not join when they make pus.
And let the depth of the cautery be the quantity of two thirds the thickness of the skin.
And let the shape of the cauteries be according to this form without addition: and if you wish to cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form: and let the cautery which does this cautery be one according to the figure of a circle according to this form.
And the stomach is cauterized by pricking it for him who fears this cauterization; and it is, as signs on the stomach point according to the quantity which you wish with encaustration; then cauterize it with a cauterizing point; then cure it with the cure which preceded until it heals.
On the manner of cauterizing a cold abscess.
When pain occurs in the liver from cold and moisture, or from thick wind, until it leaves its composition by natural discharge of superfluity, and the patient is healed with what we have said, and does not improve: then it is necessary that the patient be laid on his back on his neck, and three cauteries with encaustic signs according to this figure and this same quantity below the epigastrium from the hypogastrium, where the elbow of man reaches. And let the space between every cautery be according to the thickness of the finger: and let the cautery be according to the length of the body straight: and do not press your hand with the cautery too much.
Let the quantity that is burned be according to the thickness of the skin, the quantity of half of it not added: and let the sick person stand upon his feet.
If he is not standing, then let him be lying down, who has already extended his legs and raised his arms.
This is the form of a cautery.
And it is possible for you, that you may cauterize these wounds with a knife cautery, when there is subtlety and prudence in the art with you.
And guard yourself that you do not proceed too far in cauterization, and the thickness of the skin of the whole is burned, therefore the whole body is burned, and it comes to the intestines: because the skin there is thin, know this thing.
On the method of cauterizing abscesses of the liver.
When an abscess occurs and you wish to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in its tunic; then if it is in the flesh of the liver, a pain invades the weak patient, and heaviness without sharpness: and if it is in the tunic of the liver, there is a pain with very vehement sharpness: and you see now, because it has fatigued his doctors with treatment.
Therefore, it is necessary that the sick person lie on his neck. Then the figure of the place of an abscess with cautery; then fires of cauterium which is assimilated to a ray. And this is its form. And cauterize with it one cautery until the whole skin is burned and it reaches the flesh, until all pus comes out; then care for it with treatment of wounds until it heals.
And one should not use this cautery unless the study of medicine is prolonged, and by whose hands these ailments occur with experience many times; then indeed let him dare to perform such an operation.
But in my opinion, it is better to dismiss her.
On the method of cauterization in pleurisy.
The ancients said that a cautery with the roots of asarabacca is used for cold pleurisy in this way. And it is, that you receive from the roots of dried long birthwort, one root longer, which is found in it, and let it be like the thickness of a finger. Then immerse it in oil and set it aflame. Then burn with one cautery in that which is between the continuation of the fork and the neck, and with two small cauteries under a slight slant towards the part which is below the beard.
And with two cauteries also in that which is between the fifth and sixth rib sloping to the rear a little: and one cautery in the middle of the chest, and one above the stomach. And with three cauteries from behind: one where it is between two spatulas: and two cauteries from the two sides of the chest, lower cautery which is between two spatulas.
And you must not grasp your hand with the cautery, but rather it should be on manifest skin smelling.
And some ancients said that there are men who use a cauterio from iron similar to a rod: and they ignite it, and put it inside where is between the ribs, until it comes with it to the abscess itself, and pus emerges: as we said in the case of an abscess of the Liver.
But in this perforation with a cautery there is fear, that either the weak man dies immediately, or a fistula occurs in its place, which has no healing.
Of the mode of cauterizing the spleen. Chapter XXXII.
When you treat the illness of the spleen, as we have said from the treatment in the division of illnesses, and your treatment is not effective, then cautery in it is according to three ways, which are all right.
One of these is to make three cauteries, or four, lining them according to the length of the spleen according to the figure of the liver cauteries, which preceded.
And let there be between every cautery a quantity of thickness of a finger, or a little more or less.
And let the mode of cauterization be as we said in the cauterization of the liver, equally.
And do not press your hand with the cautery: and let the weak one lie on his back.
And another way of cauterization is: as having a cautery with two handles, which we said in the chapter on dislocation of the shoulder: and elevate the skin, which is on the direct spleen, where the elbow of the left arm reaches: and let your elevation be such that you elevate the skin according to the width of the body, so that the cauteries fall according to the length of the body.
Then introduce two burned cords far into it, until you penetrate the skin from the other side; then withdraw the cautery: thus four cauteries are made.
And if you wish to cauterize with a cautery having three handles.
Then care for the cautery after you have allowed it to discharge pus for many days, for it is more effective than anything that has preceded from the cure.
On the manner of cauterization in dropsy.
Cautery does not fall in dropsy, unless it is applied properly.
When you treat Hydropsy with the methods of treatment which we have said in the division, and the cure does not avail, then it is necessary that you cauterize it with four cauteries around the navel, and one cautery over the stomach, and another over the liver, and one over the spleen, and two cauteries behind the back between the vertebrae, and one on the direct chest, and another on the direct stomach: and let the quantity of depth of the cautery be near to the thickness of the skin.
Then release the open cautery so that it may discharge pus for a long time.
And do not remove the weak patient from treatment after cauterization with him: because it is necessary that two intentions be gathered together with him: and he will hasten to him healing with the help of God.
The form of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized should be a clamp: according to what preceded, its shape. And that with which the back is cauterized, should be an olive according to what preceded its shape.
On the manner of cauterizing feet and legs.
When abscesses are treated in a Hydropericardium, and are filled with yellow water: it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the auricular and annular; and raise your hand with the cautery, and do not twist it: then raise your hand: and do not repeat it at all.
The water of citron will then boil, and let the cautery be according to this form.
Then make on each of the two legs two cauteries in every leg, and let the cautery be made with the edge of a knife cautery: and let the cautery be made according to the length of the leg, one under the knee, and the other lower than that, about the middle of the leg: and on each hip two cauteries: and dismiss the open cautery without treatment for a long time: so that it will subside from it some water: then cure it with the rest which we have said.
On the manner of cauterization in the treatment of a rupture.
Chapter XXXV.
When the solution of the belly is from cold and humidity until it weakens the retentive and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestines: and it is cured with modes of cure, and it does not heal: and you see the weak one enduring cautery of exuberant virtue, then cauterize him with a great cautery over his stomach, according to what preceded in the cautery of the stomach with a circular cautery, and four subtle cauteries in the circumference of the navel, with a subtle cautery. And with a cautery above the alcatin above the alhosos large, or two cauteries.
And if you see excessive humidities and the weak tolerating it, then cauterize it with a cautery on the comb, and a cautery on all of that; and perhaps you add two small cauteries near the large stomach.
It is indeed a healing treatment, whose benefit does not fail.
On the manner of cauterizing hemorrhoids.
Chapter XXXVI.
When hemorrhoids in the anus are old, many, or one, and they are from thick, cold humors, or corrupted humidities, and they are cured with that which we said in the division, and treatment does not help: then cauterize with three cauterizations on the lower spinal bone of the back under the armpit a little triangularly, and the cauterization under the navel as if it were two fingers.
And if you think that his stomach is cold, and his food is not digested, and you see his face festering, then cauterize him over the stomach with a large cauterizer, according to what preceded: and with a cauterizer over his spleen, and another over his Spleen, with a caulking cauterizer: and let the open cauterium go for some time: then care for him until he heals.
Chapter XXXVII.
When you cut the artery, then apply the cautery which is similar to a ray of fire. Then introduce the burning (instrument) into the cut wound; and your last hand, until the cauterizing reaches the opening of the vein from which blood flows; do this once or twice.
If therefore the abscesses are many, then cauterize each one with a cautery according to what we have narrated. Then care for that, when it is applied with ointment until they are healed.
And if you cauterize him with a large cautery over linen, it is more ultimate in aid.
On the manner of cauterizing a fistula in the anus.
Chapter XXXVIII.
When the patient does not obey the cutting and operation which we have narrated in its place, and is terrified by it, perhaps he is healed with cauterization.
When therefore it happens to someone that he has a fistula, and it becomes old, pus runs out of it, and corrupt humidities. Therefore it is right that you examine her with a subtle probe. Then learn the quantity of its depth with a probe.
Then use fire cautery, which is like a ray. Then insert yourself ignited into the fistula itself and the quantity in which it entered.
And repeat over it the cautery, until all those corrupted bodies are burned, once, or twice, or thrice, according to the quantity of your necessity.
And guard yourself against burning the nerve, if it is there, or the large vein: or if a fistula goes to the body of the bladder, or to the body of the intestine, then guard yourself from all these places.
And do not do this, unless there is an opening in a fleshy place: and you consider, because it is not penetrating.
Then care for the place until it heals.
If, however, the place is sealed and the materials are cut away from it, and it remains so for a long time: then you know that it is now completely healed.
And if they do not cut away the material from it, then know that it is penetrating, or there is a decayed opening in its depths, or like one of those: whose recollection will come at its place.
On the method of cauterizing the kidneys.
When pain occurs in the kidneys from cold or from a thick wind, and it is lessened because of this which weakens the patient, then it is necessary to cauterize it over almethen on the kidneys, with a cauterizer over the whole kidney with a cauterio clauili, whose previous description has preceded.
And perhaps we cauterize it a second time in the very wound. Therefore will come three lines. Therefore they will be more useful in healing.
On the manner of cauterizing the Bladder.
When weakness and softening occur in the bladder due to cold and humidity, until it can no longer retain weak urine, then cauterize its lower part above the bladder, where the hairs of the pubis begin, and with one cautery from the right side and another from the left; and let the length of this cauterization be according to the quantity of a knuckle; and cauterize it with a lower back cautery, or with two cauteries if you need it; and let the cauterium be closed as before.
On the method of cauterizing the Matrix.
When coldness and humidity occur in the womb and pregnancy is prevented thereby, and her menstrual flow becomes corrupted and delayed, and pain occurs to her at its arrival, then it is necessary that she be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder, and with a cautery on the lower part of the back above the loincloth, or with two cauteries: and let the cautery be clamp-shaped.
On the method of cauterizing an ache in a dislocation.
When the mucous humors flow to the Anchae abscess and become the cause of its exit from its place; and the sign of this is that one leg lengthens over the other when they are compared against each other; and the place of dislocation is found empty there.
Therefore it is necessary that you cauterize the diseased part above the wax of its own cautery with a similar circle; after you have marked it with encaustic around the wax, just as it turns around; and so that the wax itself falls in the middle of the circle.
If you do not have this cautery at hand, then cauterize it with three cauteries, with a large olive-shaped cautery. And let the depth of the cauterization be according to the quantity of the thickness of all the skin.
Then care for it until it heals.
On the manner of cauterizing in sciatica.
When pain occurs in the groin and the cause is cold and humidity, and the patient is treated with what has been said in the division, and the treatment does not help, and it becomes old: then it is necessary to cleanse the patient from gross humors with foul pills, or with artificial pills, and similar ones. Then cauterize it.
And the mode of cauterization in it is according to two modes: either cauterization with medicines that burn, or cauterization with fire.
A cautery with fire is according to many modes.
One of these is to cauterize over the skin of the anus with three triangular cauteries, according to this form. And make for them a good depth, or a bad one. And let there be a space that is between every cautery of the thickness of a finger; and let the cautery be oiled.
Sometimes a cauterization is done in the middle above the head of the fossa itself. Therefore there are four cauteries.
And if you wish to cauterize with a circle, whose form preceded in the cauterization of the dislocation of the hip joint, one: so that it contains the whole hip.
And burn the thickness of the whole skin.
This is the mode of cautery for sciatica, when the pain adheres to the buttock itself and does not extend to the hip and leg.
If it extends to the hip and leg, then cauterize it with two cautery irons above the hip, above the place indicated by the sick man where there is pain, and with your cautery on the tail four fingers' width to the left side a little: and let the cautery be a knife.
And let the depth of the cautery be according to the depth of the thickness of the skin.
If the patient says that the pain extends nearly to the toes of the foot, then cauterize him there where he indicates with a cautery point, three, or four, or more if needed.
And if he indicates pain being under the knee towards the leg, then cauterize it there with a one-bladed knife cautery.
And be careful in all your cauterizations, that you do not go too far with the cautery so that you burn the nerves, or a large artery, and thus draw through it over the weak ailment evil, or contraction.
And I have indeed seen one and another of those who cauterized above the ankle, and lingered in the cauterization, and the leg was swollen until a tumor followed all the way to the foot, and the whole foot was perforated and corrupted; then there occurred a solution of the abdomen, and death after that.
If pain is in two parts at once, cauterize both according to this method.
And some wise men said in cauterization of the anus, whose cautery this is the mode. Make a probe like a awl from iron, whose diameter is the middle of a palm: and let it be at its opening according to the thickness of a fingernail, or a little less: and inside that probe let there be a third probe.
Let there be a space between every stitch the width of a finger's knuckle; and let the stitches be open from two parts; and let their height be like a knot, or two knots; and make for them a handle out of iron fitted centrally into the stitches.
Then it is set on fire until it glows red and throws off sparks; then it is placed over the ulcer of the limb of the sick man lying on his healthy side. Therefore cauterize him with three round cautery instruments in one vice.
Then let him be dismissed after three days. Afterward apply plasters with butter: and leave the open wound for many days. Then take care of it with ointment until it heals.
Albucasis says, "This kind of cautery, my sons, we have used little because of the terror of its appearance; and therefore, because we have found few who wait upon it.
Nevertheless it is good for those who suffer, and find with it a place for it.
The cauterium, however, with medicines burning, is so that you make two pouches having a perforated arm, into which descends the hinge of its gate from brass or iron, the length of the wall:  of which the height shall be two knots, or like themselves.
And let there be a space which is between the two quantities the thickness of a finger, and let them be open below and above: and let them contain themselves against each other, according to this form.
Then place it upon the padding of the bed, the patient lying on his healthy side. And press your hand upon the patch of flesh much. Then pour water heated with a little fire between two circles and keep it for the amount of an hour's time: and let the sick person endure its biting and burning, for he himself has found that the biting is like fire until the biting ceases.
Then elevate your hand with an instrument, and wipe away hot water from the whole wound with sweet water; then let it be left alone for three days.
And place over this butter until the blackness of burning is removed; and let it stand for several days, and pus will flow from it. It is indeed the last resort in healing.
Then care for it with ointment until it is healed.
If pain extends as far as the hip or leg: make for him a statue in that which contains water, according to what you did in ancha equally.
And this is the way of hot water: and I have already written it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines. Take alkali and unquenched quicklime, each a part, grind them both, and place them in a new pot, whose lower part has a small hole according to the amount that will enter it; and place another pot inside the bottom of the pot; and pour over the alkali and quicklime from sweet water, so that both are submerged by a finger; after which you compress them with your hand good compression, and set aside the pot until the sharp water descends into the lower part of the smaller pot.
Then gather all that water and throw it over another lime stone: and stir until it is renewed.
For it will then be strong and very sharp, which is administered in many operations of medicine, and in cauterization of the remaining limbs. For it produces an operation of fire itself.
And of medicines there are those with which  large wounds are cauterized, just as with the powder of almond and lime mixed with soap, so that both are well mixed.
And Galen indeed narrating retold, of a certain man from antiquity the cure, with which he was cured pain of the hip and sciatic vein: and magnified it to be greatly. And he said that it did not need further treatment, and that it was healed from the one wound, until it returned, because perhaps he himself had entered the bath, brought there, and went out from it already healthy.
And it is, as it should be taken from the green sitaragi: and if it is not found green, take it dry, fresh: and it is to be ordered much with a little fat, and placed over the ache, where pain is, whether in the leg, or in the hip: and let it be applied, and removed after three hours, or for the quantity that the sick man feels sedation of burning. Then introduce him into the bath.
When therefore the body becomes moist, introduce it into the bed. For pain departs, and healing comes.
And know that it is not right for anyone to use a cautery with these medicines unless after evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides said that goat dung, when it is cauterized with the vein of Sciatica, helps: and the cautery is made according to this manner. Take wool, and soak it in old oil, and place it over the deep spot which is between the thumb of the foot, and between the ankle bone, and is nearer to the ankle bone.
Then take dry goat dung and ignite it in a fire until it becomes charcoal.
Then place him upon wool, and let him be, until it is extinguished. Then again that. Therefore, do not cease doing this until sensation returns through touch up to the end and the pain subsides.
And this mode of cauterization is called cautery Vaccinum.
On the cauterization of back pain.
Sometimes pain occurs in the back from many causes, either from a fall, or from a blow, or from the evacuation of superfluity, and things similar to these, from the infusion of cold and moist material: and cauterization indeed does not apply except in this single kind, which is made from the infusion of cold material.
Therefore, after evacuation of the patient, with foul pills and similar ones, three lines should be made across the back, where there is pain, according to the width of the affected area, after marking the lines with encaustic, on every line five cauteries, or more according to the quantity that comes from the endurance of the patient and his strength: and cauterization shall be done with a cautery point.
And if you wish, cauterize with three cauteries, or four, with a medial clamp cautery, according to this form.
On the manner of cauterizing an incision in gibbosity.
This illness often happens to young children.
And the sign of its beginning in boys is: that which happens upon him constriction in breathing at elevation, and movement: and you find it in the last vertebra of the back and its knots, which has already begun to protrude above the other vertebrae.
When therefore you see that and wish to make it, then cauterize it with a cautery which is circular according to this form.
And let him take the cautery over all part of the vertebra equally: and if you wish, cauterize in the circumference of the vertebra with the cautery points two lines, or three: and let the points be near to each other.
Then take care of the place, until it heals with what we said.
And beware, lest you administer a cautery in the hump, which is formed in the spasm of the nerve.
On the method of cauterization for gout and joint pains.
When pains of the joints are from cold moisture, which is poured into any limb of the body, then when pains occur in the feet, it is customary for physicians to call that properly Podagra.
When therefore gout is treated for its cold cause with modes of treatment, and the pains are not removed, then cautery will remove them.
And it is, as you cauterize him after evacuation at the juncture of the feet, with many cauteries: and let the cautery be Olivare.
And if you need to put points on the face of the foot, then make with a cautery points. If the pains ascend to the knees or other joints, and this often happens, then cauterize the area above every knee with three or four cauterizations from all sides, with the same cautery as Claudius.
If more are necessary for you with this cautery, then cauterize it. And do not submerge your hand with the cautery, but rather let it be about the thickness of the skin only.
If, however, pains ascend to the knees and back: then administer what we said from cauterization in its chapter.
If there are pains only in the hands, then prick at points around the focus of pain, such as two lines revolving.
If there remain pains in the fingers, then prick them, above every knot, and above the comb of the hand.
If pains ascend after days to the elbows, or to the shoulders, then cauterize both sides from every part.
And do not discharge a sick person from good regimen, from the taking of medicine. For if a good regimen is followed and phlegm is evacuated, he will be healed with the help of God with this cautery.
On the method of cauterization in ruptures.
When rupture occurs in the groin and intestine or spermatic cord descends to the testicle, and this is beginning to be near, then it is necessary that you order the sick person to abstain from eating on his day. And let him use emollient substances so that stool descends from his belly.
Then let him sit between your hands on his back: and command him to hold his breath until it comes out, or appears the spleen or intestine.
Then reduce it with your fingers, and mark with a cautery under the rupture over the bone of the breast, with a sign whose extremity is similar to half a circle toward the upper part of the body.
Then a fire cauterizing, whose this is the form, until it comes white and throws sparks. Then reduce the intestine, or the rectum to its cavity. Then the assistant places his hand over the place so that the intestine does not protrude; and you have already opened between the legs of the sick person, and placed a board under him, and one serving over his legs, and another over his chest who holds his hands.
Then place the cautery over that mark, with your hand and the standing cautery straight. And hold it until you bring it to the bone; or carry it with a different tool, if you have not brought it together with it at first all the way to the bone.
And carefully observe from the exit of the intestine at the time of your cauterization, so that you do not burn it, and that there may not come through it upon the weak either death or great evil.
And know that when you do not obtain with a cautery an opening of the bone, your operation does not help.
And it is necessary that the cautery for infants be fine, according to their measure.
Then care with the remaining ointment until it heals.
And let the sick person lie on their back for forty days until the wound is sealed.
And it is necessary that you give him nourishment in accordance with the length of time of his healing, which will soothe his belly so that it does not leave the intestine at the time of defecation and evacuation.
Then when he wants to rise after forty days, then administer a well-made bandage, and let him hold it for another forty days.
And he should avoid labor and overeating of food and drink and loud voices.
For when this regimen is used, it heals with complete healing.
And I shall say the cure of ruptures with an incision in its chapter.
When ruptures occur in the rest of the abdomen and are beginning, and you wish that they not increase, then cauterize the rupture of it with a round cautery according to its size: and let that which is burned from then be like one-third of it. Then care for him as we have said: and nothing else shall be added.
And some first said that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery, according to this form.
After it has been marked with encaustic wax, and a line is placed which is across the width on the upper side of the rupture, and another line below. And place your hand in the middle with a cautery closed.
But a cautery is first easier and better.
On the manner of cauterization in pains due to a fall, or percussion.
Chapter XLVIII.
When it happens in certain limbs by chance, or by blow pain; and that pain perseveres for a long time, and it does not help in it healing with medicines: then it is necessary that it be cauterized with a pointed cautery.
Let the cautery of every member be according to the size of it, and its ability, and its weakness, and its power, and the location of the twisting, and the pain from it.
If therefore it is healed from the first cautery, it is well. If not, then repeat over the same cautery.
Because it is customary for these pains to shift from one limb to the one next to it. Therefore it is necessary that you follow them with a cautery until the sick person is healed.
On the manner of cauterization in leprosy.
Leper sometimes are helped with cautery and great help. And especially the kind of leprosy, which comes from the rotting of phlegm and black bile: when therefore you wish to cauterize it, consider this.
If therefore leprosy is ineipiciens, and you have treated it with what we said in the division, and it has not descended, nor stood; and fear that over the infirm body corruption will encompass the whole complexion of him: then cauterize him on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head known, and a second below towards the forehead at the end of the hair, and two above the two horns, and one behind the neck.
And last your hand with the cautery briefly, until it makes a small impression in its bone, and the crusts are loosened from it, that the emission of thick vapors may be relieved from it, and cauterize also the spleen with the cautery, as has been said before.
If leprosy has already spread over the infirm person and appears manifestly, then it is necessary to cauterize with these cautery instruments, which we have said in the beginning, and cauterize on the end of the nose, and two cauteries on the two cheekbones, and two cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck, and six on the vertebrae of the back, and one large one over the hip joints near the base of the tail and one above it, in the very middle: and two over the thighs; namely, over each thigh with one, and two over the knees; one over each knee, and two over the shoulders, and two over the forearms, and two over the tendernesses of his chest: and cauterize him over every joint, from the joints of his hands and feet: and cauterize over every heel of his feet, and knuckles of his hands.
And beware of the nerves that are above the heel bone, lest you burn them.
And sometimes it is cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the breastbone, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the rib.
And know that the more you add cautery, it is more helpful, and more efficacious.
And know that the sick person does not find pain in cautery as the healthy do, because his body is already numbed.
And it is necessary that cauteries be of magnitude and size according to members and joints; according to what preceded from the kinds of instruments.
Then care with a cautery from flour of herb with honey, and the rest of the cure, until it heals.
On the manner of cauterizing in a stupor.
When a certain limb is numbed, and it is treated with medicines, and oils, and plasters, and does not heal, then cauterize that numbed limb with cauteries, according to what the size of the limb deserves, or its smallness.
And let your cautery be driven into the thickness of the skin a little. Then care for it with ointment until it heals.
And sometimes it is cauterized to some kind of numbness that happens to the hand and foot, in the shoulder blades of the back at the exit of the nerves that move that limb: and the numbness is removed.
But he should not presume upon it, unless he is wise in the anatomy of the members, and the egress of moving nerves from the body.
Chapter LXI.
When Albaras becomes antiquated and does not agree in it with anything from the ingenuities of medicine: then cauterize upon it itself with a deep cautery for a little while, according to the quantity of thickness of skin, until the whiteness is removed and its color is changed.
Then treat the wound with flour of herbs, and lentils with rose oil, and arnoglossae leaves, and dove's blood, and kingfisher blood: let one part be taken from each: mix all these together, and spread them on cloth, and adhere them to the place until it is healed.
On the manner of cauterizing in cancer.
When a cancer is beginning, and you wish to stop it: then cauterize it with a circular cautery, as it revolves.
The wise men said that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle.
To me it does not seem right: because I fear that it will become an ulcer: and I have already seen this several times.
And it is better that it be cauterized around it with a circle, as we have said; or with many cauteries.
On the manner of cauterizing in Adubelati.
When someone has an abscess and it is slow to ripen, either because of the excess pus forming it, or because of the age of the patient, when he is decrepit with little blood, or because of time, and a desire to hasten the ripening of the abscess, then cauterize around it with small cauteries, puncturing many times. Then let it go. For it itself will hasten with maturation.
If, however, you wish to make a perforation with a cautery, then set the cautery on fire, which has this shape.
And lay him in the middle of Abulcati, until he penetrates the skin: and let the cautery be from what follows weak, so that it may lessen the course of purges.
Then care for it until it heals.
On the manner of cauterizing a bad corrosive wound.
Chapter LIII.
Consumption is nothing but corruption in a moving member, and it consumes itself, like fire consumes dry wood.
If therefore you see corrosion in a place which can tolerate cauterization with fire, then cauterize it with fire, much cauterium, small and large curettes, according to what is convenient for the place in which the corrosion is.
Then cauterize it from every part until you eradicate the whole corruption, and nothing of it remains at all.
Then let him be dismissed for three days, and put on the places cauterized sulfur rubbed with oil, until all scabs are eradicated and all corruption is gone.
Then care for him with ointments that generate flesh.
If therefore you see that after three days flesh is born with a healthy birth, in which there is no corruption, it is good.
And if not, then apply the cautery again over that which remains from the corrupt places.
And sometimes it is treated with a sharp medicine when corroding. For it rises in place of cautery.
Nevertheless, a cautery with fire is quicker healing; and I indeed have already said cauterization of it with sharp medicine in division: therefore receive it there when you need it.
On the method of cauterization in the nails and warts.
Chapter LVIII.
This pain often occurs in the lower parts of the feet; it is a large, thick mass that harms the foot.
And indeed there is a cauterization in these things according to two modes: cauterization with fire, and cauterization with hot water.
As much as it is with fire, the cautery should be like a concave beak of a raven's feather; which is to be made from iron, according to the quantity that it contains nail from every part; and have a fine edge.
Then place it ignited upon a stick. Then roll the hand with a cautery around the nail until the cautery reaches the depth of the nail: and let it go for three days until it begins to discharge pus. Then apply a poultice of crushed willow bark with salt, and leave the poultice on it at night. It will be removed from its roots.
Then care for the place with ointment of flesh generation, until it is healed.
If they are not converted, and often occur on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet: then administer to them cauterium with hot water: and it is, as you shall take a tube from copper, or iron, or from the wing of a bird: and place it over a spike, or an altlul. Then pour a small quantity of hot water into the tube: hold your hand and turn it with pressure from your hand for a short time, so that the edge of the tube is pressed against the root of the nail, and the hot water finds its way to the depth, to the root of the nail. And let the patient wait for about an hour after the application of the hot water.
Then release it, for the claw is removed with its roots.
Thus do with these one after another until you come upon all who are in the body from among them.
Then care for them after they are removed, with what produces flesh from ointment.
On the method of cauterization in trembling.
When someone has trembling from cold in a nerve, or from quartan fever, or otherwise: then it is necessary that you cauterize him with four cauteries, or five on the vertebrae of the back, and between every vertebra with cautery, and in his chest with cautery, and on his stomach with cautery.
For tremor rests with the olive cautery and health hastens in the case of coldness of ailment.
On the method of cauterizing Albathir.
Chapter LVII.
Sometimes foul matter, that is, pustules, are expelled from the body of Albathir, which are made from corrupt coarse materials.
Therefore, first of all, when they appear, it is necessary to cauterize the entire head of the boil with a fine cautery and myrtle wood, whose end has been set alight with fire. Or with the root of long birthwort. Or with a lentil-shaped cautery.
And sometimes the adhesions are cauterized at the beginning of their expulsion in this way: and they do not increase; and the superfluity breaking them, they heal from them.
Nevertheless, it should be done after evacuation with venesection.
On the manner of cauterization for blood flow from an artery in a wound.
Many times blood flow occurs from an artery which has been cut at a wound, either externally or at the incision of a boil, or cautery of a limb, and similar things: and it becomes difficult to stop it.
When this happens to someone, then hasten with your hand to the opening of the artery, and place your index finger over it; and tightly compress it until the blood is stopped under your finger, and nothing comes out of it.
Then place in a small oil lamp cauteries and many more, and blow over them until they are well-ignited flames.
Then take from them one, or a little, or a large piece, according to the wound and place where the artery is ruptured, and lay the cautery upon the very vein, after which you remove your finger quickly: and hold the cautery until the blood is cut off.
If it is expelled with the finger from the mouth of the artery and the cauterium is extinguished, then take another cauterium more quickly, from those which are prepared in fire.
Therefore, do not cease doing this one after another until the blood is cut off.
And beware, lest you burn the nerve that is there, and evil befall the sick person further.
And know that when blood flows from an artery, then it is not possible to cut it off: especially when the artery is large, except with one of four methods. Or with a cautery, as we said. Or when it is not extracted. For when it is taken out, the extremities of it contract, and the blood is cut off. Or it may be tied with a strong ligature thread. Or medicinal substances may be placed upon it, which are of a property to stop blood, and it is bound with a poultice-like constriction appropriately.
But he who administers its cutting with a band, and stenosis with a cloth, or the placement of burning things, and similar things, does not benefit him entirely, unless rarely.
If this happens to someone, and there is no physician or medicine present, then he should begin with the position of the index finger over the opening of his vein, as we have narrated, and constrict it strongly until the blood is stopped from the upper part of the wound and above the artery. And the finger should not be moved, from above it with cold water of very great coldness always, until the blood clots and thickens, and is cut off.
And meanwhile he should consider what is needed from cautery, or from medicine.
On incision, perforation, and phlebotomy in wounds, and similar things.
We have said in the first chapter about every ailment in which it is convenient to use fire and medicine burning together, and its opportunities, its causes, and its instruments, and the forms of cauteries.
And I placed there chapters from the top of the head to the foot.
And I shall proceed in this chapter along the same way: so that he who seeks may be relieved of his sought-for thing.
And before I begin this, it is necessary that you learn, O sons, that in this chapter there is that which is from terror that is in the first chapter of cauterization.
And because of this, greater caution is needed, because in the operation which is in this chapter, often evacuation occurs with blood, with which life stands at the opening of a vein, or incision over an abscess, or opening of a fistula, or healing of a wound, or extraction of an arrow, or incision over a stone, and similar things: from all of which tremor and fear are associated, and death falls in many of them.
And I warn you, let not that thing fall upon you in which there is hesitation, for sometimes modes of men with modes of ailments fall upon you in this art. Among these are those who are angered by their illness, and death is light to them; because of the vehemence that they find from their infirmity and the length of their malice. And when pain is from fear it signifies death.
And of these there is one who gives his tibia and dictates it with him, hoping for health, and his illness is harmful.
Therefore it is not right that you consent to him who comes to you from those, whose manner is such. Let your caution be stronger than your greed and avarice. And do not presume anything from that, unless after certain knowledge, which verifies among you that which has arrived at a praiseworthy outcome.
And attend to the care of all your patients, with prognosis and indication of that which is fitting for health.
In that, indeed, there is for you aid in acquiring fame and glory, and memory and praise.
May God inspire you, O sons, with his understanding, and may he not take away from you guidance and inspiration; for it is in his hand.
And I indeed have arranged this Chapter by distinguishing it into chapters, according to what preceded in the chapter on cauterization, from the neck to the feet: that your seeking of what you want from it, and what you need, may be eased.
On the treatment of water that gathers in the heads of children.
Chapter I.
Know that this infirmity happens often to boys at birth, or when a midwife tightens the head of the boy without ease.
And whenever it also happens even from an unknown cause which is not known.
And I indeed did not see this illness in others than in children: and to everyone whom of them I saw it hastened death: therefore it seemed good to me to omit the operation on it.
And I indeed saw of these a boy whose head was filled with water, and his head increased every day until he could not sit upon himself because of the size of his head; and the moisture increased until he died.
And this humidity indeed, either collects between skin and bone, or it gathers under the bone above the fascia.
And the operation on that, if there is moisture between skin and bone, and the abscess is small, then it is necessary to find a fissure in the middle of the head, one in width: and let the length of the fissure be like two knots, until the moisture runs out.
And this is the shape of a spatula.
If therefore the moisture is more increased, and the abscess is larger, then put these two incisions, according to this form.
And if the moisture is under the bone, and its sign is that you see the sutures of the head open from all sides, and water is depressed when you press it with your hand to the interior, and it does not hide from you: then it is necessary that you find three fissures in the middle of the head, according to this way.
And after the incision, remove all the moisture. Then bind fissures with cloths and pads. Then embrocate it from above with wine and oil until the fifth day.
Then loosen the ligament, and care for the wound with a pad and ointment.
And do not let go of tightening the head with equality. And feed the sick with every dry food little humidity, until the limb is strengthened and healed.
And another way of incision is, that you consider where the magnitude of the abscess appears, and the collection of water.
Because sometimes it is on the back of the head, or on the forehead, or on the right side, or on the left side.
Therefore ascend with the incision where pus and water filling appear to you: and cut it according to what is possible for you.
And observe, so that you do not cut the artery, and there occurs a flow of blood, and the sick person dies from that flow with the evacuation of moisture.
On the incision of arteries that are behind the ears.
Chapter II.
When pus occurs to someone's eyes or chest, and it becomes old, and medication does not help: then the last cure is in that, incision of these two arteries.
Therefore, when you wish to cut them, let the weak head shave itself. Then rub the place with a rough cloth, so that the arteries may appear. Then let the weak one tighten his neck with any of his cloths. Then consider where the vein pulses. And those places are places that are behind the ears depressed: and rarely is it hidden, except in some men.
Then mark with wax on both sides: and cut both with a spatula on each side, the incision reaching to the bone; and let it be across the width of the head.
And if you wish, insert a spatula under the artery, and cut it upwards with the incision.
And let the length of the incision be like two joined fingers.
For when a vein is cut, blood flows out with a pulsating outflow, which leaps into the interiors with frequent jumps.
If the artery does not appear to the sense, then it is necessary that measures from the ear the quantity of space three fingers. Then signs with a lead cautery, and find up to the bone.
And that which ought to be emitted from the blood is VI ounces and perhaps you emit more, or less from it. The whole thing according to the quantity which appears to you from the strength of the sick person and the filling of his artery.
Then consider the wound. Then if anything remains near the bone from the excision, then cut that out so that a hot abscess does not occur; then bind the wound with ligatures from linen cloth.
Then care for it with ointment until it heals.
On the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
Chapter III.
When it happens to a man an old headache, or acute catarrh because of acrimonious humidities, and heat in the temples, or an old, violent soda, and similar ones: and it is treated with modes of medicine's cure, and it does not help: then we have experienced in these diseases the extraction of arteries from the temples, or cauterization of them, as we have narrated.
And the manner of operation in extracting them is that the weak should shave the hairs which are on the temples, and apply to the artery appearing in the temple. For indeed it is shown to you by its pulse, and rarely is it concealed except in a few men, or with extreme cold.
If it is hidden from you, then let the sick person wrap their head with any cloth of theirs: then rub the place with a rough cloth. Or place vapor with hot water until a manifest appearance appears to you. Then take the spatula which I formed a little while ago. Then scrape away the skin with it until you reach the artery. Then throw a hook into it and extract it upward until you have drawn it out of the wound and made it come out from the tunics that are underneath it on every side.
If, however, the artery is fine, then wrap it with the tip of a hook. Then cut from that part according to the quantity with which its extremities extend, and contract, so that there is no flow of blood. For if it is not struck, and if it is not cut off, blood does not rise fully.
Then evacuate from blood six ounces, up to three.
If the artery is large: then it is necessary to tie it in two places with a double, strong thread, of silk: or from cords of aloeswood, so that it may not quickly proceed to its own putrefaction before the consolidation of the wound, and there be a flow of blood.
Then cut away the superfluity which is between the two ligaments. Do this at that hour, or after another hour.
And if you wish, cauterize it with a knife cautery up to the bone, until its extremities are cut and it will stand in the place of that same work.
It is better to do so unless if the weak one has a fever, or a hot constitution. For a cautery is one of those things which help to end moistures. Therefore it is better healing.
And it is necessary after the extraction of arteries, that the place be filled with old charcoal: and pellets be placed upon it made in a central way.
And after the solution it is treated with dry medicines which make flesh grow, and with plasters until it heals.
If while you are operating blood flows from an artery, then hasten to cut it off with a cauterium, or to fill the place with zegi; and bind your hand until the blood is stopped. If none of those things is present for you, then place your finger over the location until the blood clots. And embrocate the place with water of violent cold until the sharpness subsides, and be bound tightly as is necessary.
And because it is lighter and easier to extract the artery, it is, that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two blades: and let the sharpness of the two blades be similar to an almond. However, they are much less sharp than two knives. Because if they are sharp, like two knives, apply cold to both; and they will not cut the flesh with speed. When therefore there is a little thickness in them, fire heat is applied to them and flesh is quickly cut away; with this work is better than all works, and lighter, and easier.
And this is the form of a cautery.
And let the space that is between two knives be the quantity of the thickness of a finger, after you have marked two places with encaustic: and put both burning ones well, until they come to the bone, and cut the vein in two places: so that it may be lengthened which is between its extremities. For they are not thoroughly consolidated with this cautery.
Chapter IV.
On the treatment of acute and constant flow of tears from the eyes.
When there are continual tears, and there is a flow of them from the veins that are above the skull externally: and it makes no difference in them anything of medical treatment with medicines, and you see the face of the sick already red, and he feels on his forehead walking, as if it were the walking of ants: and his eyes are exhausted, moist, so that they are already corroded with corrosion: and his eyelids have been heated from the sharpness of the tears: then the ancients devised in the cure of them this operation, and called this cure, with the Sword.
And it is, as you should instruct the sick person to remove hairs that are on their forehead. Then, in the forehead, make three incisions equidistant according to the length of the forehead: and let the length of the incision be as two fingers, and one incision be equidistant in length from the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length somewhat from the movement of the shoulders, and the third on the other side: and beware of the incision of the arteries that are on both sides: and extend your hand from the continuation of the two jaws, and let the space of all incisions be the quantity of three fingers joined together: and let there be a prepared sponge for you, or many dried cloths, with which you will dry the blood.
Then introduce a spatula of two sharp ends, whose following form is. From the incision which is at the side of the temple, as far as the second incision; and scrape with it the whole skin which is between the two incisions, together with the fascia, which is over the bone. Then do this also from the middle incision to the second incision. Then remove this spatula and again introduce into the first incision another instrument which is called a culter-like sharp one on one side, blunt on the other. And this is its form.
And place its sharp side towards the attached flesh with skin, and its blunt side towards the bone: and drive it until it reaches the middle fissure: and cut with it all vessels which descend from the head to the eyes: except that the incision shall continue up to that which appears from the skin.
Then make it in the middle fissure up to another fissure.
And after an equal quantity of blood has run out, express the places from the clots of congealed blood.
Then place in every fissure of the skin from boiled intestines, and place over them cotton balls soaked in wine, oil, or vinegar. And see that a hot abscess does not occur.
And on the third day loosen the ligament, and administer much infusion with lukewarm water. Then care for it with ointment of basil oil, and other things which are used to heal wounds, until it is healed.
Chapter V.
On the treatment of acute tears and catarrhs of the eyes from within the head.
When anyone has acute, sharp, persistent catarrh, and you see their eyes weakened, small, and their appearance already debilitated; and the eyelids are ulcerated, and hairs fall out from them, and there is a sharp, painful pain in the depth of the head, followed by sneezing: then take from these occurrences that those matters and catarrh do not come unless from many veins.
And better treatment for these is this. And it is, as you instruct the sick to shave their forehead. Then cut one incision in the middle of the forehead, or another somewhat lengthwise, and begin with the incision from the left temple to the right temple: and let the incision be up to the bone: and stretch your hand from the temples which move when chewing: until when the bone is revealed: and you will dry all the blood with sponges.
Then separate between the two lips of the fissure with a cauterized gut, or with linen ligatures. Then bind from above with wool: and soak the wool with wine and oil, so that a hot abscess may not occur.
And when you have loosened it, and see that the hot abscess has already diminished: then it is necessary to cauterize the bone until new flesh begins to grow in it.
Then care for it with a drying regimen that causes flesh to grow; as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony, and prepare a poultice from them, and apply it to the birth of flesh in these wounds.
Chapter VI.
On the treatment of that which falls into the ear.
Anything that falls into the ear is one of four kinds: either a mineral stone, or something like a stone, such as iron and glass; or it is from a plant, such as a chickpea and beans; or it is a fluid thing, such as water, vinegar, and things like them; or some kind of animal.
When therefore a stone falls into the ear, or a kind of stone from those which do not grow in the ear, expose the ear to the sun: if then you see the stone, then distill into the ear something of violet oil, or sesame. Then administer its extraction, and make him sneeze with the condiment, and plug his nostrils at the approach of sneezing, after you have placed wadding from cloth or wool around the ear, and extended the ear upwards.
For this ailment often occurs.
If it does not come out, then administer its extraction with Gesti, that is, Pizigarolis thin ones: whose form is this.
If therefore he goes out with a gasp, it is good.
And if not, then administer its extraction with a thin, curved hook of little duplication.
If it does not exit through that, then make a tube out of bronze, and insert the end of the tube into the ear opening a great deal, and cover what is around the tube with wax softened with oil, so that there be no way for the wind except through the tube; then draw it out with your own breath attraction strongly.
For often indeed it happens as we have narrated. If this method does not work, then take from helkalimbat, or from viscus, that is, prepared gluten with which birds are caught, a small amount: and put it at the end of the radius after you have wrapped upon it a cotum placed squarely; then introduce it into the ear foramen with facility, after you have dried the ear from humidity.
If therefore it does not come out with all that we have narrated, then hasten to cut it open before a hot abscess or spasm occurs.
And the manner of incision is, that the surgeon first make a cut on the diseased one's head and draw blood from it according to the measure of its virtue. Then make the patient sit between your hands, and turn his ear upward, and find a small fissure in the root of the ear in the place depressed by its fat; and let the fissure be lunate in figure, until you reach the stone: then remove it with that which is possible to you from the instruments.
Then sew the fissure with speed from your hour, and take care of it until it heals.
If something falling into the ear is one of those grains that grow and swell, then administer its removal.
If it does not obey you at the exit, then take a thin, subtle spatula, according to this form.
And administer with it the excision of that kind from the grains, which fall into the ear, and do not do this when you think that that grain is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, until you place yourself a multitude of splints: then extract them with hooks, or with a fine thread, or with suction, as we have said, for the extraction of it may be alleviated.
In the water which enters into the ear, it is necessary for the sick person to use a sneeze with some condiment first; and already he has filled his ear with a little boiled old wool; and he lies on that ear, in which there is water. If therefore it goes out through that, it is good.
And if not: then take many stones, according to the length of the finger, thin, soft, and heat them with fire for a little while, and let the sick person insert one of them into the hole of his ear: and let him leap upon one foot from that side, and strike with another stone upon the stone which is in the ear. Therefore, do not cease doing this with stone and stone until all the water emerges.
And now water goes out so that you take from papyrus or from rush one and insert one end of it into the ear: and set the other end on fire until much of it is burned. Then take another hook and do this many times until all the water comes out, and withdraw it with a tube according to what was previously said about the stone.
In extracting an animal that has entered it, if it is small in body, like a flea and the like, care for it as I said in the division.
But if it is of a large body, which appears to the sense; then administer its extraction with forceps and hooks: and the affair of it is easier than all those held in the ear.
In the extraction of a worm that has been generated in the ear, when you have treated it with what we have said in the division, and in the treatment of distillations, and your treatment does not help: then you must look at the ear in the sun. If therefore something appears there from worms, then remove it with pliers or with subtle hooks.
If however nothing appears there, then take a cannula, whose form is this, narrow below, wide above: and introduce the delicate end into the ear according to the quantity which the sick person can tolerate; then suck with it with strong suction. Do this many times until all worms come out.
If they do not obey you at the exit, then tightly surround the pipe with cauterization, as I said on the stone.
If they do not exit as we said, then administer distillations which the ancients have already tested for the destruction of worms: and you will find this in the treatise on distillations.
And let your pouring of oil and medicines into the ear be with this instrument, whose form is depicted here. As you see, make it from silver or copper, narrow below, with a small hole, wide above.
Therefore, let what is driving in the cavity of the cannula be made of properly centered metal. And if you wish, take a rod and wrap it at its end with a piece of cloth in a decent wrapping; then throw oil or juice, or whatever you wish from these medicines into a tube; and let the tube be in the ear; then introduce the rod with the cloth from above, and squeeze it with your hand in moderate compression until the oil is driven into the concavity of the ear, and the sick person feels it inside; and that which is poured into the ear should already be warmed with a little fire; and beware that what distills into it is not very cold: for medicines do not tolerate this.
Chapter VII.
On the treatment of the accident of earwax accumulation.
Sometimes infants emerge from their mothers' wombs unperforated.
And it also happens to some men that an inflammation occurs in the ear passage from a wound, or flesh born in it.
And this poultice is sometimes made deep in the ear hole, which sight does not reach; and sometimes it happens to the outside of the hole a little, and sight reaches it.
Therefore that which happens in the depth of the ear, and which is not comprehended by sight, is in many dispositions difficult to heal.
And in that which follows the sight, you ought to place the ear of the sick person in the sun, and look at it: then if you see an apparent hairiness, open it with a fine spatula, whose form is this which follows, let its extremity be in which there is some small width, whose part be sharp: and the rest of the spatula be gentle on two sides: so that it does not injure the ear.
If therefore the earwax is born of flesh in the passage of the ear: then hold it with a fine hook, and cut it with facility of force until all the flesh is removed.
If the suppuration is deep in the ear, then take a thin, soft rod and heat it slightly with fire; then put it into the ear canal.
If therefore you feel swelling with that which the sick person finds with heaviness of hearing, attempt to open it with facility: and beware lest you wound the nerves of the ear.
Then place licorice in the ear according to the amount of width of the opening which you have enveloped in Egyptian ointment; do this for several days until you are secure about the consolidation of the wound.
Or take licorice and pour it into rose water, and pulverize over it ground zinc, and use it.
If you see the ear already suppurating, then it is necessary to extract the pus and allow it with another lint cloth, which you wrap in a cauterized bandage that has been made with rose oil, until the abscess sits hot; then take care of it until it heals.
If it happens that there is a flow of blood, then immerse a sponge or cloths in cold water and place them over the ear: and use the remaining cure which cuts off the flow of blood as previously stated in the treatise on distillations.
On the treatment of a wound in the eyelids.
Chapter VIII.
Injuries of the eyelid which occur sometimes are humid and sometimes dry.
Therefore, it is necessary that you hold them with pliers: or with a hook, and cut them with a spatula from their roots. Then place powdered ziziphus over the areas.
If blood flows from them, then cauterize them with a fine lentil-shaped cautery.
And to cauterize them is better after incision. For many times they return when something remains from their roots. And when they are cauterized with fire, those roots burn up and do not return.
On the treatment of prolapsed eyelids of the eye.
Chapter IX.
Many times something happens in the eyelids that is similar to a grain in its hardness and strength, and because of this it is called a Granuloma: and it is an aggregation of gross moisture in the upper eyelid, and the lower eyelid.
The operation therefore is, that you consider then, if there is a gland proceeding in it, which appears from the eyelid, and move to every part, and its matter is easy.
Therefore, make a cut across it. Then scrape it from every part with ease until it comes out. Then suspend it with a hook, and cut it away.
If you do not prepare the cutting for him before you penetrate the eyelid with a small incision, then it will harm him in some way.
If the fissure is large, then gather it with suture and care for it until it heals.
And if it is small, no evil will come to you from it. For the ointment restores it itself, and makes flesh of it.
And if the granulation is large and slopes towards the inner surface of the ear, then turn the eyelid back, and suspend the granulation with a hook: besides which you will need to make an incision, and press it from every part.
If the eyelid is lengthened through an incision, it does not harm in any way.
Then wash the eye after the cutting of a cataract with salt water; and take care of the place with it that it may become flesh until the sick man is healed.
On the treatment of a harelip
Chapter X.
Axirnath is a fat that is generated in the tunic of the upper eyelid: and it happens most often to children: and it weighs down their eyes, and catarrh occurs in them in the mornings, and they cannot look at the light of the sun, because tears rush to them, and therefore you see them lying on their faces always, and sleep on them, and their eyelids are moist under the eyebrows, which have already been covered by inflation: and the prominence of Axirnath is apparent to the eye, and when you press the place with your fingers, you feel Axirnath between them.
And the mode of operation is that he place his head in your bosom.
Then take a linen cloth, and prepare a ligature in it, and make a circle from that ligature according to the quantity that contains Axirnath from every part. Then place him upon it, and press with your fingers from every part, that Axirnath may be gathered in the middle of the circle.
Then find in the middle of that moisture with a spatula cutting incisions across its width, and let not the incision be larger than that made in phlebotomy in depth.
Either it is necessary to cut through all the skin until you reach Axirnath, for in many arrangements Axirnath proceeds from a fissure according to the shape of white fatty twig.
Therefore extract it with the cloth, which you have soaked between your fingers to the outside: and you turn your hand right and left until it is scattered. And beware, lest you add it into the fissure, so that you do not reach the eye with the spatula and wound it.
If you do not see Axirnath at the beginning of the fissure, add a little into the fissure with ease until Axirnath proceeds. Then remove it, as we said.
Then immerse cloths in vinegar and water, and place them over the site, and bind it with a splint.
And there are some men who grind salt and place it in the hollow of the fissure so that it may liquefy what remains of that moisture.
Then care for it until it is healed.
If a hot abscess occurs in a place, then treat it with soothing plasters until it heals.
On ways of treating a drooping eyelid, that is, when the eyelid softens the eye so that it wrinkles as it ought not.
Chapter XI.
When hairs grow on the eyelids beyond the course of the natural hairs, and age: then they harm the eye, and cause modes of illness, such as frequent tearing, and softening of the eyelids, and clouding, until it becomes the cause of the destruction of the eye.
And a cataract of the eye is cured according to four ways. Or with fire by cauterization. Or with acute medicine, according to what was said before in the chapter on cauterization. Or it is treated by Ataxmir through incision and suture. Or through tubes, as I shall say.
You must place the head of the sick person in your bosom. Then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand.
If therefore it turns, it is good. And if not: introduce a needle into it, in which there is a thread from the lower part of the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate with the thread from above, and let it be near the hairs themselves, that is, near the edge of the eyelid, where the hairs are born: and draw the thread upwards with the eyelid, and turn it with the radio.
Then find in the inner part of the eyelid under the added hairs with a spatula cutting from the greater lacrimal gland to the lesser lacrimal gland.
Then remove the thread and place a small piece under the eyelid from cooked cloth or linen; then sign over the eyelid with encaustic wax so that it is like the shape of a myrtle leaf.
Nevertheless, it is necessary that the figure be made according to the quantity and elevation of the eyelid; because indeed it is diversified in men.
From these [techniques] is one who needs that it be cut from the eyelid a quantity large, according to the quantity which softens from the eyelid.
Then when you have marked two lines with the spathulum and begin from the larger lacrimal gland to the smaller one, and let there be a fissure near the natural hairs, as thick as the thickness of a radius.
Then introduce a hook into one of the two corners of the skin. Then scrape the entire lesion. Then gather with suture the two lips together, with a needle and fine wool thread; and wipe away the blood, and make adhere what is superfluous from the threads over the two supercilia, with some things that are hard to come by, if you wish to do so: and if not, do not care.
Then leave the suture and thread for three or four days, then care for it afterward.
And if you wish, let the wound go without suture, and care for it in such a way that it dries and contracts. For the eyelid must be raised when sealing a wound and bringing it together; but it will be better later.
This mode of healing Ataxmir taught the ancients.
Nevertheless, there is concern over the sick person, and it is from a good operation, and there is no fear in it.
And another method is in Atxamir also: and it is, as signs on the eyelid a figure which is like the figure of a myrtle leaf, as we have narrated.
Then lift the eyelid with three separate or combined hooks, according to the following form, then cut what is superfluous with small scissors, according to this form, with equality of incision.
If it is not possible for you to hold the hook and it is not equal: then take an awl in which there is a thread, and introduce it in the middle of the figure: and introduce another thread near the greater tear duct, and the second thread near the lesser tear duct: and gather together between your fingers the threads with equality.
Then lift your hand with an equal elevation; and lift the skin above which is the signated wound, as we have narrated.
Then gather the two lips of the wound together with a suture: and take care of it until it heals.
If however an abscess occurs at your incision or your fissure: then treat that abscess with a cautery and similar things, from sedative ointments.
And sometimes it happens that the eyelashes also turn inwards.
Therefore, you ought to use that which we have said about incisions; but suture is more artificial on both sides. On the treatment of ataxia with dogs.
And it is, as you convert the eyelid, and cut the fissure which is inside, according to what I have narrated. Then by art make two canes, or two fine strips of wood: the length of which should be according to the length of the eyelid, and their width should be less than the width of a spatula: and you have already cut at the extremities of both from both parts where you hold the threads.
Then gather both together with subtlety over that which is superfluous from the eyelid of the eye, and bind two canes from both parts with a strong binding, and release it for several days. For if the skin is tightly bound, it will die and become discolored and rot until it falls off by itself.
If therefore it delays, then cut it with shears. Then care for it until it is healed.
When therefore it is consolidated, elevate the eyelid: and hairs do not prick.
And this is the shape of two tubes, which you will make according to this figure, and quantity in length and width.
Chapter XII.
On the elevation of piercing hairs in the eye with an awl.
The operation consists of taking a fine needle and inserting into it a thread made of fine silk, soft. Then bring together the extremities of it, and knots both knots very finely: and let the length of the threads be one palm.
Then place another subtle thread under the first in Alinxotati [a type of surgical clamp], and tie the ends of it if you wish.
Then let the patient lay his head in your lap, and be near the sun as the operation is declared; because it is a subtle or minute operation.
Then introduce a needle with an awl into the root of the eyelid, and make it penetrate quickly into the eyelid until you extract it from above the natural eyelash.
Then draw the needle up above the incision; and introduce the needle into the incision: if there is one, or two, or three, no more.
Then draw your hand with it until the hair comes out with its root in the eyelid with the natural hair.
If however the eyelash is pulled out and the hair does not come out with it, pull the eyelash downward, with the thread which you have composed in it, until the eyelash comes out of the upper opening, and you see it with your eye: then pull the eyelash and the thread, and extract both, and close the eye: and let him keep it closed for two or three days, until the hair adheres to its place, and flesh grows over it.
If the hair is short, then either associate with it a long hair from natural hairs, and elevate it with it; or let it go, until it lengthens after a space, and then elevate it.
Chapter XIII.
When this happens to the eye, it is called Leporino.
And this Al-Zahrawi is either natural or accidental.
Therefore, an accidental wound is made from the consolidation of a wound, or section, or cautery, and things like these.
And the mode of operation on it is, that you may find that consolidation and that you may separate its lips, and place in it what is between them a ligature made of linen, and bind it until it heals.
And it is not proper that you use in its cure things that dry and constrict, for if you do this, Alxatrati will return worse than it was. Rather use those things which soften, such as hay: and embrocate with water in which has been cooked marshmallow root, flax seed; and ointment of dyaquilon, which has been liquefied with some oil; and envelop with it licorice, and care for it with this.
And your treasury of healing is, that you endeavor with every skill, so that it may not be solidified, according to the form which was in the first place.
And this operation which we have said, is nothing but a certain rectification of Alxatarati, so that it does not return to the form of the place according to what it was altogether.
On the treatment of a tumor on the lower eyelid, which is a wrinkle or contraction upward to the right and left.
Chapter XIV.
This incision which is made below, is truly called Alxatrati. It is natural and it is accidental.
And an accidental wound is made from a cut, or fissure, or cautery, and those similar things.
And the way of operation in it is, that you take a needle, in which there is a doubled thread, and dye it in flesh, and make it penetrate from the left lachrymal to the right lachrymal, until the thread comes to both extremities of the flesh.
Then extend the flesh upward with a knife, and cut it with a wide spatula. If therefore the shape of the eyelid returns as it ought, it is good.
And if not, take a probe and put it in the fissure, and turn it with it eyelid: and find two fissures on the inner side of the eyelid, and let the extremities of the two fissures be from the two angles of the incision, until they meet and an angle is made of them; until when they are gathered together, the figure of them is made thus, and is the Greek letter Lambda.
Then remove that flesh by the amount which is the lower sharp side of it, from what follows the eyelid. Then gather the separated parts together; sew them with a wool thread.
Thereafter care for them with that which we have said, of softening medicines and poultices, until they are healed.
And if an laceration should occur from a cut or suture, or cautery: then it is necessary that you make the incision flat under the eyelashes, also according to what preceded. Then separate between the two lips with a ligature, as we have said.
And the sum of the discourse on the cure of a wound from an ax, whether it is above or below, is that the treatment should be carried out according to how the wound was prepared according to the form of the ax.
For it is of many varieties in form: and a prudent craftsman prepares the organ in every possible way until it returns to its natural form, or nearly so, and the patient himself, according to what is suitable for him from the operation and instruments in many dispositions.
Chapter XV.
On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva, or cornea.
Sometimes this consolidation happens to many people, so that the upper eyelid solidifies with the white of the eye, and prevents it from its natural operations.
Therefore it is necessary that you insert the end of the radius under the eyelid and raise it upward: or extend it with a hook: then cut the adhesion with a spatula of fine subtlety, which should not be with the sharpness of the incision of spatulas, but rather blunt for a short while: so that the sick person may not be disturbed during the operation, and the spatula is removed, and does not damage the eye with its sharpness: and let your incision be as though you were excoriating that adhesion with ease, until when the eyelid returns according to its natural form, and the adhesion heals completely.
Then pour saltwater into the eye, and wash it with water; or distill into it from a sieve made, from linen dissolved with water.
Then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a linen thread: and place above the eye wool soaked in alum and white of egg: and on the third day use sifter, and with solidifying matter until it is healed.
On the cutting of the nail and the prominence of the flesh of the tear duct.
Chapter XVI.
Know that a nail is according to two modes. Or it is a nerve; and it is similar to the sinew, fine. Or it is not fleshy, like the frozen moisture of white: which when it touches iron or you attempt to grasp it with a hook, it breaks off and the hook does not catch in it.
And both kinds do not begin, unless from the greater tear duct, as far as it goes gradually, until it covers the desired amount, and prevents light and the movement of the eye.
And the mode of operating in the incision of it is: that the sick person places his head in your bosom. Then open his eyes, and lift his eyelid with your hand. Then collect a sponge with a hook of small duplication, and extend it upward. Then take a needle and insert into it a thread from horsehair, oxhair, or wool. Let the thread be strong and double the end of the needle slightly, and fix it in the middle of the hoof. And pierce it with the needle and tie the hoof with the thread, and extend it upwards.  And scrape with the hair the side of the hoof that follows the pupil, and if you bind it with hair to its very end.
Then cut the residue at the root of the lacrimal with a fine spatula, or with small forceps: and let go the natural flesh of the lacrimal, so that there does not happen from the incision of it a continuous flow of tears.
And sometimes a nail is extended with a hook, or with a thread, as we have said. Then it shall be scraped with a spatula of moderate shape.
And be careful, lest the spatula touch the corneal tunic and a rupture occur in it, and the pupil be pierced.
Then after the incision, put something of salt ground up, or from sifting made of zinia, into the eye and let it be until the next day. Then care for him with what is necessary until he is healed.
If the claw is not nerve-bearing and you cannot introduce a needle into it, nor does a hook fasten in it, then this kind of claw is cured many times with medicines, and heals as I have told in the division.
If you wish to cut it, then open the eye of the sick person, and take a spatula subtle, gentle, of weak sharpness, according to this form. And with a subtle shaving shave the area from above. If you see that it becomes thin and breaks apart, and a razor imprint is made upon it, then distill from your hour into the eye an extract made from ziniar, or from red sief, or from ground salt: and cover the eye until the next day.
Then iterate over the same operation until the whole of it is removed. Unless it is contrary for you in the eye a hot abscess: then indeed dismiss that, and take care of the abscess, until it heals.
Then repeat the operation on it with reason until it heals.
If the prominence of the lacrimal flesh harms the eye greatly, it should be suspended with a hook and a part of it incised; and do not make the incision to the end so that the flow of tears does not occur.
Then a drop of wine (or made from zinc) in the tear sac, until it heals.
On the incision of Alguardenic, and flesh born in the eye.
Chapter XVII.
Sometimes in some human eyes there is born flesh red in color, composed or superimposed, until it covers the pupil, or approaches it, or tightens over the eyelids, and perhaps turns the eyelids outward: and it resembles the stalk of a rose.
And the operation in this also is that the sick person put his head in your bosom. Then open his eyes, and collect that flesh whole with suitable hooks to it: and hold it with one forceps, or tongs.
Then cut the flesh first until the whole of it is finished with a cutting instrument. And guard your eye so that you do not wound it during the operation: and let your incision be with the same thing which you cut with, or with a spatula, which we have told of in the incision of the nail: or with small scissors, with which one gathers the asbel, according to what will come its shape after this chapter.
When therefore the incision is complete, and the whole algoudenici is removed, then fill the eye with salt ground; or distill into it a powder of red and similar to it from corrosive medicines; and place above the eye a cotton ball with the white of egg: so that it may be secured from a hot abscess.
If something from the blade remains and you have a hot blood flow, and fear a hot abscess; then release the eye, and treat it with that which will settle the abscess.
Then iterate over it with the operation until it is healed.
And similarly do with flesh added which happens in the eye of this kind.
Nevertheless, it is necessary that the treatment of every weak eye, whether by natural or accidental way, be performed with iron: and do not put your hand into any of these operations until you see that that member is enduring that operation.
On collecting the style from the eye.
Chapter XVIII.
There are red veins that are woven over the eye and prevent the sight from carrying out its function: and they weaken the eye as the days lengthen.
Therefore it is necessary for you first of all to consider if the eye in which there is a Sebel is strong and there is no other pain except Sebel; then collect the Sebel from it.
And it is, as you prescribe to the sick person, that he should put his head in your bosom.
Then suspend those veins with one hook, or two according to your judgment: and let the hook be a fine doubled one, according to this form, or let there be two hooks graduated in one body, according to this form.
Then collect with fine forceps those veins with subtlety, and wipe away the blood every hour until you see those veins removed from the eye, and resolved: and beware lest you wound the eye with the edges of the spatula.
And let your operation be in midday before the sun, and be firm in your operation greatly: that you do not cut except those veins.
And when you have finished, then distill into the eye a green or red ointment: so that its sharpness corrodes what remains of the scab.
If it is not possible for you to collect the whole thing in that hour, then apply a poultice to the eye with something that will soothe the pain of the eye; and leave it for several days until the pain subsides; and secure it from hot suppuration; then repeat over it in the same way until it heals.
And this is the shape of the forceps.
On the reduction of the arrisatus to the nose.
Chapter XIX.
Surgeons call a fistula an "Arissati," which they treat with cauterization, or with a sharp burning medicine, according to what has preceded in the narration.
And if it does not heal, then there is no skill in it: unless you find a collection of pus at its birth, and extract the entire moisture which is in it and pus, until the bone is exposed.
When therefore a bone is discovered, and you see in it corruption, or blackness, then scrape it with an instrument, whose form is this.
And it is called Asperi head.
Let it be made of iron, and let its head be round like an azir, which is to be marked with the point of a file, or the point of a chisel with a fine point: and put it over the place corrupted in the bone.
Then roll it between your fingers, and you press your hand briefly until you know that the corruption is already scraped away; and do this several times.
Then restore the place with medicinal dried astringents.
If therefore the place is consolidated, and flesh is born in it, and the course of healing is severed: and it remains for forty days, and is not renewed, and does not suppurate, and no accident happens in it: then know that it is now healed.
And if not, then there is no talent in him, unless he reduces the fistula to the nostril opening, according to this form.
And it is, as you remove from the bone with an iron instrument, or with a sharp medicine: and when the bone has been exposed, then take a borer according to this form, let its iron tip be triangular: and its wood be pyramidal extended to the end, just as you see.
Then place it over the bone itself: and let it be near the tear duct: and extend your hand away from the eye a little. Then roll your hand with the trephine until it penetrates the bone, and feel that it is yielding; by this you will find air coming out of it when you hold your hand over his nose.
Therefore then restore the place with hemostatic and drying medicines, as I have taught you.
When therefore flesh is born and the place hardens, then the matter which was poured out to the exterior returns to the nose; therefore it is lighter upon the weak.
On the reduction of the prominence of the eye.
Chapter XX.
When the eye protrudes with its entirety, and there is no harm or diminution in vision, then it is necessary to loosen the diseased part; then let him make a bloodletting; afterwards place vents on the neck without scarification, but with suction.
Then put over the eye a liniment made of acacia, and aloe, and frankincense, and sarcocolla. Then tighten the eye from above over the plaster with many pads.
And the method of a few is: that you may take soft cloths, many, and every cloth be doubled out of them over four: make many from these: then place them one upon another, according to the quantity which the Eye needs: then bind upon them with a hard cloth a strong binding.
And again wounds with suction without incision.
Then remove the wind-filled [parts], and leave the eye tightly closed day and night.
If, however, the ligature softens again, then it is necessary that it be tightened a great deal; then remove the ligature after a day and night, as we have said.
If therefore you see the eye already returning to its white tunic, it is good; and if not, then repeat the plasters, and poultices, and constriction, and fomentations, until it heals.
On the incision of the urinary tunic.
Chapter XXI.
When a rupture occurs in the tunic of the eye, then it protrudes and proceeds outside the eyelids like a grain of wheat, and the appearance of man is defiled because of it, and you wish to cut it: then the operation on it is, according to what I tell: and it is, that you introduce a needle into the root of the eye from the lower to the upper part.
Then introduce another needle into which there is a doubled thread from the lacrimal part, and make it penetrate: and let go of the first needle according to its position.
Then cut the place of the double thread, and tie with it the part of the vein on the circumference of the needle: and tighten it very much.
Then extract the point and put over the eye wool soaked in albuginea; and let it go until the thread falls with water.
Then care for the eye with that which comforts it, until the wound heals.
And sometimes the eye is bound by a circle of cloth from every part until it gives great prominence.
Then it is pierced with a fine spatula until it reaches the depth of the eye, and the albuminous moisture is scraped away, and the eye descends, and immediately enters; then it is tightened until it heals.
On the treatment of dislocations.
Chapter XXII.
This ailment called Alcomnati is nothing else but a pus that gathers in the eye, similar to water descending, and it is not itself.
And the mode of operation in it is that you make the sick person sit on the prepared seat, or directly.
Then take the head in your hands from two parts, and move it until you see the stream arrive at the lower parts with your eyes. Then it is fastened, so that it does not descend, and the opening is closed: and the sick person may see things as he used to see; and if it does not descend below, know that it is water.
If however the descent of the bowels is not prepared with that which we said, then make the sick person sit between your hands. Then take a subtle spatula and find with it above the skin tissue near the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corneal tunic in the circle, until pus comes out.
When he exits, then distill into the eye hot water in which you have mixed honey; or water in which you have already boiled hay and honey; then cure with the rest of the cure, until it heals.
On the treatment of water which descends into the eye, or cataract.
Chapter XXIII.
Now we have discussed the kinds of water in division, and which is suitable for piercing, having explained it with words, then take that same thing according to health.
Therefore you must make the sick person sit between your hands, square to the light, near the sun: and tie his healthy eye shut, and bind him firmly; then with your right hand, if the eye in which there is water is the left eye, or with your left hand, if the eye is the right.
Then take with your right hand the almond if the eye is left; or with your left hand, if the eye is right.
Then place the end of the probe near the crown through the thickness of the radius in the apparent conjunctiva of the smaller lacrimal eye; then push the probe with force and you will turn your hand with it until it penetrates into the conjunctiva of the eye, and you feel that the probe has already reached the hollow.
And it is necessary that the measure of the journey from the almond to the depth be the measure of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the blackness: and it is the circle of the eye. You will see it in the pupil itself of the eye, because of the clarity of the cornea tunic.
Then place the almond until it reaches the place where water is. Then press it downwards with one finger after another.
If therefore water descends, then the infirm person sees it above which he opens his sight immediately, and the almond in his eye.
Then rest for a little while. If therefore water should flow down, then put it aside second, except that it may go out from the almond.
When therefore it is set, and does not ascend: then extract the almond with ease: and you revolve your hand gradually.
Then dissolve something of clear salt in water: and wash the eye inside with it. Then place a whole wad of cotton wool or soaked wool steeped in rose oil, and with the membrane of an egg, and tie the eye together with it.
We, and those of our time, put upon it a mixture of ground cinchona with albumen of egg.
If the eyelid does not obey you at the entrance into the eye because of its hardness, because it is from men, whose eyes are hard indeed: then it is necessary that you take a spatula, which is called Alberid, whose shape this is.
Therefore, perforate with it only that conjunction and not the last of your hand into the hole; and there is nothing but to make a way to the almond place subtle.
Then introduce the almagd, as we have said.
And in the completion of your work, prepare for the sick person a room well-made, in which he may lie on his back in a dark house: and forbid him from all movements, and from coughing: and put food before him that soothes his nature: and let him not move his head right or left at all.
And let the ligature remain according to its arrangement up to the third day.
Then solve it in that dark house, and try to experience its sight; and make him see things. Then reduce the ligament up to the seventh day.
And it is not proper that he should do this at the hour of healing, or immediately after the incision: indeed, it is necessary that he transfer it elsewhere; because water ascends quickly through vigorous aspect.
If however a hot abscess occurs: then it is necessary that you loosen the eye before the seventh day; and correct it with what soothes the abscess, until it is soothed; then loose its vision, and place over its face an oral [potion] which regulates its vision under those few days, itself being in that dark house.
Then he shall go out of the house gradually, and turn in his affairs.
And know that in surgery a student is not excused from seeing often: then indeed he may dare about the operation.
And now indeed it has come to us from one of those who are from Al-Rayy, who said that a large hole was made in Al-Rayy, through which water is drawn.
Truly, therefore, I saw no one in your land who has done that; nor did I read it in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that it is new.
And these are the forms of the kinds from the book, so that he who does not know them may stand upon them.
Let them be made of metal, and let their extremities be triangular with this same fineness, and the tip acute.
Chapter XXIV.
On the treatment of flesh born in the nose.
Sometimes fleshy growths of a different kind are born in the nose, of which some resemble the legs of many scorpions: and from this there is cancerous flesh, stony, dusky colored: and from this there is also flesh that is soft, not dusky coloured.
In those things which are from these flesh is gentle, not deceitful, nor cancerous, it is necessary that you make the sick person sit between your hands opposite the solid one, and open his nostrils, and throw in a hook to those flesh: then draw them to the outside, and cut what you have grasped from them with a sharp fine spatula on one side, until you know that all the flesh has already been removed.
If something remained of it whose cutting is not possible: then carefully remove that with one fine instrument with ease, until nothing remains of it. If blood governs you, or if a hot abscess occurs, then oppose it with what is necessary. Or if it is from malignant abscesses, then hasten to cauterize it, until the blood is cut off, and all flesh is removed.
Then vinegar, water, or wine is poured into the nose after incision. If, however, the nose is opened and moisture proceeds from it up to the palate, then know that it is already healed.
If moisture does not penetrate as it should, then know that within it is flesh born in the upper bones of the nose, to which the instrument does not reach when cut.
Therefore, you must insert a linen thread which has some thickness, and many knots in it. And place between every knot the quantity of a finger, or less. And instruct the infirm man, that he may put one end of the thread into the nose with a stick, or as much as is possible to him after he has made himself a similar probe. And draw his scent until it reaches the cavity, and emerges above his throat.
And many times indeed boys like this Attomi make similar things in schools: and it is a thing easy for him who wants to.
Then put two ends of thread, one end which comes out over the nose, and the other which remains in the nose. Then and with a minister lock of flesh with knots that are on the thread. Do this until you know that the flesh is already with thread knots.
Then extract the thread and place it in the nose after removing the blood clot which you absorbed with the ointment of Egypt: do this for three days or more until the ointment corrodes all that remains of the flesh.
Then put a lead tube into the nose at the end of the matter for several days until it heals.
If however it requires treatment that will dry it out, use this.
To make a cauterizing head, with which oil and other medicines are distilled into the nose, make it of silver or copper: that it be like a small lamp, open like a shell: and its passage similarly.
And if you wish to make a closed tube, like a reed.
And the shell of the instrument for making a cautery should be full and open: which has a handle at its end, with which you hold it when you heat oil in it, or what you wish from juices, and flowing substances.
Chapter XXV.
Many times a tumor is born at the extremity of the nose, and it grows larger, and increases with days until its appearance becomes foul.
Therefore, it is necessary that at the beginning of its appearance, one should cut into it and eradicate its roots completely. Then place upon the site either a cautery or burning medicine which stands in its place.
If therefore the incision is delayed until it has become enlarged, then consider if it is stony, hard, dusky colored, with few senses; then do not touch it with iron, for it is a cancerous abscess.
Many times I have seen those who had a bloody abscess and because of it great evil happened to him who had it.
And if the abscess is gentle to the touch, not dusky in color, and you see that incision is possible throughout its entirety, then evacuate the sick person, and make an incision into it without fear or trembling: and care for the place with something that dries and constricts, until it heals.
Chapter XXVI.
On the suture of the nose, and lip, and ear.
Know that when a rupture of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, little is accomplished by operating on it, except in some men.
Therefore, when something of that sort happens to someone, you should consider if it is a wound recent with its blood; and then gather the edges of the wound together with suture; then care for it until it heals.
And if the lips of the continuity have already been separated, and each part has been made healthy: then it is necessary that the curette be scraped over the entire part with its sharp edge until it bleeds. Then gather the two lips together with a suture, and tighten them, and pulverize on top of it dragon's blood and ground frankincense: and put above the powders a piece of diaphana plaster, and of some other solidifying plaster: and leave it bound for two or three days. Then dissolve it itself, and change the medicine: and dismiss it until the threads are cut by themselves. Then care for it with ointment until it heals.
The method of suturing is that you bring together the edges of continuity, either with awls, as we recounted in the suturing of the abdomen: or you bring together the edges with thread, as I have made you know.
Chapter XXVII.
On the extraction of lip nodes.
Many people experience abscesses on their inner lips, similar to hard grains of grain, some smaller and some larger.
Therefore it is necessary that you convert the lip and bind over every node of it, and suspend it with a hook, and cut it from every part.
Then fill the place after the incision with crushed zeger, until the blood is stopped.
Then it is to be covered with vinegar, and the place where there is clotting is to be cared for with it until the wounds are healed.
Chapter XXVIII.
On incisions in the flesh above the gum.
Many times there is born on the gum flesh which the ancients call an abulus.
Therefore it is necessary that you suspend it with a hook: or hold it with forceps, and cut it at its root, and let the pus run out, or the blood.
Then place on the rubbed wound site, or other styptic powders, drying ones.
If that flesh returns after treatment, for it often does return, then cut into it again and cauterize it: for it does not return after cauterization.
Chapter XXIX.
On the extraction of teeth with iron.
Sometimes they gather on the surfaces of the teeth from the inner and outer part, and between the gums, rough, coarse, and sometimes they become blackened, and yellowish, and greenish, until corruption comes from it to the gums, and the teeth become foul because of it.
Therefore, you ought to make the infirm sit between your hands, and his head in your bosom, and grind and gnaw, at that which appears to you as bark, and a thing similar to sand: until there remains nothing of them, and similarly do with blackness, and greenness, and yellowness, and others until they are purified.
If therefore that which is in them from the beginning of reason is taken away, it is good: and if not, then repeat upon them the reason on another day, second, and third, until the last study comes to that which you wish.
And know that a tooth needs razors of various forms and figures: according to how it is prepared for your operation; therefore, the razor with which a tooth is shaved from the lower part is different from the razor with which a tooth is shaved between teeth, according to other forms.
And these forms of razors should be prepared for you, which you see.
Chapter XXX.
On the Extraction of Tooth Pain.
It is necessary that you treat the tooth of its pain with every skill and delay in its extraction. For there is nothing that can replace it when it is removed: because it is a sublime substance: so that when there is no excuse for its removal, then when the sick man is forced to remove it, he must strengthen and make sure of the aching tooth with you.
For often pain deceives the sick person and thinks that it is in a tooth and pulls it out; then the pain does not cease until the bad tooth is pulled out.
For we have now seen that from the operation of bloodletting.
When therefore a tooth aching is certified to you, then it is necessary that you scarify around the tooth with a spatula, in which there is some virtue, until the gum is loosened from every part; then move it with your fingers, or with slender forceps at first little by little, until you shake it.
Then place the large forceps in that spot and the head of the patient between your knees: which you have already held well so that it is not moved; then pull the tooth according to its straightness so that you do not break it.
If therefore it does not emerge, then take some one of those instruments and introduce it under it from every side with facility, and endeavor its motion, as you did at first.
If, however, the tooth is perforated or corroded: then it is necessary to fill that hole with cloth; and bind it with the extremity of a fine wire, so that it does not break at the time of your constriction upon it with forceps.
And it is necessary that you act with great care when making an incision around the gum from every part very much.
And keep your strength, so that you do not break it, and may its part remain, and return over the sick from that evil which is greater pain of his first.
And beware, lest you do what ignorant bloodletters do in their haste and boldness over its removal, besides administering that which we have recounted.
Many times indeed they cause great illnesses to happen to men, the more difficult of which are those that break and the roots of them all remain, or some of them; or that they extract it with some bones of the jaw: as we have testified many times this.
Then it shall be covered after its removal with wine, or with vinegar and salt.
If it happens that blood flows from places (for this often happens), then smear something from the ziziphus and fill the place with it: and if not, cauterize it if you cannot apply ziziphus.
The shapes of the fine forceps used first for moving a tooth should have long handles and short grips, thick so that they do not fold when pressure is applied upon a tooth with them; like you see in thick handles, until when you tighten with them, they do not bend themselves nor fold; short handles, and be made of iron, or of well-crafted brass, straight handles. And at their ends should be teeth, some of which enter into others, and tighten by decent, strong constriction.
And sometimes extremities are formed like the beak of a bird called a stork, and they have strong constrictions.
Chapter XXXI.
On the removal of teeth and the extraction of fractured jawbones.
When something remains at the site of a broken tooth's removal, then you must place over the customary spot some butter for one or two days until the place softens; then introduce into it an instrument, or forceps: whose ends are similar to the beak of a bird that is called a stork. The shape of this is forceps.
Let their extremities be made like a file inward: or like an awl.
If therefore it does not obey you towards the exit with these forceps, then it is necessary that you dig above the root, and uncover the whole flesh, and introduce the instrument which is called the Small Lever, whose form is this.
Let the short end of the limb be rather coarse and not too wet so that it does not break.
If therefore the root comes out through that, it is good: and if not, it is necessary to help with these other instruments whose shapes are these.
The shape of the first triangular extremity, in which there is some thickness.
Shape of a triangular extremity fine.
And with other instruments and tools which preceded in the extraction of teeth.
Also let there be an instrument with this, which is similar to a large hook, of this form, triangular extremity twisted, in which there is something of thickness so that it does not break: and let it be not soaked.
And know that instruments for the teeth are many: and similarly the rest of the instruments are not counted, and a prudent artificer, subtle in his art, finds for himself the instrument, according to what the operation signifies to him and the pains themselves.
Because they are from agricultural implements, for which the ancients did not say what instruments, because of the diversity of their kinds.
If a bone of the jaw or other bones of the mouth is broken, or if it rots: then examine it in its place with that which is fitting to it from the instruments and forceps which I have said in the extraction of roots, and help with a clamp, whose form is this.
Let there be something of a size gradually inserted so that it is tightened or held with the bone, and not escape and leak, until the bone emerges; and restore the place with suitable medicines to it.
If there is a small amount of decay in the bone, then scrape away the decay from it, and take care of it until it heals.
Chapter XXXII.
On the closing of prominent teeth above others.
When teeth protrude not according to their natural course, an ugly form is produced: and especially when this happens in women and girls, namely those of the genitals.
Therefore you ought to consider. If a tooth is born after another tooth and does not fit, or it is possible to lock it, nor file it; then eradicate it: and if it is attached with another tooth, then cut it with this instrument, whose shape is this.
It is similar to a small beak, and it is made of Indian iron, with a very sharp tip.
And let your incision be such that you cut it on many days, and because of the hardness of the tooth, and so that another tooth is not moved.
If, however, it is protruding and exposed from its rasping, then scrape it with a rasp from within, whose form is this.
Let the entire instrument be from India, and the handle of it have many small punctures, like a file with which needles are made: With which one grinds the tooth gradually in many days with ease, so that the tooth is not moved, and falls out; then smooth it, at the end scrape it with certain razors.
If it is a tooth that is broken and injures the tongue, then it should be filed down until the roughness of the fracture is removed and it is leveled, smoothed, and does not injure the tongue or corrupt speech.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the binding of teeth with gold wire
When the front teeth are shaken and bruised by a blow or accident; and the weak one cannot hold it together when eating so that it does not fall out; and you have treated them with astringent medicines, and the treatment has not been effective; then the ingenuity is in them to be tied together with gold thread; because silver becomes green and rots after days; but gold never changes.
And let the thread be of medium thickness and coarseness according to the amount it will take between the teeth.
And the form of the suture is, that you take a thread, and insert twice its length between two healthy teeth: then weave with both ends of the thread between the moved teeth, whether one be, or more, until you come with the suture up to the healthy tooth of the other part. Then repeat the texture until you reach the part from which you began: and tighten your hand with subtlety and wisdom, until it is not moved at all: and let your constriction where you tighten the thread be at the roots of the teeth, so that it does not escape.
Then cut the ends of the superfluous thread with scissors: and gather both together, and turn them with a twist: and conceal them between the sound tooth and the moved tooth, so that it does not harm the tongue: then let it be let go as tightly as it remains.
If it is loosened, or cut, bind them together with another thread, and it will remain so throughout the whole time.
And this is the form of Teeth, and the figure of the rotation of two sound teeth, and two moved teeth, as you see.
And sometimes it happens that one or two teeth return to their places after an injury, and they remain as we have narrated, and this is done only by a skilled and experienced artificer.
And sometimes a piece of bone from the rib is fitted and shaped like a tooth, and it is put in its place, so that the tooth is fortified and held together, as we have said; and it remains, and serves with it for a long time.
Chapter XXXIV.
Sometimes this ligament which occurs under the tongue is either natural, with which man is born, or accidental, from a wound that has already healed.
And the operation on it is, that you open the mouth of the infirm person in his head in your bosom, and elevate his tongue; then cut that nerve ligament acrosswise until the tongue be loosed from its restraint.
If there is something hard and knotted in it, and it is from the consolidation of a wound, then throw into it a hook, and find it across its width, until you cut the ligament, and the knot is loosened.
And beware lest there be a fissure in the deep flesh, and you cut the artery there, and there occur a flow of blood.
Then the wound is to be rinsed with rose water, or vinegar, or cold water.
Then place under the tongue a linen ligature which the sick man should keep in throughout the night so that it does not harden again.
If blood flow should occur, then place a crushed piece of zege over the site. If blood overcomes you, then cauterize the place with a rusty cautery which is suitable for it; then care for it with the rest of the cure until it heals.
Chapter XXXV.
Sometimes a tumor occurs under the tongue that resembles a small frog, preventing the tongue from performing its natural function; and perhaps it magnifies so much that it fills the mouth.
And the operation in this is, that you open the wound of the sick person before the sun: and consider the abscess.
If therefore you see it of a dark color, or black, hard, which does not find the feeling of the sick person; then do not touch it, because it is cancer.
And if it is inclined to softness, in which there is moisture, then throw into it the hook and cut it with a fine spatula, and free it from every part. If blood overcomes you during the hour of your operation, then place crushed ziziphus on it until the blood is stopped; then return to your operation until you have extracted it with its entirety.
Then it shall be covered with vinegar and salt; and care for it with the rest of the appropriate treatment until it is healed.
On the treatment of an abscess of the two tonsils.
Chapter XXXVI.
Sometimes things happen between the throat and godad, that is, glands, which resemble algodad, which happen deforis: and they are named two Amigdalae: which when care with what we said in the division, and do not heal, then consider.
If therefore it is a hard abscess, dusky in color, with little sensation: then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is of ruby color and its root is thick: then do not touch it even with iron, fearing the flow of blood, rather let it alone until it matures. And then either you will pierce it yourself or it will burst open of its own accord.
And if it is white in color, round, and its root is fine: then it must be cut.
And the operation is this, that you consider before your operation, if its hot abscess has quieted and completed in quiet, or diminished by some diminution: then do so to make the sick man sit facing the sun, and his head be in your bosom: and open his mouth, and let a serving person receive between his hands, and press down his tongue below with an instrument, whose form is this.
Let it be made of silver, or copper, that is as fine as a knife.
When therefore you have laid the tongue aside with it, and an abscess is shown to you, and falls upon it your gaze: then receive a hook, and fix it in the tonsil, and draw it out to the outside as much as you are able, except that you pull along with it something from the tunics.
Then cut it with an instrument, whose form follows. It is like forceps: however, the extremities of it are curved so that the opening of each one is directly opposite to the other's sharpness; therefore care should be taken that it be made of iron tempered, or wood soaked in alum.
If this instrument is not present, then cut it with a spatula, whose shape is this. Be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other.
And after you have cut one tonsil, cut the other following this same type of incision.
Then after the incision, the patient gargles with cold water, or with vinegar and water.
If blood flow should occur to him, gargle with water in which the barks of pomegranate trees have been boiled: or myrtle leaves, and similar things from styptics, until the blood flow is stopped; then care for him until he is healed.
And sometimes abscesses are born in the throat, other than the two tonsils. Therefore, cut it according to what I said in the incision of two tonsils equally.
And I myself had treated a woman from an abscess that was formed between her throat, which she drew to the groin, few senses, because it had almost closed her throat; and the woman breathed through a narrow passage, and it had already prevented her eating, and drinking water; and she had already approached death, if she had remained for one day or two days.
And the abscess had grown so large that it had produced two branches until they emerged above the two nostrils.
I therefore hastened and fixed one of them hooks. Then I drew it out, and a large portion was drawn out from it.
Then cut it where it is grasped from the nostril.
Then I did that which had proceeded from the other nostril opening.
Then I opened his mouth and pressed on his tongue: and afterwards I fixed a hook into the abscess; then I cut away part of it from him, and there came out of it only a little blood: therefore the woman's throat was healed, and she immediately began to drink water, and then she took some food.
Therefore I did not cease to cut into that abscess many times over a long period; and an abscess followed in the place where I cut, until it was prolonged too much and with it that.
Therefore, I devised and cauterized an abscess between the throat.
Therefore I stood after the addition; then I walked from the place, and I did not know what God did with it after me.
On the incision of a boil.
Chapter XXXVII.
When catarrh descends to the vulva and forms a pus-filled abscess and is long, then it is called perpendicular. And if it is in the lower part large and round, then it is called a vulva.
When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help: and you see that the hot abscess has calmed down from it, and is subtle: then it is necessary that you cut into it.
And that which from it is gathered round and does not have length to it, and is bloody or dusky in color, or black, and does not have sensation; then it is necessary that a surgeon make an incision of it. There is fear over the weak in that.
Therefore, when you see it according to the measure which I have said, and its length, so that you make the sick person sit facing the sun: and press his tongue with the instrument, of which the foregoing account has been made; then fix the hook in the uvula, and draw it down: and cut it with one of the two instruments which I have said in the incision of the two tonsils.
And it is necessary that you do not cut from it except what is added above the natural term without addition.
If you cut from that more deeply,  you will injure the voice and speech.
Then after the incision, use that which we have narrated concerning the incision of the two tonsils: and take care of it until it heals.
If however the patient fears the incision: then it is necessary that you use ingenuity in cauterization of him without fear and trembling.
And the way of cautery on it is not except with sharp water and it is that you put the head of the sick person into your bosom. Then press down the tongue of him with the instrument that we said. Then take from the water which I told you about in the chapter on cauterization, and mix it with lime that is not extinguished, and put it in this instrument, neither thick nor thin, and fill its cavity with it, whose form is this.
Let the extremity where medicine is placed be concave, like the cavity of a snail's shell.
And place the instrument with medicine on the wound itself: and let the sick person lie on his side so that saliva from his mouth runs inward from the medicine, so that it does not descend into his throat and harm him.
Then hold your hand with medicine. And you will from the first apply it upon the wound with a quantity of half an hour, until you see it already darkened and the inflammation calmed by medicine.
And if you wish to receive a bandage and wrap it over the end of the radius bone, and fill the bandage with medicine, and introduce the radius bone with the bandage into a tube from above, until the bandage adheres to the wound.
Do this many times until you achieve what you desire from the cauterization of the vein. Then let it be left alone: for it hardens and falls off after three or four days.
If you wish to repeat the medicine, repeat it: and after cauterization wipe around the wound with a cloth dipped in butter, and cleanse it with that which is around it from the medicine: and cover it with cold water.
And it is treated externally with compresses, and internally with gargles, until it is healed.
This kind of treatment therefore is more healthful by cutting and farther from fear.
And sometimes a wound is treated even with that which is more subtle than cautery and incision: for it is treated with fumigation, according to this manner. Take a cloth and hyssop and oregano and rue and sage and chamomile and wormwood, and similar herbs: and gather all these, or some of them, in a pot, and let them be submerged with vinegar, and let them boil: and the pot should be lined with clay properly: and there should be a hole in the middle of the pot, over which an instrument is placed hollow according to this manner.
Let it be made from silver or copper, and let the end, in which is the grain, be introduced into the bone of the infirm person until vapor ascends to the tube above the cannula, until the tube becomes much darkened.
Then repeat over it many times until it stops.
And beware, lest you make this cure at the beginning of the arrival of an abscess. Generally he adds this in an abscess: and it ought not to be done unless at the time of the subsidence of its heat.
If this instrument is not present to you, then take a tube and put cork at its end so that the bone of the infirm does not burn; because cork prevents steam from burning the bone; and this is from good care with health.
On the extraction of splinters and bones from the throat.
Chapter XXXVII.
Many times something adheres to the throat, either a fish bone or something else.
Therefore it is necessary that you remove what appears from them above which falls the sight, after pressing the tongue with an instrument near the sun, and it is declared to you what is in the throat.
And that which does not appear to you and is hidden in the throat, it is necessary that you make a vomiting weak before food is digested in the stomach. Perhaps indeed the thing joined will emerge through vomiting.
Let the sick person swallow a piece of breadcrumb, or lettuce root, or a mouthful of dry bread; or take a piece of dried marine sponge soft: and bind it with thread, then swallow it. When therefore it comes to the place where the spines or bone are, and it is drawn out, then it issues forth.
If therefore it does not come out with that which we said: then use an instrument of lead according to this form.
Let it be thicker than a radius somewhat, and at the end of it there should be a curvature, so that it may enter its throat with ease; and let itself have its head raised upwards.
And let him beware of touching his epiglottis, so that he does not get a cough, and drive it in with his mouth, or spine, or introduce himself with his own hand.
Truly it is better if the infirm one inserts, that is, because of his knowledge of the place of the thing annexed: and he pushes down or draws his hand with an instrument up, the whole thing according to the quantity which is prepared for him, until it emerges.
On the Extraction of Leeches.
Chapter XXXIX.
When a leech is treated with that which I said in the division from healing with medicines, and it does not help, then consider in the throat of the sick one in front of the sun, or in the sun after pressing his tongue with the instrument that I told you about.
If therefore your sight falls upon a leech, remove it with a small hook, or with a thin stick carefully.
If it is not possible with these things: then take a concave tube, and insert it into the throat of the sick person up to near the gullet: then insert into the concavity of the tube iron ignited with fire. Do this many times: and let the sick person abstain from water all day.
Then let him take a full mouthful of cold water, and open his mouth in it: and put his mouth into it, and do not swallow anything from it: and move the water every hour with his hand. For when a leech feels water, it immediately falls.
If it does not come out as we have narrated, then fumigate the sick person with cinders, or with asa and the instrument which I have narrated in the fumigation of the vulva.
Do that many times because it will fall.
And the method of operation in fumigation is, to take a pot, in which are live plums with fire: and let the pot be covered with a cover, in the middle of which there is a hole: and let the extremity of the instrument be placed in that hole.
Then throw in the fumigation, and let the sick person put their mouth at the end of the tube, and close their mouth so that the fumigation does not go out until you know that the fumigation has already reached the bloodsucker. For the leech will immediately fall off.
If it does not fall, then repeat the fumigation many times.
And let the weak person endure thirst, and eat salty food, and other things, and not drink water.
It is therefore necessary that he go out with this regimen.
And this is the form of the instrument with which bloodsucker is extracted from the throat, when it falls upon it itself.
It is similar to forceps, as you see: unless because it has this curve that goes into the throat. And its extremity is like the beak of a bird called a stork, in which there is the roughness of a file: when it seizes something, it does not let go of it at all.
On the opening of abscesses, and their incision, and care in general.
Chapter XL.
There are many kinds of abscesses, of many modes, according to how their remembrance comes, namely one and one in this book: and they are diverse in the piercing of them, and in the cutting of them from two ways.
Of which one is of the kind of abscesses within itself, and that which it contains from moisture.
And the second method is because of the places where it happens from the body.
Because an abscess occurring in the head is different from an abscess occurring in the anus: and an abscess occurring in a fleshy place is different from an abscess occurring in the joints: and to each of these belongs its own judgment from the operation.
And from abscesses there are some which ought not to be pierced, except after the ripening of the pus within them, and the completion of it: and there are also some which ought to be pierced while they are raw, and do not ripen according to the completion.
Like boils that are near the joints.
Because an abscess when it happens near a joint and is prolonged to be until it rots what is around it, perhaps the ligaments or nerves of that joint are corrupted: therefore it is a closer cause of contraction of that limb.
Or it is an abscess in the main limb: for if you delay its piercing until it matures, it will harm either it or through that member.
If it is near the anus, pierce it immaturely: and let it not be pierced if it is a raw abscess, not completely digested, except if it is near the anus so that it does not rot deeply, and lengthens to the interior of the anus, and becomes a fistula, or becomes at its end what does not heal.
It is necessary for you to know the hour of perforation of an abscess, which has matured according to its course: and it is in the sedation of pain, the recession of fever, and the diminution of redness, and pulse, and the sharpness of the head of the abscess: and other signs.
And it is necessary that you make the same perforation in the lower part of the abscess and the more prominent eminence: and let the perforation be deep in length of the body, if the abscesses are in the parts of the hands and feet, and places of the arms, and tendons, and nerves, and arteries, and finally in all equal places where there is no reflex.
In those which are reflected, go with a piercing according to that limb.
When a boil is in fleshy places, it is better that you release its opening until its digestion is confirmed, as we have said according to the complement.
For if you pierce it before that, the course of the virus is prolonged from it, and there is much dirt and filth, and perhaps the lips of it and its depth will endure.
And certain abscesses are pierced according to the width of the body as necessity demands; or according to what the limb needs.
And it is necessary that you administer in small abscesses a small perforation, and in large abscesses a wide perforation; or many sections according to the similarity of the size of the abscess.
And they are from abscesses, in which it is necessary that the skin be concaved; and it should be cut when it has already been made like a cloth, and has come to an end, that which has already died: such as what happens in many, that it swells, and with buboes.
And among these are those which are cut with a cutting instrument having three angles. And of these there is one which occurs like a myrtle leaf in figure.
Like an inguinal abscess.
And of these there are those in which a round incision is administered, and a lunar incision: and similar incisions to these.
For that one who does not have a head, such as superficial ulcers and boils, it is necessary that he be pierced with a superficial perforation, or only leveled.
And it is necessary, when an abscess is large and has already collected much pus, and you pierce it, that you do not hurry and extract all the pus in that hour; rather, extract a part of it. Then the pus should be left alone until the next day. Then remove something from the pus again.
Do this many times according to the gradation, until it emerges: especially if he is weak of virtue, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old man decrepit: for the animal spirit is much dissolved from the animal with the emission of humors: and perhaps the weak one dies, and you do not perceive.
Therefore, pay great heed to this chapter.
And after you have perforated it, through which you perforate the abscesses, it is necessary that you cleanse the wound: and consider. If therefore the wound is of a small abscess, or is a flat incision, then administer a lint made from linen, or old cloth. And if it is a large abscess, and there are many fissures of the opening, then it is necessary that you introduce into each fissure liniment, until they reach each other.
And if in an abscess you have cut away a part of the skin, or in the surrounding area scooped it out; then it is necessary that you fill it with old dung, or as when it is covered with cloth, or shaved linen wool without moisture: and bind it until the third day.
Then throw it out, and take care of it with what is necessary from ointment until it heals.
If blood should flow during your operation, then administer cold water and vinegar, after having soaked a cloth in them: and place it over the location of the bleeding many times.
If however the flow of blood persisted, then it is necessary that you administer a regimen and treatment and powders which I have recounted in many places in this our book, and from the division.
If it is in wintertime, and the place of the abscess is among many nerves, then it is necessary that you pour warm pills with wine and oil, and place them over the places.
And if it be in summer, and the places are fleshy: then it is necessary that you place poultices soaked in water, and oil, or him with wine and oil, and the whole thing cold. Until the third day, as we have said, then it is necessary that you loosen the abscess and cleanse it, and administer to it what is fitting for its cure, until it heals.
This is therefore what is necessary from the knowledge of the treatment of abscesses universally.
According to the method of distinction, I have already said about every abscess, how the way is to its cure individually and separately.
Chapter XL I .
On the incision of boils that occur in the scalp.
Small abscesses occur on the scalp skin, and they are of the kind of boils, which contain sacs, like little pouches made from a hen's gizzard.
And their kinds are many.
Of these some are fatty; and of these some contain moisture similar to clay; and of these some contain moisture similar to gruel and porridge: and the like, and of these there are also those which are hard and stony.
And in the cutting of all, and their extraction there is no fear, as long as in their cutting it does not oppose the artery.
And the operation on their incision is that you should explore it with an instrument whose form comes after these, which is called Intromissum, until you know what it contains.
If it contains moisture, then dry it out by cutting it lengthwise with a shallow incision: according to this form.
And begin with a cut from line b to line g. When therefore the moisture is evacuated, then scrape out the cyst which contains that moisture, and do not let anything whatever escape from it.
Many times indeed it returns, if anything remains of it.
Then immerse a sponge in Egyptian ointment, if it is present: and if not, in water and salt: and fill the wound with it, and leave it until the next day. For it will eat away what remains from the cyst.
Then again pass over the same tumor with the Egyptian knife second and third, and if it does not digest with that, until you are confident that nothing remains of the cyst, then take care of the wound with ointment until it heals.
If it contains a fleshy node, then cut it according to this form, with the incision shaped like a cross: and throw hooks between the edges of the incision, and scrape it from every part: and endeavor your strength in extracting the tunic that contains it.
If an artery opposes you, then do what I will tell you after this.
And similarly do in an abscess, if it is stony, from incision, and cure the same, according to what we said.
And incision over a stony abscess is easier; because there is little blood and moisture. And sometimes there are certain of these abscesses that are in the head in some men, with which there is no moisture at all.
Because I cut into an abscess on the head of an elderly woman and found the abscess like a hard and solid stone, rough, white, which could not be broken; and if someone struck it with something thrown, it would wound that thing.
In other boils that occur on the head, besides those which occur in the heads of children and at the roots of the ears, the section of all of them should be a superficial section.
Or place the perforation of them always from the lower part of them, so that the flow of healing may be relieved downward.
Then care for him as is fitting from healing.
On the cutting away of strictures in the neck.
Chapter XLII.
These abscesses often occur in the neck, and under the arms, and in the groin: and sometimes they occur in the rest of the body.
And those things that happen to them in the neck are some one thing and many: and they arise from each other: and every Strophula from them is inside its own tunic, just as it is in nodes and boils of the head, just as we have narrated.
And there are many kinds of these Strophulas. And from these there are stones: and from these there are those that contain moistures: and from these there are malignant ones, which do not obey healing.
In that which therefore you see of good disposition in touch, whose manifest color is near to the skin, and moves to every part, and is not joined with nerves of the neck, nor with guidegi, nor with artery, nor is it deep: it is necessary that you cut it with a superficial section from the upper part to the lower part of the body from line b to line g, and scrape it from every side: and extend the two lips of skin with a hook, or with many hooks, if you need them, as we have said in abscesses of the head, and extract it gradually.
And it is a precaution, so that vein or nerve may not be injured.
And let the spatula not be too sharp: so that it does not add your hand with the incision, or disturb the sick one, and you cut what is not necessary.
If you cut a vein or artery, or if it prevents you from operating, then put crushed zeigee or some powders that stop bleeding into the wound, and bind the wound, and let it be until the sharpness of the abscess has subsided, and the wound has softened: or until it begins to rot.
For blood is severed with a knife, therefore return to your operation until you complete it.
Then with your index finger examine if anything remains of the other small strophulis; therefore, cut them and cleanse them.
If the great vein is in the root of a strangulated hernia, then it is necessary that you do not cut the hernia from its root: rather, it is necessary that you tie it with a doubled strong thread, and let it go until it falls by itself without harm.
Then fill the wound on the belly, which you have already submerged in Egyptian ointment. Then take care of it itself.
If the whole Strophula is cut, then it is necessary to join the two lips of the wound, and itself immediately after you see that there remains no superfluity at all.
If you see that there remains an excess because of the size of the Strophula, then it is necessary to extend [it] to cut its root and remove it; and administer the suture which we said.
And what contains moisture from the Strophuli, perforate it with a superficial perforation: so that the place of its maturity appears to you: and place the perforation below that which follows in the body, as we said.
Then administer after the perforation a liniment with ointment, and similar things, so that it corrodes what remains from the corruption, until when you see the wound already cleansed: then take care of it with an ointment that generates flesh, until it heals.
Chapter XLIII.
On the incision of the epiglottis due to an abscess inside the throat.
The ancients said this incision is in the Epiglottis, and I did not see anyone in our land who has made it: and this is the writing of their words.
In those having a synanchia, it is necessary that the section of the Epiglottis be made; when no help is given by it; because all veins and lung are weak.
In those who have a hot abscess in the mouth, or throat, or at both tonsils, when there is no pain in the canal, it is necessary to use the section of the Epiglottis to avoid the destruction which is done from before-mentioned preparation.
Therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, it must be cut under three or four circles of the epiglottis with a small incision across its width, in that which is between the two circles by the quantity that the section should be in the soft tissue, not in cartilage: and this place is convenient for the section because it is devoid of flesh, and the blood vessels from it are distant.
If the surgeon is timid, then he ought to extend the skin of the throat with a hook. Then he finds the skin until he comes to the channel: he cuts the vessels of blood if he sees anything from them.
Then he cuts the fistula as we have said; and it is signified over the incision of the channel from the phlegm that flows out of it, with that which is broken up, and the cutting away of the voice.
And let the open wound be left for a while.
When therefore the hour is removed in which the foreclosure is feared, gather together the two lips of the skin wound, and sew its own alone without cartilage.
Then administer medicines which cause flesh to grow, until it is healed.
Says Albucasis. The summary of this discourse which we narrated, is not an exposition, unless they see that some of these abscesses has already opened the throat of the sick person: and the patient has been raised above death, and wishes to be intersected by his breath: They go to cut the epiglottis, so that the sick person may breathe over the place of the wound with some respiration, and be saved from death: and for this reason they ordered the open wound to be left alone until the malice of the illness is consumed, and its malice is three days, and as such: then therefore they ordered it to be sutured and cared for until it is healed.
And that which I saw with my own eyes, is that a maidservant took a knife and put it into her throat, and it struck the part of the windpipe.
And I was called upon to treat him, and I found him moaning, as is the moaning of a dead man.
I therefore examined the wound and found blood that had come out of the wound a little. Therefore I was confused that she had not cut away the vein, nor had guided it; and wind was escaping from the wound.
Therefore I attended to his wound and cared for it until it was healed; and nothing happened to the girl except a hoarseness in her voice; and she returned after days to better disposition of herself.
Therefore I say: that there is no fear in the incision of the epiglottis.
On the incision of a groin hernia.
Chapter XLIV.
This abscess called Hernia gutturis, is a large abscess, according to the color of the body: and it is much in women.
And it is according to two modes: either it is natural or it is accidental.
It is not natural certain talent.
An accident is according to two modes: one of which is like swollen knots. And another method is similar to an abscess which occurs from ligation of the artery. And in this there is fear, and it ought not to be presumed upon with a knife unless in what is small; and you prove it, and investigate it with the probe. If therefore you find it similar to a fatty lump and is not suspended with any veins: then cut it as nodes are cut: and remove it with what it contains from the cyst, if it is in a cyst; and if not, then examine the whole of it. Then care for the place as much as is necessary until it heals.
Chapter XLV.
On cutting open swellings called Nodes.
There are many kinds of nodules, and I have already said all their kinds in the division: and it is necessary that I tell here the difference between a Node and an Fistula: when there is doubt making.
Therefore I say, that when the heat and fever and violent pains have subsided until the boiling of excess is calmed and putrefaction is complete, then indeed the fever and heat subside.
When a knot is present there is no heat, nor fever, nor pain, and it contains them in its own bag called sifachin which corresponds to the color of the body. And its beginning is like a chickpea, and it becomes like a batecha, and it is greater or lesser.
And they are according to two kinds: either fat: or containing moisture. And the colors of humidity are many, according to what I said in the division.
Therefore, when you come to the treatment of a Node, you must examine it, and inquire into it first with the instrument that is called an Intromissor, according to what will come its form in the chapter that is after this.
And the way to investigate abscesses and all kinds of knots is that you take this instrument and insert it into the moister place which you find in the abscess; and you revolve your fingers with it gradually until you know that the instrument has already pierced the skin. Then your last hand according to the measure of the size of the abscess.
Then withdraw what was inserted, and consider what comes out in its track.
If therefore a running humidity occurs, whatever its color may be; then dry it with a superficial incision, according to what I have said in the rest of the abscesses.
And if humidity does not exit in the place of introduction, then you know that it is fat: therefore, make a cut over it having the form of a cross, according to this form, as I have taught you; and suspend it with hooks, and scrape the skin from every part with ease; and guard the cyst if you can on it, so that you may extract it whole with the knot.
If, however, the bladder bursts during the operation, and it is not possible to remove the whole thing intact, since this happens often, then remove it piece by piece until nothing remains of it.
If anything remains from it, whether a little or a lot, a Node returns according to the most.
If it conquers you, and there remains little from it, then fill the wound at its completion with some sharp corrosive powders; and bind the wound, and place above it what sits pus hot, and care for it with the rest of the cure, until it is healed.
If therefore the knot is large, then sew its two lips together, and take care of it as with that which is incarnate.
If however the pulsating or non-pulsating vein is opposite to you, then hasten and fill the place with crushed zegi, and loosen it for two or three days, until the wound putrefies and the boiling of blood rests; then return to cutting that which remains from the Knot.
Chapter XLVI.
On instruments used for incision and piercing of the mouth.
There are forms of intromittors, and they are of three kinds.
From these there is a great one, and from these there is a medium one, and from these there is a small one.
Let pointed instruments of square ends be made from iron, so that they hasten entry into an abscess.
And these are the forms of Experiences, and no, that is, piercing: and one of them is named beris, that is, piercing: and there are three kinds.
Of these there is a large, and a medium, and a small.
It is necessary that these abscesses, and openings, and fistulas, and buboes be investigated by what is between them from the bones.
And for others are made round, smooth, blunt, like large needles which they insert under the buttocks, from citron, or copper, or iron, or silver.
And better ones are made from citron.
And experience is also made with black lead, which is suitable for experiencing fistulas, whose concavity is reflections, so that they are reflected with their softness with those reflections.
And they are again of three kinds. Because some are long, some medium, and some short, according to the quantity of the width and constriction of it.
The shape of hooks, and there are many kinds.
Because these are simple ones, that is, those which have one care: and they are three kinds as you see, Great, Medium, and Small.
And of these are blind pouches, and there are three kinds.
And of these there are hooks having two curves, and there are three kinds: and of these there are hooks having three curves, and there are three kinds: and all these are necessary in their place.
And these are the shapes of scalpels, with which knots and abscesses are cut and scraped; and there are three kinds: because among them is a large one, a medium one, and a small one.
The ends of those which are cut are sharp, the other ends are not sharp: and they are not put thus, unless that help may be given to them in the scraping of Tumors at the fear of incision of a vein, or nerve: and that the weak may be healed by them, and find somewhat of tranquility from burning as he finds in the scraping of an abscess.
They are made of metal and are similar to a distilling apparatus, with which alcohol is made; and at the wide end there is a point hidden by a spatula; and through it it runs inwards and outwards when you wish, as you see.
The form of splints which are hidden between the fingers at the perforation of an abscess; and the sick do not perceive them; and there are three kinds, large, medium, and small.
Wounds of the winds with which blood flow is cut off; and there are three kinds, large, medium, and small.
Let them be made of copper, or citron, round, of short length, as you see: and let them be fine.
And it is necessary that these kinds of Winds be with you large and small, so that you may cut blood by them with speed when necessity requires, and then when medicine is not present to you.
However, do not use them for cutting blood in every place of the body, and do not use them except in fleshy places: such as the hamstrings of the leg, and hip, and the wounds of the arms, and nipples, and belly, and groin, and the like of these, from fleshy, moist incisions.
And sometimes they make small instruments from these similar to the cortices of a fist, according to their shape: with which blood is cut when it flows from the place of phlebotomy, or at the incision of a vein, or artery: and sometimes they are made round according to this form.
Chapter XLVII.
On the care of the nipples of humans which are like the nipples of women.
Sometimes the nipples of certain men swell during sleep (that is, when they begin to dream) until they resemble the nipples of women, and they remain festering with pus.
He who shuns this, let him cut above the nipples with a lunar section, according to this form from line b to line g. Then flay the entire fatness. Afterwards fill the wound with medicinal plaster. Then gather together the two lips of the wound with suture, and care for it until it is healed.
If the nipple inclines downwards and softens because of its size, as happens to women: then it is necessary that two incisions similar in shape to a crescent moon be made on its two upper sides, each one containing the other at the edges of both, until there is a larger line enclosing the smaller, according to this form from line b. to line g. Afterwards, scrape the skin which is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and administer what we have said about sutures and powders, which are necessary for healing, until it heals.
If, however, you do not deem it necessary to make an incision of it, because of the restlessness of the sick man, or because of the flow of blood: then it is necessary that you fill the wound with a poultice submerged in corrosive ointment, and leave it, until it corrodes what remains of the fat. Then take care of it until it heals.
On perforating an abscess that occurs under the armpit.
Chapter XLVIII.
These abscesses that occur under the nipple are of the kind of hard boils, which contain cysts, and from these there are those which contain moisture.
Therefore, those which contain humidities, ought to be cut with a lunar section, according to this form, from line b. to line g. When therefore the whole that is in the abscess is evacuated of blood, then fill it with cotto vetri, and dismiss it until the next day.
Then remove the tumor, and treat it with an appropriate ointment until it heals.
If it is an abscess from the type of knots of Strophulus, then cut over it, as we said in the section on cutting over Strophulus equally.
If the wound extends so that it discharges pus, then administer a cautery to it, according to what we have said previously.
Chapter XLVIII.
On the incision of an abscess that occurs because of an artery and vein.
When an artery is torn and the skin above it is sutured, often many times a boil occurs from there, and similarly with veins, so that a boil and swelling occur in them.
And the signs by which it is known that an abscess and inflammation are due to artery and vein are: because when an abscess is due to an artery, it is long, gathered deep in the body: and when you push on the abscess with your fingers, you feel as if there were a scraping sound.
And that which is for the vein, is round on the manifest body.
And a section above this abscess is an error, and especially that which is under the armpits, and groins, and neck, and in many places of the body: and it is very great. Therefore it is necessary that his care be cured with iron, and what from those also is at the extremities, or in the head, it is necessary that it be cured.
Therefore, upon that which is from them through the inflation of the opening of the Artery, make a cut in the skin in length. Then open the incision with hooks, afterwards the Artery: and free it from the tunics, until it is uncovered.
Then insert under it a needle, and make it penetrate to the other side, and bind the Artery with a doubled thread in two places, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the two Arteries which are in the temples.
Then prick the place which is between two ligaments with a lancet, until all the blood that is in it comes out and the abscess is loosened.
Then administer a treatment that produces pus until the ligaments fall away; afterward care for it with suitable ointments until it heals.
If it is an abscess due to the cutting of a vein, then you should hold with your hand as much as possible of the abscess with the skin. Then introduce a needle under the place which you have held with your hand, and make it penetrate: and let there be in it a thread double, until you withdraw it from the other side. Then tie the ligature with the abscess itself with a good ligature; according to what I told you about the ligature of the uterus, from two parts with two ends of thread.
If you fear that the thread being removed will cause trouble, then introduce another needle with a different thread under the entire abscess at the incision; press and tighten your threads in four places.
Then dry up the abscess in its middle until it discharges what is within; then cut away the excess skin and release what was bound from it.
Then place over that little bit which you have submerged in wine and oil. Then administer treatment, which is done with lead and ointment, until it heals.
Chapter L.
On an abscess that occurs from a twisting of the nerves.
Just as an abscess occurs in an artery and vein, so it also occurs in a nerve; which happens to them through percussion, or from excessive labor, and the like: and it is most common in those places of the assistants, or the heel, and in every place where joints move: and it is a serious abscess.
Its color is similar to the rest of the body, and it is found in many positions without pain: and when it is squeezed with force, it feels like a stupor in it, as if weak.
And it is not an abscess collected deep in the body, but it is under the skin, and it moves to every part, and does not go to the anterior parts, nor forward or backward to the posterior parts.
Therefore, what is in the joints from these things, it ought not to be invaded with iron. Perhaps contraction may occur.
In that which is in the head, or on the forehead, cut the skin with a knife. If therefore the abscess is small, then hold it with forceps and cut it away from its root.
And if it is large, then suspend it with a hook, and scrape it; then remove it, and gather the wound together with suture; and care for it until it heals.
Chapter L I.
On cutting an abscess that occurs in the belly.
Certain people experience, many times, in their bellies and in other parts of their bodies, growths which are called Fungalia, because of their similarity to mushrooms.
Their root is slender, and their heads are thick, and their lips are turned inward. And there is a small part among these: and there is a great part that is highly magnified.
And I have indeed seen a man, and in his belly there were two tumors, which were more like mushrooms than other things: there was no difference between them, white, small roots, and their lips were reversed, and they could be found, and moisture ran out of them always.
Therefore, I cut into it, and I found in one side as much as X and VIII ounces, and in the other side as much as VI ounces. And the operation in cutting them is, that you consider then, if the patient is moist and the color is white, moist, and subtle of root: then cut it with a wide spatula, and have cautery in fire present.
For often much blood is expelled during its section: therefore if you are overcome by blood, then cauterize it.
If you see a weak and timid patient afraid of the cut with iron, then take a lead wire properly made and tie it with it to the athleul. Its method is what we said, and release him for two days.
Then add lead to the constriction. Therefore, you should not stop tightening the lead until it is pressed into the drill and cuts off by itself without effort.
If however the root be thick, then there is some fear and trembling in its incision, especially because it is in the belly.
Nevertheless, it is possible to cut its half. Then cauterize it so that it does not return.
Then take care of the wound until it is healed.
And beware lest you presume to cut into that which is dusky in color, with few sensations, and of foul appearance: for this is a cancerous abscess: and I shall come back after this with a remembrance of Cancer.
Chapter LII.
On the treatment of umbilical hernia.
A protrusion of the umbilicus occurs from many causes. Or from fissures which are above the belly: and it goes out of it either the large intestine, or the intestine, according to what happens in the other ruptures. Either from blood that flows from the Vein, or from the Artery, according to what has been said before. Or compressed from windiness in it.
If it is due to a fissure of the skin and discharge of pus: then its color is similar to the color of the body: and it is soft, without pain: and it appears in various locations. And if it is because of the protrusion of the intestine, then its location is, with that which we have narrated, of more diversity. When therefore you press him with your fingers, he is hidden; then he returns, and perhaps there is a sound with him; and it is much magnified at the entrance of the bath, and labor pain.
If it is due to moisture, it is soft, then it is not covered when you press it with your hand, nor is a bandage applied, nor added.
If it is due to blood, then with these signs the abscess appears black from the  incision.
If it is due to flesh born: then it is a grave, large, hard abscess and it takes shape according to the quantity of one.
If it is due to windiness, then its touch is gentle.
And the operation on it is, that you consider then, if the prominence of the navel is because of blood from the Artery, or Vein, or windiness: then it is necessary that you forbid its cure. For in that there is fear and dread, as I have taught you in the chapter, in which I said abscesses because of the artery and vein.
If the protrusion of the navel is due to the intestine or a hernia, then it is necessary for you to instruct the patient to hold his breath and stand upright extended. Then signs with a cauterizing implement around the whole belly button. Then command him to lie down between your hands upon his back. Then around with a wide spatula on the circumference of the umbilicus over the place which you have marked with encaustic. Afterward extend the middle of the abscess upward with a large hook. Then tie him around with a strong thread or silk cord firmly bound: and let the knot of the ligament be well fastened.
Then open the center of the abscess extended above the ligament. If therefore you find it already captured by a ligament: then extract it with the forceps and introduce your index finger into it, and drive the intestine into the interior of the abdomen: and if you find a tumor, then take it with a hook and cut away its excess.
If however, the artery or vein is contrary to you, then wind around it much. Then return to your operation. Take two needles and insert two strong threads into them. And insert two needles into the circle you made around the abscess in the shape of a cross, so that they penetrate.
Then bind the abscess in four places above the needle: and if you wish, remove the needle, and release the place until the extended flesh decays: and falls by itself: or cut it yourself when it becomes soft and decays.
Then care for him with what is necessary from ointment until he heals.
If the prominence of the navel is from flesh or moisture, then it must be scooped out like an abscess, as we said. And you shall draw out blood, or moisture, which you find there.
Then care for it with that which solidifies the place.
Chapter Fifty-Third.
On the treatment of cancer.
We have already said in the division of the kinds of cancer, and how is the way to its cure with medicines: and beware of it when curing it with iron, so that it may not ulcerate: and we have said about cancer generated in the womb, and beware of its cure.
And the ancients said that sometimes cancer is in a place where it is possible to eradicate it; such as cancer that is in the nipple, or in the hip, and those similar ones, from members located to remove the whole of it: especially when it is beginning small.
When, however, it becomes old and large, it is not proper that you approach it.
For I was not able to heal anyone from it; nor have I seen anyone before me who has succeeded in doing so.
And the operation in that case, when it is located as we have said, is, as before, and to free the sick person from black bile several times. Then if you find the lancet filled with blood plainly.
Then prepare the weak with preparation, in which it will be spoken of with the operation.
Then throw into the tumor hooks that correspond to it. Afterwards, hollow out the entire thing with a blade, according to examination, until nothing remains of its roots: and let blood flow, and do not cut it quickly, rather express the places, and wipe away the gross blood altogether with your hand, or with whatever instruments are possible there.
If however a thick flow of blood from an incision in an artery or vein troubles you, then cauterize the vein until the blood is stopped. Then care for it as well as the rest of the treatment, until it is healed.
On the Treatment of Hydrops.
Chapter LIIII. Now we narrate in the division of kinds of Hydrops, and how the gathering of water is made: and the signs of every kind, and its cure with medicines.
And that which is cured with iron, is only a species of asclisis alone; and it does not approach with iron the kind of tympanitis; nor the kind of hypocarchia entirely; for that one is mortal.
When you have already treated this type of Hydropsis of the tympanum with medicines, and your medicine has not helped, then consider. If weakness has already come upon the sick person, or if there is another infirmity with him besides dropsy: such as if he has a cough, or diarrhea of the belly, and the like: then beware that you do not treat him with iron: because there is fear of this.
If you see a patient with excessive strength and there is only dropsy accompanying him, and he is neither a boy nor an old man, then the mode of operation in him is that you raise the patient standing between your hands, and the assistant behind him expresses his belly with his hand pushing water to the lower part of the chest.
Then take a grooved knife, according to this form. Let there be two pointed parts, long, and acute at the end like a spatula. Nonetheless, let there be something of brevity gradually so that you do not pass through with it at the operation up to the intestines and wound them.
Then consider. If a generation of dropsy is from the part of the intestines, then it is necessary that you lengthen with a cut from the navel to a quantity of three fingers, to the lower direct above the breastbone.
If, however, the generation of dropsy is because of liver illness; then let your section be on the left side from the navel three finger widths.
And if its generation is on account of the spleen, then let a section be made on the right side: and it ought not also to be a section on the side upon which the sick person wants to lie, so that superfluities do not flow to that weak place.
Then pierce the skin completely with an instrument. Then introduce your hand into that incision and lift it with the Spatula between the skin, and scrape, as if you were scraping it: and let the quantity which is scraped be the quantity of a fingernail, or about that much.
Then pierce the skin until the sponge reaches the place of vacuum, and there is a place for water. Then extract it, and insert into the opening an instrument which has this form. And it is like a cannula: it is made of silver, or copper, or brass, soft and smooth: which has a small hole in its lower part, and on its sides are three holes, two on one side, and one on the other side: and its end is cut, according to the manner of cutting a reed, as you see: at the upper end of it there is a ring.
For when the instrument reaches the water, then it descends immediately upon the instrument, therefore it evacuates from the water in an hour a medium quantity.
For if you evacuate from it more than is necessary, perhaps the sick person will die in an hour through dissolution of his animal spirit; or it happens to him that he falls into a swoon which approaches death.
Truly evacuate from it according to the quantity of its power, and according to what dispositions of the sick person signify to you from the pulse's virtue, and from its goodness.
Then remove the instrument and retain the water.
This is because it is held back immediately because of the skin which retains the opening which is above the sifa; about which I have told you, so that you may pierce it according to that manner.
Then on the next day repeat the instrument if you see that the sick person can tolerate it; and also withdraw from the water a small quantity.
Do this for several days without fear, and guard yourself against error until there remains little water left.
If however you fear for the weak one, and release much water from him; then care for him with burial in hot sand, and much sweat in a bath and sun, and let him wait upon thirst. And care for him with drying medicines, until he is healed. And cauterize over the stomach, and liver, and spleen, after the extraction of water: according to what I have narrated in that which precedes.
On the care of infants who are born with their urinary openings not perforated.
Chapter LVII.
When someone is born from the womb of their mother and the head of their offspring is not perforated, or is a stricture, or is not in its proper place.
Therefore, one must help with its perforation immediately when it is born with a spatula finely and delicately, according to this form.
Then put a thin lead rod into the hole, and tie it: and hold it for three or four days.
When therefore he wants to urinate, he should remove it and urinate. Then reduce it.
And if you do not put lead, it is now possible that the urine which flows over the place, will not allow it to close.
He who has a narrow opening is treated with lead, as we have said, for many days until it is widened.
Those who have a hole in a place not their own are harmed. That is because from those who are born, there is an opening at the end of the penis: therefore he cannot urinate forward until he elevates the penis with his hand upward. It is not generated because sperm cannot reach the womb in a straight line, and it is a very foul ailment.
And the mode of operation in this is that the sick person is laid on his back. Then extend the head of the rod with your left hand forcefully, and cut the head of the rod from the place of the penis, with a sharp point or knife; just as you would cut a reed, or something else, so that its middle comes out like the head of the rod: and so that a hole falls in the middle according to what is necessary.
And beware during your operation of blood flow. Many times indeed this occurs. Therefore oppose him with that which cuts off blood, and care for the wound until it is healed.
On Albucasis which things happen in the foreskin and head of the penis, and corruption, blackness, and adherence.
Chapter LXVI.
Many times these things happen to Albucasis on the staff, and there is a lump of foul flesh.
And from it some are malignant and some not malignant.
Therefore, you should not suspend a non-malignant tumor with a fine hook, and cut it off until you have completely removed it. Then place upon it a compress soaked in Egyptian ointment. Then care for it afterward with dyacin ointment until it heals.
If Albather is malignant, of foul color, then it is necessary that you administer cauterium in it after its incision and the excision of it.
If, however, the foreskin of a captive who has not been circumcised is caught, and part of the prepuce is inside, and part outside: then it is necessary to remove the prepuce that is inside first, until it is healed, then care for the part outside; because when you care for both at the same time, the foreskin does not heal but is pierced.
And now also there happens even in the testicles and prepuce blackening and corruption. Therefore, it is necessary for you to hollow out everything that has been blackened and which wants to be corrupted or already is corrupted.
Then a line on top of it after this with honey that is already mixed with flour and the rind of pomegranate seeds, and herb triturate strainer-like.
Then care for it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
If blood flow occurs, then administer cautery with a lunar cautery, according to this form.
Cautery is a remedy for two dispositions at once, namely for the flow of blood, and for a wound when it is corrupted.
If the head of a urinal is worn away and destroyed within an hour, then you should insert into its opening a lead tube so that the patient urinates over it.
In the adhesion of the foreskin with the head of the penis, and this adhesion does not occur unless in the one whose foreskin is healthy, and circumcision is not required on it: and sometimes adhesion occurs because of a wound or abscess: therefore it is necessary that you scrape it with an obtuse Spatula until the ligament is loosened, and the head of the penis is freed from every part.
If it is difficult to distinguish these subtle things, then it is necessary to excise something from the head of the penis and from the prepuce. That is, because when the foreskin is thin, it may be pierced because of its thinness quickly.
Then separate between the prepuce and the head of the penis with a fine linen cloth which has already been moistened in cold water so that they do not stick again.
Then it is treated with wine and a poultice until it solidifies.
Chapter LVII.
On the purification of infants, and the cure of diseases that happen to them by error.
Circumcision is not a solution of continuity, like the rest of the wounds: but since it is from our operation, by our will, and its use is proper to boys, it is necessary that we mark in it a better operation, and a smoother way leading to health.
Therefore I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books; because they do not use it in their laws, and it is only what we have acquired through experience.
Which is because I found that most artificers and bloodletters use purification, cutting with a knife, and with forceps: and they use the cautery, and tie with thread, and incision with a nail.
And I indeed have already proven all these methods, and I have not found a better purification with forceps, and binding with thread.
Because in cleansing with a knife, many times the skin escapes. Because the foreskin has two layers of skin: therefore perhaps the upper skin is cut, and the lower tunic remains: therefore it is necessary to make an incision to cut the other, and future pain will result. And with purification which is made through alfecati, that is, finger-tools, which surgeons use, the incision of the extremity of the male member is not carefully made; because perchance it may enter into its foramen.
In the cleansing, however, if a nail possibly comes out, and spoils your operation; and indeed the skin of a boy is short in nature, and very often they are born thus, that they do not need cleansing; and I have already seen this.
The cleansing with forceps and a cord of thread proved good to me, because the forceps are proportionate to the incision; indeed, the sharpness that is above is like the sharpness that is below. When therefore you place your hand, two points are proportioned, and they cut according to the operation one at a time: and a compression is made of similar figure, containing the skin in its entirety from every side, with which no error at all falls.
And the manner of operating is that you make him estimate, especially a boy, if he is one of those who understand briefly, that you do not do anything except tie a thread on his rod and let him go until another day.
Then make him rejoice and be glad in every way possible to you because of that which he receives through his understanding. Then make him stand between your hands, prepared in stature, and not sitting: and keep the forceps hidden in your sleeve, or under your foot, so that the boy sees them not at all, nor anything of the instruments.
Then insert your hand into its shaft, and blow into the skin, and draw it upward until the head of the shaft emerges. Then cleanse it from that which is gathered in it as filth.
Then bind the marked place with a doubled thread. Afterwards bind lower it a little ligament according. Then hold with your index finger and thumb the place of the lower ligament well, and cut between the two ligaments. Then lift the skin upward quickly and remove the head of the splinter. Then let the blood flow gradually (for it is better), and place powder on top: and above the powder, a cloth in which a sponge has been boiled in rose water, shaken with rose oil. Recently good: and release him over himself until another day: and care for him with the rest of the treatment, until he is healed.
The shape of the forceps for cleansing is this.
Let there be two blunt ends, and let them be intersecting: so that a branch of the clavicle does not go out from them; and let the length of two points be like the length of two manubria equally.
An error occurring during purification is this: for perhaps the entire inside of the skin escapes, or a part of it at the incision.
Therefore, it is necessary that you extend it from your hour with your finger before suppuration of the place; and cut it according to equality.
If you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then remove it with a hook, and cut it.
If it should happen that three days have passed and what is under the stick remains inflated, an abscess; then release it until the abscess sits warm, and excoriate it with ease, and cut into it according to how you prepare for it: and beware of the head of the stick. It will not harm him.
Therefore, treat it with that which solidifies a wound from powders, which we have narrated in the treatise on powders: and if it occurs from the skin above measure, and goes out to the upper parts, it does not harm it even so.
Therefore care for it as we have said until it is healed.
Chapter LVIII.
On the extraction of retained urine in the bladder.
Urine retention in the bladder is caused by an obstruction made from stone, or frozen blood, or pus, or flesh born, and similar things of those which we have said of modes of cure in the division.
And if urine does not pass, and you see that its retention is due to a stone which is already in the neck of the bladder; then it is necessary for the sick person to be bent over his knees. Then his feet are laid upon his back, and he extends his belly from the upper part of his back, and he draws in his failing breath as much as possible. Therefore it is necessary when the neck of the bladder is brought to expel the Stone backward: therefore urine is discharged.
If it is not loosened with what we have said, and the matter is violent upon the weak: then it is necessary that you administer its extraction with an instrument which is called a syringe, whose form this is: let it be of silver, and be subtle, soft, concave like the quill of a bird's feather in subtilty of radius, long in similarity to one and a half palm: to which let there be a subtle cannula at its head.
And the mode of exit of Urine through it is, that you take a doubled thread, and tie wool or cotton onto its end, good binding: and introduce the end of the thread into the lower part of the Syringe: and cut with scissors if anything remains from the wool, but introduce it into the tube vigorously, like a pump.
Then smear the syringe with oil, or butter, and egg white: and make the sick person sit on a stool, and insert the catheter into the bladder, and its rod with moist oils, and olive oil, and warm water.
Then introduce a syringe into the rod with ease until it reaches the root of the rod.
Then double it above from the navel region.
Then drive the syringe into it itself until it reaches the bladder and feels that it has arrived at an empty space; and this is not done in this order unless because the passage through which it goes is twisted.
Then extend the thread with wool gradually. Urine will follow wool.
Then withdraw it, and make urine flow through the urinary tract; and repeat the syringe, and do not cease to do this until the bladder is emptied, and the patient finds relief.
On the quality of cleansing the bladder with a clepsydra.
Chapter LXIX.
When an ulcer occurs in the bladder, or blood freezes in it, or pus is constricted in it, and water and medicines are distilled into it; then a tool called a Clepshydra is made, and this is its form.
It is indeed deaf, that is, closed. And in it there are three holes, two on one side, and one on the other side, as you see.
And the concave place, in which that thing is which drives it, let it be according to the quantity that needs it without addition, until when it is drawn with it something, it attracts from humidities: and when it is driven, with it expelled far away: according to what the clepsydra does, which projects naphtha, that is, Greek fire in battles of Mars.
When therefore you wish to throw liquids into a vein, introduce the end of the syringe into the liquid, and draw with it that which drives upwards, for the liquid is drawn into the concavity of the syringe.
Then introduce the end of it into the rod, according to what we have narrated in the syringe. Then drive moisture with it since that moisture reaches the wound immediately so that the weak one feels it.
Form of a fine enema for irrigating the bladder.
Make it of silver or gold: whose head be higher like a small sickle, and underneath a groove where the ligament will fall.
Then take a sheep's bladder, and put in it the moisture with which you wish to irrigate the bladder. Then bind it between two sinuses with a strong ligature and double thread: and heat that moisture for a little while over fire.
Then introduce the extremity of the clysters into the rod, afterwards tighten your hand above the vessel with a decent moisture of constriction, until the sick person feels that that moisture has already arrived at the vessel.
If you do not have a bladder present, then take a piece of parchment, and make a circle from it, and pierce it throughout its entire roundness. Then introduce a strong thread into those openings, as they turn. Then gather a circle, as if it were gathered from a rope; after you have put in it what you wish of moist substances, and oils, and waters.
Then bind the same thing to the instrument: and do with it as you did with the bladder from expression with your hand, until moisture comes to the bladder.
Chapter LX.
On the Extraction of Stone.
We have said in the division of the kinds of stone, and its treatment with medicines: and I have said the difference between stone generated in the kidneys, and the bladder, and the signs of the whole: and I have said the stone upon which operation falls with the hand and section: and it is stone generated in the bladder properly: and he who is fixed in the rod: and I am narrating this with manifest exposition and abbreviation.
Therefore I say that a stone generated in the bladder most commonly happens to boys.
And from the signs of this it is, that urine flows out of the bladder similar to water in its fineness: and there appears in it white sand, and the weak man rubs his stick with it, and labors with it, and many times hangs down. Then it is raised and exits with the rectum in many of them.
And it is an easy cure for children, up to the age of fourteen years. And it is difficult in the elderly. In young people, however, it is medium, in that which is between that and that whose stone is larger, the cure is easier: and if small, it is harder to treat.
When we come to treatment, it is first necessary that we cleanse the sick person with a clyster, which will remove all the feces that are in his intestines; for sometimes this prevents the finding of the Stone at the examination.
Then take the patient with his feet, and shake him, and move him to lower: so that the stone may descend to the deep of the bladder, or leap from a height several times.
Then make him sit between your hands, and let his hands be under his hips, so that the whole bladder may slope downwards.
Then examine him and touch him externally.
If therefore you feel the Stone in the space, then hasten immediately with a cut upon it.
If it does not fall under your touch at all, then you must wipe the index finger with oil of the left hand, if the boy is weak: or the middle finger if he is a complete youth: and introduce it into his anus, and inquire for the Stone until it rests under your finger: and turn it gradually towards the neck of the bladder.
Then press upon it with your finger, and drive it outwards toward the place whose section you desire: and order your assistant to press the scrotum with his hand, and order another assistant to extend the testicles with his right hand upwards: and with the other hand, to remove the skin which is under the testicles in the part from the place where the incision is.
Then introduce a spatula cutting, whose form is this. And find it in the space between the anus and testicles, and not in the middle, to the side of the left hip: and let the incision be made above the stone, and your finger be in the anus: and let a transverse section be made, so that the external section is wide, and the internal one narrow, according to the quantity that the egress of the Stone may be no greater.
Perhaps the finger that is in the anus compresses the stone at the point of incision, and it exits without difficulty.
And know that from stone is made which has angles and margins, wherefore its exit is difficult because of this.
And from that it is smooth, like a gland, and round: and an easy exit is made of it.
Therefore, to him who has angles and margins, add to the fissure.
If it does not come out thus, then it is necessary to put the mind over it; or bind it above it with a twisted bandage, whose end be like the moon, which binds upon the stone, and does not escape from it; or that you introduce under it an instrument, of subtle curvature.
If you cannot work above it, then enlarge the hole a little. If something wounds you with blood, cut it away with a saw.
If however there is more than one stone, then drive first the largest one to the mouth of the bladder. Then cut upon it. Then push a little after that; and similarly do if there are more than two.
If it is large, then ignorance is such that one should not cut over it with a large incision. Because it happens to a sick person one of two things, either that he will die or that he has a constant discharge of urine, because the place does not heal at all.
But administer its expulsion until it comes out; or using instruments in its fracture with forceps until you extract it piece by piece.
When therefore you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with frankincense, and aloe, and dragon's blood; and bind it, and place upon it a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or rose oil, and cold water: that a hot abscess may sit.
Then place the patient on his back, on his neck, and not untie the ligaments, until the third day. When therefore you have loosened it, embroider the place with water and much oil.
Then treat it with dyafinicon ointment and basilicon ointment until it is healed.
If however a hot abscess happens to be added to the wound, and corroded, and similar to these things: as if blood clots in the bladder, and urine is prevented from flowing out of it: and this is known by the emission of blood with the urine. Therefore introduce your finger into the wound and withdraw blood from it. For if it remains, it provokes the corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
Then wash the wound with vinegar and water and salt: and apply to it of every kind what is fitting from healing, until it heals.
And it is necessary in the hours of healing the whole, that you bind two hams, and aggregates, because of medicines which are put upon the place.
If the stone is small and is in the ureter, and it is fixed there, and prevents the outflow of urine: then cure it with what I have told you before you reach the section. For many times indeed you will be excused from incision by this cure, for I have now proven that.
And it is, that you receive a perforator from iron steel, whose this form is, of triangular extremity, acute, fixed in wood.
Then take a thread, and tie it with a stick under a stone so that it does not return to the wound.
Then introduce the piercing iron into the rod with ease, until it reaches the stone; and revolve the perforator with your hand in the stone gradually; and try the perforation of it, until you make it penetrate from the other side.
Urine, however, is completely passed at once.
Then press your hand upon that which remains from the stone on the outer part of the virga. He himself breaks and comes out with urine, and the sick one is healed.
If this treatment is not prepared for you, because of something that prevents it: then tie a thread under the stone, and another thread above the stone. Then dry over a stone in the very staff between two ligatures. Then remove it. Afterwards, dissolve the ligament, and cleanse the congealed blood which is formed in the wound.
And it is not necessary to put a thread under the stone, except that it may not return to the vessel; and another bandage from above, except that when the thread is released after the removal of the stone, the skin may return to its place, and cover the wound: and for this reason it is necessary for you, when you tie the upper thread, to elevate the skin upward, so that it may return to its place, and cover the wound, as we have said.
Chapter LX I.
On the Extraction of Women's Stones.
Stone is produced in women in small amounts.
If however it happens to anyone of these stones, then healing is difficult, and it is forbidden because of many ways.
One of these things is: that a woman may be a virgin.
And the second reason is that you will not find a woman who will reveal herself to a doctor when she is chaste, or from those who have husbands.
The third is because you do not find a woman well-knowing this art, especially the operation with the hand.
And the fourth is distance from the place of the stone: wherefore there needs a deep incision, and in this there is fear.
If necessity compels you to this, then it is necessary to take a female physician who knows well: and few are found.
If you wish to do this first, then seek out a chaste and skilled physician and present the woman to an experienced midwife or one who is proficient in this art. Have her examined, especially by the stone that I have instructed you about in my inquiry.
First of all, it is necessary to see if the woman is a virgin; then it is necessary for him to insert his finger into her anus and seek out the stone.
If therefore he finds it, he should constrict it under his finger, and then order the midwife to insert her finger into the womb of the feeble one, and inquire about the stone, after she has placed her left hand over the vulva and compresses it with a good pressure.
If therefore he finds the stone, then it is necessary that he gradually moves it from the opening of the bladder to the lower parts with the utmost of his skill, until he comes with it to the root of the hip.
Then he cuts above it at the opposition of the middle of the thigh at the root of the hip, from whichever part it is prepared, and feels for the stone in that part: and his finger shall not be moved from the stone, pressing beneath it: and let the incision be small at first. Then he inserts a ray above that incision.
Then he inserts a ray above that incision. If therefore he feels the stone, then he adds into the section according to the quantity proportionate which stone goes forth from it.
And you should know that there are many kinds of stones. From these things it is small and large, gentle and rough, long, and round having branches.
Therefore know its kind, as it shall be shown to you by this above what you see.
If blood overcomes you, then add crushed zegel to the place and hold it for an hour until the blood is stopped.
Then return to your operation until the stone emerges; and do, that you prepare with you from instruments, which I said in the extraction of the stone in men, that you may help through these in your operation.
If blood flow overcomes you, and you know that the expulsion of blood is from an artery which has been cut: then place powder over the place, and bind it with a strip of cloth properly: and do not move it: and release the stone, and do not extract it. Perhaps the weak woman will die. Then care for the wound.
When therefore the sharpness of the blood subsides after days, and the place decays, then return to your operation until the stone emerges.
Chapter LXII.
On the incision for an aquatic hernia.
The spermatic cord is not watery, but a collection of moisture in the white sifac, which is under the skin containing the testicle sac: and it is called sifac.
And sometimes it is in the fold of skin that nature has prepared for him in part of the scrotum, until it is thought to be: which is another testicle, and it is the skin of the testicle between the white tissue, which we have said: and this is not made except rarely.
And indeed the generation of this branch is from weakness that happens to the testicles: therefore this matter is poured out to them. And sometimes it happens from a blow to the testicles.
And this humidity has many colors. Either its color is sloping toward yellowness, or it is blood-red, or it is foul, black, or it is watery white, and this is the most [common].
And the signs by which it is known where the collection of water is, are these. If it is in the white scar that we have said, then the abscess is round to a short length like the figure of an ear: and the testicle does not appear, because moisture contains it from every part.
And if there is moisture in its own cloth, then an abscess is round with a part of the egg, and therefore man thinks that it is another egg.
And if humidity is between the skin of the testicles and the white tunic, then it falls under sensation.
When therefore you wish to know the knowledge of color and humidity, then experiment with the color of humidity in an abscess when a square is inserted, whose form preceded. Therefore, according to what emerges from the trace of Intro mission, judge that which is between them.
When we come to treatment with iron, then it is necessary that you order the sick person to be bled if possible and see his body full.
Then he is laid on his back upon a slightly raised object, and many cloths are placed underneath him.
Then sit you on his left side, and command the assistant to sit on his right, who shall extend his rod to one of the two sides of the skin of the testicles, and to the part above the navel.
Then take a broad spatula, and cut the skin of the testicles from the middle along its length, as far as near the pubic bone: and let the incision be made according to the straight line equidistant which divides the skin of the testicles, until it reaches the white surface enclosing them: and scrape this and observe, or rather beware that you do not sever it: and let your scraping be on that side which hangs with the egg more: and carefully examine with the scraping as much as is possible to you.
Then perforate the full syringe with water by a wide perforation, and draw out all the water.
Then separate between the two lips of the incision with hooks, and extend the knife upward, and do not touch the skin containing the testicles: and cut the knife however you are able to cut it, either in its entirety or in parts, especially its subtle side. For if you do not carefully examine it, there is no security in its incision, but water will return.
If however, it proceeds omentum exterior from its own cutting at the hour of your operation: then when you have completed the section of the siphun (a surgical instrument), reduce it. Then gather together the two lips of the skin of the testicles with a suture.
Then care for it as you would other wounds until it heals.
If you find a corrupted egg from another blackness, then it is necessary that you bind vessels which are suspended, fearing the flow of blood.
Then cut away the testicle with its suspensory ligament, and draw out the egg: afterward care for it as we have said.
If water is gathered into two parts, then you shall know that there are two branches: therefore dry the other part according to what you have done in the other equally.
And if it seems to you that there should be one operation, then do so; afterwards remove the blood. And introduce into the incisions wool immersed in oil, or in rose oil: and put before this wool another which you have immersed in wine and oil, and spread it over the two testicles, and the marvel of the belly: and put above double cloths, and they are bolsters: and tie them above with a bandage that is having six according to this form.
Then take two cloths and stitch them together and fill them with a carminative powder, according to this model: and make the ends which are pressed from wool or wet wool: and bind them together with the band around the loincloth: and one end shall receive over the anus up to the back, and the second shall receive to the breast side: and two ends above the two lower hips, and two other ends above the two groins, and gather the whole band around the loincloth.
And sometimes this scrotum is treated artificially with a cautery at the place of the incision with iron; and it is, that you take a thin knife-shaped cautery, and cut with it the skin of the testicles; and it is ignited, according to what we have narrated: until when it reveals the white sifac containing water; then take the cautery, according to this form.
It is similar to the Greek letter.
Then pierce it with that and ignite it until all moisture has emerged.
Then extend a knife with hooks, and scrape with a fine cautery lit, and cut into it as much as possible until you have removed the whole of it.
And beware from egg, lest fire touch it.
And know that this operation is healthier and farther from bleeding, and better than the operation with cutting.
If, however, it causes you opposition at the time of incision or cauterization, a hot abscess, or bleeding, or something else: then it is necessary that you cure what opposes you from it with the care which is fitting for it, according to what was said before.
If however the sick person is fearful and does not wait for this operation because of its horror: then administer the perforation according to what I tell you: and it is.
When it is made certain to you by what we have said about the meanings, that a branch is watery: then it is necessary that you make the sick person sit upon an elevated seat.
Then pierce the abscess in its lower part with a wide spatula: and place the perforation according to the length of the body, and let the opening be wide until water runs through entirely.
Then place a pad over the injured spot, and bind it, and allow it to drain the remaining water; then care for it until the wound heals.
If however the contrariety is to the exit of water at the hour when you pierce it; and it is not otherwise, because the white panniculus makes contrariety in the opening of the wound, and prevents the exit of water: then it is necessary that you insert a feather into the wound, or an instrument with which water from hydrops is extracted, whose form precedes: or add in the operation of the wound a little.
And know that water returns and is gathered after six months, or thereabouts. When therefore it is gathered together, then let it be closed in the same manner, and the patient will pass his days.
Chapter LXIII.
On the treatment of fleshy branches.
Know that in cutting above this branch, fear can lead to harm in many conditions. Therefore it seems to me his dismissal from there is salutary.
And I remember the operation upon it, and the appearance of the abscess.
I say therefore that abscesses frequently occur in bodies, of which some are composed of testicles: and this comes from many causes, namely.
Either from excess of acute or sharp which flows down to the testicles. Or by percussion.
And the color of an abscess is according to the color of the body, and no pain is found in it, and it is a serious abscess.
And perhaps it is a stone abscess, whose color is dark and there is no feeling in it.
And sometimes it happens from the tying of arteries, and their inflation: as I have already said in its remembrance: or from the inflation of veins.
What is from these by inflation of the arteries, is known by the arrangement of the abscess, when you compress it with your fingers. And you must not touch it at all.
That which is done by inflation of veins, does not disperse anything when compressed with fingers.
And now it is possible that a section be made upon this kind, and upon the remaining flesh: and it is, as to cut the skin of the testicles. Then stretch the omentum upward and draw it out with a white sponge: and free the suspensory ligament from the cavities, and tie the vessels: and cut the suspensory ligament after you have freed it from all parts of the parts.
If therefore the egg has become consolidated with those flesh born, then it is necessary that you draw the egg out, and cut it open.
And if adherence is between something from the siphon or in that which is between vessels: then it is necessary that you free the whole of that adherence, and cut it with a round incision.
If however it is a birth of flesh at the place of adhesion which is behind: then it is necessary that you cut the whole of it, and extract the egg, just as we have said.
When therefore your operation is completed, then fill the wound with wool steeped in oil of roses and wine; then care for it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
Chapter LXVIII.
On the care of branches, which is with the vine.
A boil is an abscess enclosed in a certain wrapping, like a tumor, with softening of the testicles: and it makes difficult movement and exercise on the weak and walking.
And in the healing of this illness is fear, because of remembrance of what preceded it.
Truly, it is necessary that we say the operation according to what the first ones did.
Therefore I say that it is necessary that you make the sick person sit upon a seat elevated. Then drive the testicular sling downwards. Then hold the skin of the testicles with your fingers, along with those vessels which are near the virga: and let another person hold it, and extend it with a strong extension.
Then make an incision with a wide, sharp spade across the straight vessels until the vessels are revealed.
Then skin is scraped from every part, as we have told you in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
Then make a point in it where there is a doubled thread, and tie it in the first of the places where the bites occur: and tie it again in the last of them. Then dry it in the middle incision straight according to the length of the body, and remove what is gathered from the fetid corrupted humidities.
Then care for wounds as with the cure of other wounds, so that a vein which nourishes one testicle may be generated to fall. It is not evil because of that.
If it happens that the veins are all swollen in the scrotum, then it is necessary to remove them together with the testicles so that the egg does not be deprived of nourishment because of the incision and waste away or wither, and so that there may be no benefit from them.
Chapter LXVII.
On the treatment of intestinal ruptures.
This injury of the groin is from a cut that happens in the extended sifach over the belly in the area of the mirach of the belly.
Therefore the intestines descend from that rupture to one testicle. And this rupture is either from a tear, or an extension of it.
And these two kinds happen from many causes. Or by percussion. Or by leaping. Or with shouting. Or by elevating a heavy thing, and similar things.
And the sign, when it is from the extension of the siphon. There is that which happens gradually over a long time, and does not happen suddenly: and it is an abscess equal toward the depth: because, that siphon compresses the intestine.
And the sign of it when it is from a section of sifach, because it causes a violent pain to happen suddenly from its beginning; and it is a different kind of abscess, appearing under the skin nearby: and this is because of the exit of the intestine, and its course to the exterior sifach.
And sometimes it emerges with a tumor of the intestine: and this is called Intestinal Ramp, and tumor: and sometimes it is done with windiness.
And sometimes stool runs into the intestine and is retained there: and this is harmful to the sick person because it causes bad pain, especially when pressed upon.
And in the treatment of these kinds of illnesses with iron there is fear: therefore it ought to be guarded against.
And the way of operating is, that you order the sick person to bring the intestine back with his hand into the cavity of its own body, if he obeys the return. Then, he is laid back on his neck between your hands, and his legs are raised.
Then extend the skin that follows the skin above, and cut the skin of the testicles entirely along its length. Then fasten hooks into the two lips of the incision, according to how much you need to open the incision with them: and let the incision be according to the quantity, as far as possible, that an egg may come out of it.
Then scrape the skin of the testicle and that which is under the skin of the testicles until when it reveals the white, hard sifach from every part: then introduce your index finger into that which follows the testicle, into that which is between the white sifach, which is under the skin, and between the second sifach, and separate with it the adhesion which is in the posterior part of the scrotum.
Then move with the right hand into the interior of the skin of the testicles: and with this extend the white sheet upwards, with the left hand: and elevate the testicle with the sheet to the part of the incision: and command the assistant to extend the testicle upwards: and you alone loosen the adhesion which is behind, complete solution.
And feel with your fingers so that there is nothing from the intestine entwined in the hard white cloth. If you find anything from that [place/object], then drive it toward the lower abdomen.
Then take a needle which has a thick thread, made of ten threads; and introduce it into the last sifach, that is, the tunic which is under the skin of the testicles following the incision: then cut the ends which protrude from the thread until there are four threads. Then compose some of them over some with a figure in the shape of a cross: and bind them with alsifach, which we have spoken of, because it is under the skin ligament of the testicles, strong, until nothing from the vessels, which nourish them, can send anything to them: so that an abscess may not happen there. And place again the second ligament beyond the first ligament, distant from it by less than two fingers. And after these two ligaments are released from the sifach, which is under the skin of the testicles, the quantity of the size of a finger: and cut the rest entirely according to the roundness, and take out the testicle from it.
Then cut dryly in the lower part of the skin of the testicles, from which blood and pus run, as we have narrated before.
Then administer wool soaked in oil, and place it in the wound: and administer the ligature that we have narrated. And sometimes when the white sifach which we have spoken of is cauterized after its incision, for fear of bleeding. It happens often indeed. And let go of the ligament until it falls of itself.
If, however, his case is delayed, then it shall be cauterized with hot water: and place upon it that which we have said, until it falls.
Then care for the wound with the rest of wound care, until it heals.
Chapter LXIV.
On the wind-blown lance.
In this treatise I did not find anyone who dared to treat it with iron.
And first they said that it is done as we narrated in the branch which is with the Vine. That is, as you have cut the vessels after the incision, easily carry them downwards; then dry them in the middle and take care lastly with that which opens them until the vessels fall; and take care of the wound, according to what we said, until it is healed.
Chapter LXVII.
On the rupture that occurs in the groin.
When a rupture occurs in the groin, as we have said, and the place is prominent, and nothing from the intestines descends to the testicles: and if it does descend, it is small, and returns within every hour; but if time is prolonged with it, a fissure is added in the scrotum, until the intestines descend into the scrotum.
And this happens from extension of the sifach, which is in the groins, as we said. Which is because it extends sifach: then it softens, and the place becomes suppurated and prominent.
And its treatment is with a cautery, as his narrative has preceded.
And sometimes it is cured with a knife, according to this manner: and let the sick person lie on his back between your hands. Then dry the place of the rupture and abscesses and prominent one, with a cut across its width, according to the quantity of three fingers.
Then tighten the alsifak and that which is under the skin until when it reveals white sifach, which is under the skin that follows it.
Then take a ray and place it on the prominent place from the siphon, and press it into the depth of the belly.
Then sew two prominent places above the end of the radius with a sifach, and connect one with the other with suture: then draw out the end of the radius.
And do not cut the intestines at all, nor pull out the bowel, nor anything else, as I have told you in the cure of a ruptured intestine.
Then comes the care for wounds. When therefore you cut the thread, cleanse it, and restore the wound until it consolidates.
If a hernia is contracted and no prominence is added.
And a cautery is better in this place; because it is closer to safety.
Chapter LXVIII.
On softening the skin of the testicles.
Often the skin of the testicles is softened in some men, because of which the flesh that is between them is also softened, and its appearance is disfigured.
Therefore it is necessary for one who is asked about the cure of this, that he make the sick person lie upon his back, and cut the entire skin which has been softened over the natural skin.
Then bring together the two lips with a suture: and if you wish, sew in the first place the excess of softened skin with three sutures, or four, and make a firm suture.
Then cut between the sutures.
Then care for the healing of the remaining wounds, until they are healed, and the threads fall away.
Chapter LXIX.
On Castration.
Know that castration is forbidden in our law: and for this reason it would be permissible for me not to remember it in my book; and it is not necessary to remember it except for two ways.
One of these is that a physician should know it when he is questioned about it and know how to treat someone who has it.
And another way is that we often need the castration of certain animals for our benefit, such as rams, goats, and cats, and similar animals.
Therefore I say that castration is done in two ways. Or by rubbing. Either through incision, and section.
In that which is done by attrition, the way of operation is: that we make the animal sit in hot water until its testicles become soft and pliable and hang down; then rub them with your hand until they dissolve and do not appear under touch.
In castration by incision and section, it is necessary that you hold the animal and press the skin of its testicles with your left hand.
Then tie the suspensory ligament, and dry above every ovum with one incision, until when two ova proceed: then cut them after having scraped both, and do not put anything above them from sifak except fine sifac which is over vessels.
And this method of castration is better when it is done by rubbing; because rubbing perhaps leaves something of the testicles, wherefore the animal desires copulation.
Then care for the wound until it heals.
Chapter LXX.
On the care of a hermaphrodite in two ways.
A hermaphrodite is from a man according to two ways. One of them is because it appears in what follows the space, or in the skin of the testicles, in what is between the two testicles, a figure like the vulva of a woman, in which there are hairs: and sometimes urine flows from what is in the skin of the testicles.
In women there is one type, and it is the vulva of a woman above the comb like the testicles of a man are small, altogether prominent to the outside: of which one is like the penis of a man, and two like two testicles.
And the treatment of three kinds, two from men, and one from women, is: because it is necessary that you cut the added flesh until the impression of it escapes. Then care for the wounds after these have been treated.
In this second kind of men, from which urine exits, which is in the skin of the testicles, there is no operation, nor is there any cure at all.
Chapter LXXI.
On the incision of the labia and the prominent flesh in all women.
Perhaps something is added to the natural thing, until its appearance becomes foul and ugly: and sometimes it is magnified in some women so much that it expands like in men, and even comes to copulation.
Therefore, you ought to hold the superfluity of the tendon with your hand, or with a hook, and cut: and do not go too deep in the cutting, especially in the depth of the root: so that there may not be an outflow of blood.
Then care for the wound itself, until it is healed.
The flesh that arises is the flesh that is born in the opening of the womb until it fills it; and perhaps it comes out to the outside according to the likeness of a tail; and because of this some first call the ailment caudal. Therefore it is necessary that we should cut into it as we cut into a tumor, and treat it until it is healed.
On the treatment of Alratica, which is the woman's vulva not perforated.
Chapter Seventy-Second.
The vulva of a woman should be unperforated, or have a small opening. And it is either natural or accidental.
An accidental condition is from a disease that precedes it; and this itself comes from flesh added which is born, or from sifach fine, or coarse; and it happens either in the deep of the uterus, or on its sides, or in its upper part, or lower part; and it prevents coition and impregnation, and childbirth, and perhaps it prevents menstruation.
And knowledge of it is obtained by the look of an obstetrician, if the swelling is apparent nearby.
If it is not apparent, then seek it with your fingers, or with a rod.
If however the abscess is from a subtle stitch and it is close to the two lips: then hasten, and break it open.
And it is, that you put over two lips little balls.
Then place your indexes of both hands together, and let the woman lie on her back with her legs spread. Then stretch the two lips with fortitude until the subtle fissure ruptures and the opening becomes apparent.
Then take wool and soak it in oil, and put it over the place: and let the woman every day apply it so that the place does not harden again with other matter.
If, however, the sifach is large and thick, then it is necessary to cut it with a spatula wide like a myrtle leaf.
If the abscess is born of flesh, then suspend it with hooks and cut into it; and let medicinal substances be with you that will staunch the flow of blood without biting, such as acacia, and dragon's blood, and thus the coagulated albumen of egg white.
Then administer a lead pipe, wide, so that the wound does not close quickly, hold it for several days; and administer licorice from dry linen, then cure with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
And sometimes there is a birth in the womb of another's flesh: it is therefore necessary that they be cut according to this manner: as long as it is not a cancerous abscess for an abscesses cancerous that is in the womb, do not oppose with iron at all.
Chapter Seventy-Third.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids, Athehelil, and red boils in women.
Hemorrhoids indeed are openings of veins, so that blood flows from them continuously in large amounts.
When hemorrhoids become severe, they become tethers: and I have said in the division of their kinds, and their signs; and I will say here what cures they receive, and which they do not.
Therefore I say that hemorrhoids which are in the opening of the womb and do not appear to the sense, then there is no cure for them with iron.
Those things which are in the opening of the womb over which sense falls, those are cured.
Therefore, you ought to introduce the woman into a cold house. Then extend the athehel with forceps, or with a rough cloth, and cut it from its roots.
Then pulverize upon them at the flow of blood from one powder of incisions without corruption: such as acacia, and dragon's blood, and so on, and similar things to these.
Then he drives his feet against the wall for an hour. Afterward, lay it in cold water.
If the bleeding persisted, then have her sit in a decoction of sumac, and rind of pomegranate, and galls, and similar things.
Then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster with it over his back.
If therefore blood is cut with it, it is good: and if not, make to adhere to the back windy, and nipples, without scarification.
Then take wool and submerge it in the juice of tarathis, or the juice of arnoglossa, or the juice of alaulat branches, that is, aglantar, Pontic wine, and make it adhere to the lion.
When therefore an abscess rests, then care for the place with ointment until it heals.
Albarth, however, is like the heads of Alhaasse, and it has a rough appearance.
Therefore, you must cut what appears from it, according to what I said before; and take care of it until it heals.
Chapter Seventy-Fourth.
Of the perforation of the uterus which happens in a woman's womb.
Many kinds of abscesses occur in the womb, such as cancer, and stony abscess, and ulcers, and bedsores, and scabies, that is, herpes, aestiomemus, and fistulas, and hemorrhoids, and ragadiae, and thelil, and hot abscess.
And I have indeed already said all these ailments and their kinds, and their signs, and their cures in the division: it is necessary that I say in this treatise an abscess that happens in the womb when it is from abscesses that collect pus, and you wish to know how it is opened with a knife.
Therefore, you ought to consider. Then if the pain of an abscess in its beginning is acute with percussion of it, and flame, and fever: and you see it redden; if sensation falls upon it, then do not hasten with its perforation: and care for it with that which helps super maturation, until when it rests the sharpness of accidents.
Then it is necessary that you make the woman sit upon a seat which has two seats, and recline, or lean against her back, and bring her feet to the lower part of the belly: and let her hips be spread out, and put her arms under her knees, and bind each with a suitable bandage.
Then let the midwife sit on the right side and administer the instrument that opens the uterine orifice.
And it is necessary when you wish to administer this instrument, that you set the peg with a sound depth into the uterus of the woman; so that what enters from the instrument may not be more than the depth of the uterus, and damage the weak one.
If the instrument is more than deep, then it is necessary to place small pads on the roof of the deep matrix, so that the entrance of the instrument into the whole depth of the matrix is prevented: and it is necessary to place a whirl, which runs in the instrument, from the upper side; and that it may hold the instrument, and that the minister may revolve the whirl until the deep matrix is opened.
When therefore it appears that the fistulous opening is soft and smooth when touched by the hand, then it is necessary to cut it at its head with a wide spatula.
When the pus has been evacuated, then it is necessary to place a moistened linen cloth into the wound, submerged in rose oil: or in green oil, which has some astringency: and place the linen cloth, and remove the incision deep in the matrix.
And place externally over the womb, and over the wool comb submerged in water, in which mallows have been boiled.
Then it is cared for after two days with an ointment that is suitable for it, until it heals.
And sometimes the womb and wound are washed so that it is douched with water and honey; then with water in which lily root or long birthwort has been boiled; then return to ointment.
If a wound has been concealed within the womb, then it is necessary to refrain from curing it with iron, rather care for it with what we have said in the division.
Chapter LXXI.
Doctrine of Obstetrics, how embryos are treated who are born not in a natural form.
It is necessary for an obstetrician to know first of all the figure of a natural birth.
From the signs therefore it is, that when you see a woman compressing to the lower parts, and desires to smell the air, and is lifted upon her which is above her from childbirth, and hastes the exit of the embryo: then know that this birth is according to the figure natural, and is the exit of it upon its head, and secondary with it: or suspended, or hanging from the navel.
When therefore you see these signs, then it is necessary that the belly be compressed, so that the embryo descends quickly.
For when he lowers it over his head, the second one descends with him, and it is purified from those superfluous things by a good cleansing.
But that which is beyond this birth is unnatural, blameworthy.
For sometimes the fetus emerges on its feet, and its body comes out before its head, and its feet, and one of its hands, or one of its feet; or it emerges with its head and hands; or its belly; and perhaps it turns over on its neck, and similar remarkable figures.
It is therefore necessary for the midwife to be prudent, subtle in all these things, and to guard herself from error and neglect: and I am showing every figure of them, and how the mind is in each one, and it is signified by this, and stands upon it.
When the fetus emerges from its head during its natural exit, and it becomes forceful upon the woman, and labor becomes difficult for her, and you see that its strength is already weakened: then make her sit on a seat, or let women hold her; and vapors of willow bark boiled with moist oils.
Then the midwife puts a small spatula between her fingers, and finds with it the second one, and cuts it with her nail until it runs what is in it of moisture: and presses the woman's belly until the fetus descends.
If it does not descend, then a woman should be given an enema of linseed and sesame oil.
Then direct him after the enema, that he be compressed: and make him sneeze with a  paste, and hold his mouth and nose for one hour. For the fetus will immediately emerge.
If two hands of the fetus emerge first, it is necessary to join them so that you may gradually reduce them with ease. If it does not obey on entry, then place the woman over a seat and elevate her feet upward; then strike the seat against the ground; and the woman must be held so that she does not fall during the concussion.
If therefore the hands do not come out, and the fetus dies: then cut them, and extract the residue of the fetus: and bind the hand of it with a cloth, and extract it with equality: for it will itself come out.
The exit of the embryo onto its feet. When the fetus emerges onto its feet, then it is necessary to push them upwards; then turn the fetus gradually; afterwards level it out.
Then he should take one of his feet and extend it gradually.
When they go out as far as the hips, then command him to press it down and have him sneeze with a concoction; for he will come out if God wills.
And if it does not emerge as we have narrated, then bring back the fetus gradually until you place it according to its natural form. For he will then go out by an easy passage.
If this is forbidden with all that we have recounted: then take from the pulp of aloe, and sesame oil, and gum dissolved: and pound the whole in a mortar with good percussion; then put it on the wound of a woman's belly and lower abdomen. Then make her sit in lukewarm water until she reaches the hypochondria.
When therefore you see that the lower parts are now warmed, then make for him a sif of myrrh and lay it upon him. When therefore one holds the sieve one hour, then let him make it sit upon the seat. Then make him sneeze: and grasp his mouth and nose: and press the lower part of the belly with easy compression. For the fever will immediately leave.
The exit of the fetus over the knees and hands. When it emerges in this form, then ingenuity lies in introducing his hands little by little. Then the woman is laid on her back, and her feet hang down; and she lies on a bed, and folds her hands. Then press above his belly gradually. Then extract what is under his feet from the dustbins, until it is prepared on the lower part. If the fetus does not emerge, then take its feet and move them with a vigorous motion. Then press that which is above the hypogastrium gradually, until the fetus ascends to the upper parts. Then he inserts his hands and gently pushes in the fetus; and instructs the woman to contract until the fetus emerges.
The fetus hangs laterally from the hands. He will set the hand. If he cannot reduce it, then raise the woman, and make her walk.
If he cannot walk, then make him lie on a bed and shake his legs with a strong concussion.
Then apply the liniment which you have prepared from mucilages.
If she receives it in childbirth, then make her sit on a stool. Then study in the reduction of the hand, and equal fetus according to the natural form: and make her sneeze, and command her to compress herself, until it comes out.
The fetus emerges from its mother's womb with its arms outstretched and its face toward its mother's back. The midwife must grasp the fetus with her hand, then gradually turn it and make it even with ease.
When therefore it is made equal, then place upon its surface what we have recounted from oil and mucus.
Then direct him to be moved gradually. When therefore you have done that, then make her sit upon a seat, and command her to incline to the right side. Then order him to compress it: and make him sneeze with the condiment.
The prepared fetus is placed on its side. When it descends to the opening of the womb in this way with the second instrument, then cut the second instrument with your finger until it is evacuated from moisture.
If therefore it is suspended over the face of the fetus, and its neck, then cut it from the navel: so that it may not be retained, and die.
Then drive the fetus inward until you place it as is necessary: and command the woman to compress herself several times; for he will himself emerge by the light exit.
The exit of twins, or of many fetuses. Know that twins often are born, and sometimes three, and four. Nevertheless, this is foreign and rarely happens.
There are five things outside of nature, and they do not live at all: and it contains them, even if they multiply, according to one: and they are separated by a siphon, distinguishing between them the ligament in the navel of each of them.
And sometimes they emerge like one fetus from the natural exit, easily; and they emerge through the praiseworthy exit, as we have recounted.
If some of these things should prove difficult during childbirth, and they come to that which we said from unnatural figures, then care for them as we have narrated: and let the midwife be subtle, and do what she does with ease and delay, and devise according to every figure with that which is prepared for her from skillful guidance to safety.
A reminder of what is formed in the womb from embryos and miscarriages.
Sometimes one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more than ten are formed in the womb: and it has now been verified to me that a woman, aborting, emitted seven, and another fifteen, all formed.
What has been done by the measurement of the glorious wise man.
Therefore, this whole thing ought to be in the science of midwifery. Perhaps it will come upon that one similar to this: let him therefore oppose it with what is fitting.
Chapter LXXVI.
On the extraction of a dead fetus.
When you treat a dead fetus with what I said in the division of medicine, and it does not come out, and you are forced to use an operation with your hand, then it is necessary for you to consider.
If therefore the woman is of sound virtue, and is not with any of those accidents, for which destruction fears her: then it ought that the woman be laid upon the bed, upon her back, and let her head be inclined downwards, and her legs elevated: and let the minister hold her by two parts, or be tied to the bed, so that her body may not be pulled out during the extraction of the fetus.
Then moisten the womb's bone with wet oils together with althea mucus and fennel seeds and flaxseed.
Then let the midwife anoint her hand with these oils and ointments: then let her insert it into the womb with ease. Then he should seek out a place where he can insert hooks from the fetus and suitable locations for it.
Consider therefore then, if the fetus is prepared to descend over its head: then fix hooks in its eyes, or in its neck, or in its mouth, or in its palate, or under its beard, or in its clavicle, or in places near the ribs, and under the hypogastrium.
If the descent is upon his feet, then in the hip bone and middle ribs of him.
And it is necessary that he hold the hook with his right hand and place its curve into that which is between the fingers of his left hand and introduce it with his hand easily and fix the hook in one of those places which we have said, until it comes to the empty thing.
Then he places another hook, or a third one if needed, opposite it, so that the contraction is equal and does not lean to one side.
Then it shall be extended with an equal extension, and let the extension not be according to straightness alone, but rather moved to every part, so that the exit of it may be relieved; as is done with a tooth when it is being eradicated.
And it is necessary that in what is between them, it be softened extension. If a part is retained from that, then it is necessary for the midwife to anoint some fingers with oil and insert them from the side, so that she may turn what is retained with them.
If therefore a part of the fetus comes out, then let the hooks be changed to another place which is higher: do this until the whole fetus emerges.
If therefore the hand emerges before other things, and it is not possible to reduce it because of its constriction: then it is necessary that a cloth be wrapped over it. Then remove it until it comes out entirely, cut it either at the joint of the foot or at the elbow: and thus you ought to do with your other hand and both feet.
If, however, the head of the fetus is large, or there is a constriction at its exit, or there is water collected in its head: then it is necessary that he insert between the fingers the Spatumile spinosum, and find it with the head, and extract the water: or break it with an instrument called Almisdac: whose form comes with the forms of the other instruments in the chapter which is after this.
Similarly, let him do if the fetus has a large head, then it is necessary that he cut the afterbirth; or take him out with forceps, as we have said. Then pull out the bones with forceps.
If it protrudes from the head and is drawn together at the fork, then it should be held until the moisture in the chest is expelled.
If it is not complicated, nor does it submit to an exit: then cut off the head piecemeal, according to what is possible for you.
If a boil or dropsy is in the lower abdomen, then it should be pierced until the moisture flows out of it.
If however the fetus is on its feet, then its extraction is easy, and its direction to the maternal orifice is light.
If it is bound near the abdomen or chest: then it is necessary that you extract it with the cloth which you have wrapped over your hand: and bind the abdomen, or chest, until what is in them heals.
If the remaining limbs are removed and the head returns, then the midwife will insert her left hand. If therefore the maternal opening is open, then he shall insert his hand into the depths of the womb, and with it seek the head, and draw it with his fingers up to the maternal opening; then he shall insert one hook or two hooks into it, and draw it with that.
If the mother's bone is constricted, because of a hot abscess that happens to it; then it should not be labored over, rather it should administer an effusion of humid and fatty things; and apply plasters; and sit in waters which soften and moisten.
If the fetus is on its side, then it is possible for it to be made equal; then that which we said regarding a living fetus should be administered.
If that is not possible, then it shall be cut in pieces and extracted.
And it is necessary that you do not let anything out of the second bowel at all.
When therefore you have completed your operation, then administer what we said about hot abscesses that occur in wombs.
If bleeding occurs, then let it descend into styptic water and administer the remaining treatment.
And I myself have seen a woman who had a dead fetus in her womb; then she became pregnant again over it, and afterwards another fetus died as well. Therefore, after a long time an abscess occurred to him in his navel, and it swelled until it opened; and he began to discharge pus.
I was therefore called upon to treat him, and I treated him for a long time: and the wound did not heal.
Therefore, I placed over it some strong drawing plasters: and out of the place bone came. Then after several days another bone came out. I was therefore amazed that there is no mouth in the belly.
I thought therefore, because they were from the bones of a dead fetus.
Therefore I investigated the wound, and extracted many bones, a woman being in better dispositions of her own. And now she has lived such as this for a long time, and sends out a little pus from the place.
And I did not set this foreign thing down, unless because there is science in it, and help for that which the physician-craftsman administers with his hand from healing.
Chapter LXXVII.
On the forms of instruments necessary in extracting a fetus.
The form of dizziness when the womb opens.
Here is the shape of the  Strictor, which books are equated to, which have two whorls on both ends of two pieces of wood. However, this vertigo ought to be a more refined constriction, and it should be made, either from ebony or from boxwood.
And let the width of the whole piece of wood be like two fingers; and the margin of each of both be like one finger, and the length of each of them is a palm and half; and in the middle of the two pieces of wood are two additions of the same kind of wood, which are already fastened on both sides, whose length is half a palm and a little more; and the width of both is like two fingers, or a little more.
And these two additions are put into the opening of the womb, so that it may open with them when you revolve two whorls.
Another form similar to this, more subtle and lighter.
Make it out of ebony wood, or boxwood, according to the likeness of forceps. Nevertheless at the end of it there should be two additions, as you see here above: and the length of the whole addition from them is like a palm: and the width of both is, two fingers.
When therefore you wish to open the womb with it, then make the woman sit upon a bed, with her feet hanging down, and that which is between her legs open. Then introduce these two adjuncts joined into the uterus: and you are holding the lower extremity of the instrument between his hips. Then open your hand with an instrument, as you do with forceps, evenly according to the quantity that you wish from the opening of the mouth of the womb, until the midwife does what she wants.
Form of Vertigo of another kind which ancients called Form of the Driving Force by which the fetus is driven.
The form of an Almisdac, which is used to crush the large head: and it is similar to a forceps, which has teeth at the end, as you see.
And sometimes it is made oblong, like forceps according to this form, as you see, which has teeth like saw teeth, with which one cuts and crushes.
The form of a wound having one spine.
The shape of a two-spined wrench.
The shape of a spatula has two extremities for cutting off the head.
The form of two spatulas also called probes.
All these instruments are practiced, and the more their kinds multiply, and they are prepared by the craftsman, the faster it is to operation, and the higher among men, because of their quantity.
Therefore do not disregard from them an instrument, that it may be prepared with you. It is indeed an inexcusable necessity of theirs.
Chapter LXXVIII.
On the extraction of the Second (tooth) .
When Secondina is retained at childbirth, then it is necessary that you instruct the weak one so that she may retain her breath. Then make him sneeze with the condiment: and hold your hand over his mouth, and his nostrils. If therefore it comes out through this, it is good.
If not: then take an olla, and pierce a hole in the bottom of it: and put in it herbs that open the womb, such as  mallow, rue, anethum, chamomile, sage, cassia twig, and centaury: take all these herbs, or some of them, and submerge them with water, and put them on the fire.
Then put a reed bandage over the opening of the pot's handle, and the other end into the mothers womb: and hold it until steam reaches the concavity of the womb.
Then make her sneeze, as we said. For Secondinus will go forth with ease.
If it remains after this treatment and does not come out: then order the Midwife to submerge her hand in sesame oil, or thick alum. Then he inserts into the wound and seeks with it the second layer. When therefore he has found it, then let him take it and extend it gradually.
If it is attached deep within the womb, then he shall insert his hand, according to what we have narrated, until he finds the Secundina and extracts it gradually along a straight line, so that the womb does not fall upon violent pulling: indeed, it ought to be moved with ease to the right and left sides; then add to the quantity of the traction. For it then obeys, and is preserved, and departs from adherence.
If the maternal bone is contracted, as we have already narrated: care for it with sneezing and from the treatment of a pot with herbs.
If it does not come out with all that we have narrated, then beware of tiring it beyond measure in the repetition of extraction.
But it is necessary that what exits from the mouth of the womb be brought to the hip of the woman. Then administer an enema with ointment of four drugs. For indeed it will rot it after days, and it will dissolve, and it will come out.
But when it rots, a bad smell arises from it to the stomach and head, and harms the weak. Therefore, it is necessary that appropriate fumigations be administered to it.
Some of the ancients already experienced fumigation with nasturtium and dried figs.
Form of the instrument for fumigating a woman during the retention of the Second and menstrual flow.
Make a wick like incense from glass or wax: and place the wide end over the fire: and let fumigation be placed over prunes: hold it until the fumigation is consumed: and repeat another.
Chapter LXXIX.
On the treatment of an unperforated anus.
Many boys are born, and their anus is not perforated, whom already subtil sifac has cured. Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to perforate that sifac with her finger; and if not, she should perforate it with a sharp Spatula; and she should beware of the laceration, so that it does not touch it.
Then place upon it wool soaked in wine and oil. Then care for it with ointment until it heals.
If you fear that it should be filled, then put a lead pipe into the opening for many days, and remove it when the child wishes to heal.
And now it happens that a suppuration of the anus also occurs from the consolidation of a wound, or abscess. Therefore it is necessary that this consolidation be cut, then it should be treated with what we have said regarding treatment and lead.
Chapter LXXX.
On the treatment of fistulas that occur in the lower part.
Fistulas which occur in the lower part are a Knot and Lumps that occur near the anus of the opening: or in the space of one part: and it is one fistula, or several.
When therefore that Knot becomes obsolete, it is opened and a watery moisture, white, or a subtle pus runs out of it.
And sometimes these are penetrating fistulas. Therefore, they are recognized as penetrating through that which comes out from defecation and windiness, when the sick person uses defecation: and perhaps it comes out of them worms.
And there are among these fistulas when they are in penetrating space up to the bladder, and up to the male organ's passage. And some of them penetrate as far as the hip joint, and as far as the tail bone.
From this it is known that a fistula penetrating to the anus, even if not penetrating, is so that you introduce your index finger into the anus: and introduce a thin probe into the fistula from bronze or iron; when there is no twist.
If there is a twisting in it, then introduce into it a thin lead probe, or a shaft made of horsehair, until you feel the probe, or the shaft in your finger.
If you do not feel it completely, and nothing comes out of the hole by discharge, nor windiness, nor worm as I said: then know that it is not penetrating: therefore hasten to the cure.
And when a fistula is penetrating to the bladder, or to the passage of urine: then its meaning is the exit of urine from it, and its prohibition so that this place may be solidified with medicines.
If it penetrates up to the joint of the hip, or to the bone of the hip: then the sign of it is that the touch reaches there, if there is no tortuosity up to the bone; and the finding of pain around the part, and that pus issues from it always; and that medicine does not avail in it, nor does it solidify with ointment.
And in all these penetrating fistulas there is no cure at all; and their treatment is labor and vanity to him, from foolish physicians, upon whom it is formed.
In that which is not penetrating and not ancient, healing is hoped for with a suture, according to what I tell you, and I have already proven it: and it is, as the sick person lies between your hands on his back: and raise his legs up to his hips, and let his hips be inclined towards his belly. Then they introduce lead, or air, if there is a twisting in the fistula, until you know where the probe arrives.
If, however, he feels her weak around the anus, then it is necessary that you introduce your index finger into the anus.
If therefore you feel in your finger that something has already penetrated itself, besides what you feel between your finger and the skin, or flesh; then certainly know that it is penetrating; do not therefore labor on it, because it is not its healing, as we have said.
They said, however, that in some people flesh heals and from the medication which is hoped to be helpful, it is as if fine cauteries are applied according to the width of the fistula, as was previously stated, and you introduce this ignited into the fistula until it reaches around the anus. Then repeat this twice, or three times, until you know that all those added and filtered meats which are like the quill of a birds feather have been burned.
Then care for it with cloths wrapped in butter, until those burned meats come out; then care for it with ointments that generate flesh and consolidate it.
If therefore it is healed, it is good.
And if not, then it is never healed with any other cure.
And if it emerges (the probe) and does not reach your finger, which is in the anus, and there is a thick layer between it and the probe, either of flesh or of cicatrix: and you see a fistula in what follows the skin surface, then cut the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and you go cutting with the probe that is in the fistula, until the incision reaches where the probe's extremity reaches, and the probe is freed and falls.
Then purify those filtered meats which are similar to the quill of a bird's feather, so that nothing remains from them.
If blood conquers you, and loosens between you and your operation so that you cut those flesh, then it is better, and of swifter help, to cauterize it with fire, or with a sharp medicine.
Because a cautery with fire gathers good properties, the burning of those added flesh tissues, and the cutting off of blood, and the drying out of moistures.
Then the wound is treated with linens wrapped in butter or crushed cabbage until it discharges pus and the charred flesh comes out into the pus.
Then care is taken of the wound once it has been consolidated with ointment that produces hard flesh; and there are medicines in which there is astringency and drying.
For when they are restored, then it is healed and you should not fear a repetition.
If however a fistula has already reached deep into the anus, and extends from the excess of the body: then introduce your finger into the anus, and investigate with it.
If therefore you feel a wound, and between you and it is a covering of silk or flesh, and it is near to penetration; then there is no operation in that, except according to the way of trust and hope.
That is, because it is administered in one of three ways: either that you cauterize it, as we have said; or that you cut it until you find its concavity so that it is possible for you to introduce a ligature and cure from close by. And do not proceed much with the cutting, so that you do not cut the ligament holding back the anus, and that it happens over the weak exit of excretion without will. Then take care of it as we said.
Perhaps it will heal: or you may lengthen the bandage, and cleanse it after drying it nearly to the anus, as we have said, either with a probe or with some other instrument having a sharp extremity. Then purify those filtered flesh that are in the incision, as far as you can with scrutiny.
Then attempt restoration of the entire wound with a section and an upper opening where it closes; and let there remain an open fistula in the inner part of the anus, and it will be lighter on the weak side.
And sometimes a fistula is treated in this way: and it is when you insert a probe into the fistula: and it is on the side of the anus near the surface of the body with the skin and edge of the anus: then take a probe with a perforated end, which is like an awl, that is, prepared leather, according to this form. And introduce into it a thread wrapped from five threads, and about it. Then introduce a probe with a thread into the fistula until you reach its cavity.
If therefore it is penetrating in the margin of the anus inwardly near, then extract the thread from that hole: so that you may introduce your finger into the anus, and draw out the end of the thread, and gather together the two ends simultaneously: and tighten both, and release it on one day, or two days: and as much as the thread sinks into the flesh, tighten it well, until those fleshes which are between the two extremities of the thread sink in, and fall: then take care of the wound, until it consolidates, and heals.
If however the opening of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate in any way that you prepare for yourself, unless it is deep within. For it is not fitting for you to do that because of the cut so that you do not cut it.
Then make with it as we have said, until it heals.
The shape of a knife for cutting into the spine where a fistula is found, whose cure is very acute, and the other part is not sharp, so that it does not cut what is not necessary, as you see.
Chapter LXXXI.
On the suture of hemorrhoids from which blood runs after incision, and care for fissures.
There are hemorrhoids in two ways. Or they are inside the anus, like pieces of charcoal or plums: or as if they were grains of a grape. And of these there are small ones and large ones: and blood flows from them always, and there is one, and there are many. And they are outside the anus and at its extremities.
However, those that are outside the anus are, for the most part, few in moisture, of which runs yellow water or little blood with a steady flow: and they are according to the color of the body.
And the cure of this which is within the anus, is that you instruct the sick person to fart, and expel it until it comes out of the anus, and appears to you white. Therefore, also suspend with hooks: or hold them with your finger. Then cut them at their roots.
If they are not held by the hooks because of their moisture and softening: then take them with a rough cloth, or with a wad made of double wool fleece, and remove them with your fingers. Then cut them, and pulverize upon them after the incision some hot powders, so that they may stand in their place as cauterization. Or cauterize them according to what preceded in the chapter on cauterization. Then care for them with the rest of the cure, until they are healed.
If the anus does not obey defecation, then a clyster should be administered to the sick person in which there is a small bite, so that it may wash what is in the anus and obey defecation quickly when the sick person expels himself.
If they are external from the anus, then their condition is light and easy; and it is as if you would take them with your fingernail or hook, and cut them. Then care for them with that which we have said, until they are healed.
And if he shuns cutting with iron, then it is necessary that you administer a suture of them according to this method. Take a thread wound up, and introduce it into the needle. Then draw the athil upward and make it penetrate with a point at its root from the other side: and involve the two extremities of the thread, in the lower part of the awl, and let them be laterally placed: and tighten the athil tightly. Then knot the thread, and draw out the point.
Do this with all aethile and release from them one: and do not let its own, so that it runs out of excess blood.
Then place a cloth soaked in rose or red oil over the anus, and place it over the anus. And command the sick person to rest. Then let it go, until it falls.
When therefore the athelia fall, treat them with ointment, and the rest of treatment, until they are healed.
On the care of fissures. Many times indeed they happen from drying of excrement and constraint of nature.
When therefore they are ancient and medicine does not avail in them, then it is necessary that you cut with points of a spatula, or with your fingernail, until they become moist, and the upper cortex which prevents them from consolidation be removed from them. Then care for them until they are consolidated as is proper.
If they do not solidify, then treat them again with greater vigor than before, until they bleed much and are scraped, and then take care of them until they heal.
On the treatment of inverted and non-inverted  Almirmar, and Athelil ulcers, and Formicae.
Chapter LXXXII.
Know that Almirmar is nothing but a round knot according to the color of the body, similar to the head of a nail: and it occurs in the whole body, especially in the lower parts of the feet, and fingers: and pain happens from them when walking.
Therefore it is necessary that what is around the nail be cut and held with forceps or a hook, and be removed from its root.
Then care for that: and if you wish cauterize it according to what preceded in its chapter.
From the armpit there is one small, rough, filtered eminence, round on the surface of the body. And many times they happen in the hands of children.
And its treatment is, that you extend athelil and cut it; or bind it with silk thread; or with hair, until it falls off. And if you wish, cauterize it according to what has been said with fire, or with a sharp medicine; and now the athelil are eradicated, both inverted and not inverted with the instrument which I shall tell you about.
A bite from an ant is also a small elevation, rough, on the surface of the body, penetrating deep down; and when it finds cold, it feels like an ant bite in it, and happens throughout the body; and most of it happens in the hands.
And its cure is, that you take a tube from the feather of a goose, or the feather of a strong vulture: and put that tube over the Formica, until it contains a circle of the tube from its parts. Then turn your hand with a probe until you cut what is around the ant's form; and place it deep in the flesh, and eradicate the ant from its root.
And if you wish, make it with a tube of air, or iron, according to this form.
Let the upper part of the tube be drawn up to a height so that the grip on the finger is lessened and its turning made easier.
And if you wish to cauterize a  Formica according to what was previously said in the cauterization of Athelil in the chapter on cauterization.
Chapter LXXXIII.
On the shapes of instruments which are administered to the urethra in affections of the anus, and the loosening of the belly, and colic.
Sometimes a clyster is made of silver, or brass, or cast or hammered copper.
And sometimes these instruments are made small and large, according to those in which they are administered.
Therefore that which is administered in the care of very young boys, let it be small; and of those whose anuses are weak, or painful, so also their testicles.
Large clyster.
The tube of it, that is, the upper part in which the uterus is tied, should be wide according to this method: and let there be a distinction so that the uterus can be tied as you see, and its lower end which goes into the anus, should be closed, that is, not open, soft, smooth, gently pulling towards fineness: and on one side of it there should be two holes, and on the other side one hole.
And let the width of the foramen be according to the thickness of the rays, and a little thicker, and let it be in which medicines are put from the bladder of an animal: or from sheepskin, which is according to the form of a small asophore: whose root is one palm.
And it shall be pierced with many holes as it is turned, and let the space that is between every hole be the thickness of a finger. Then introduce into those openings a strong thread of raw thread, which is made of ten threads, or about that many, and gather it with it the uterus like an asofratus. When therefore it is placed in it, let it be tightened at the head with a clyster between two distinguishing constrictions with strong force. Then give a clyster with it.
And this is the form of the circle of the womb here depicted, and the hole.
The quality of cleansing with this, is: that you fill the rectum, or bladder with medicine, which should be heated according to the amount tolerated by the patient: and beware that it is not too hot, or too cold.
Then the patient is laid on his back and his legs are raised to the upper part; and beneath him a cushion, that is, skin upon which men lie, or cloth, is placed.
Then anoint the extremity with oil, or with egg white, or with flaxseed mucilage, or the like. Then introduce it into the anus with ease. Then let the attendant take the rectum with both his hands and press it forcefully until everything that is in the clyster is evacuated into the intestine.
Then remove the clyster and have the patient raise his legs against the wall.
If medicine compels him to an outcome, then let him hold as much as he can. And if he sleeps with it throughout the whole night, it is more helpful.
If, however, you give him enemas in complaints of belly disease, and his death hastens, then repeat the enemas until he is healed.
If there are hemorrhoids or painful abscesses in the anus, then a fine, gentle enema should be used, like those with which children are cleaned.
And this is the form of a thin enema for when the skin is tight.
Chapter LXXXIV.
I have said in the division of the cure of wounds what was convenient for the book, and I will say here the cure of them with hand and with medicines according to complement.
Therefore I say, that wounds differ according to the manner in which they are inflicted, and according to the place upon which the wound falls.
The things therefore by which wounds are made very often are such as a throw of a stone: or incision with a sword, or knife: or striking with a spear, or wood, or arrow: and similar things from many others.
Wounds that are made according to the location of the body are such as a wound that falls upon the head, or neck, or chest, or belly, or leg; and similar ones from those limbs.
And I am relating cures of certain wounds, so that I may place that reasoning and rule over the rest of the wounds.
And I begin with simple wounds of the head: for the recollection of compositions will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore, I say. When a simple wound occurs on the head, and there is no bone fracture: consider then, if it is from a stone throw, or something similar, and it has only broken the skin: and the wound is large, and you fear an outcome of hot suppuration: then make haste, and perform cephalic phlebotomy immediately: and do not delay this: and draw out blood according to the quantity of its power: if nothing forbids phlebotomy, especially if the blood that comes out of the wound is little. And let the incision be made on the opposite side from the wound.
And let the incision be made on the opposite side from the wound. And let the sick one beware of repletion, and wine, and heavy foods.
If something prevents reduction, then it should be lessened from food, and it should not approach meats, nor wine.
And put over the wound if it happens to him a hot abscess, apply a decoction infused in rose oil alone, or with wine in which there is astringency.
If you are sure about the hot abscess, then place on the wound, if it is recent with its own blood, and has not yet changed its air, the powder which I shall tell you a little later: and if it has already changed its air, then place upon it some ointment until it heals.
If, however, the wound is large, or is from a sword cut, and similar: and its lips do not come together by means of pins, then gather them together with suture, according to what I will say about wounds of the abdomen regarding their sutures.
If now the wound is already discovered from the bone, and hangs, and there is no retention of it, except in a small suspensory: then cut into it. Then care for the wound with medicines, and restore in it the hard flesh in the place of skin, and order the sick person to be fed with foods which are thick, such as heads, and cooked wheat, until it is like porridge; and similar things.
If you find in the skin rotting, and it does not adhere to the bone: then cut out the whole rotten part, and throw it away; then care for it.
If in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood flows and it is not cut off by medicines, then investigate above the artery. If therefore you find it not cut, then cut it with a spatula, or bind it. If necessity requires when that which we said does not help, then cauterize it until the blood is cut off.
If however these wounds are small, simple, then the matter of them is easy, light: so that you put this powder on them: because it consolidates them before they change in air.
The Method of Incarnate Powder. Take one part of olibanum, two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of unburnt chalk: mix all together well and sift it.  Fill the wound with this and bind it tightly with a good bandage until it adheres well to it and clots with the blood.
Then bind it above with pads and let it go, and do not loosen it while it remains so that it does not come undone. For the medicine is not removed from it until it is healed.
And sometimes it does this alone the plaster, when you do not have frankincense at hand, and dragon's blood also does the same operation in many of the large wounds, when it is convenient to be laid upon them and bound tight, and are fresh wounds with their own blood, which has not been altered by air.
If it has already been altered by some kind of change, especially when it is in the summer time, then there is no intention for this powder to be in position: therefore take care of it with what we have said, so that you put some ointments on it which are digestive; or put poultices on it made from barley flour, made with water and honey, until they emit pus. Then care for the rest of the treatment, until they are healed.
If it happens with a wound and fracture in the bone, and it is small, then remove it with the Gesti: and I will now say the cure of fractures of the head in what will come next.
On Wounds of the Neck.
If a wound occurs in the neck, there is no difference in treatment between it and a wound on the head when it is simple.
If a vein of the neck or an artery has already been cut: then if it is a nerve, there is no power in it unless it be treated with that which makes staunching vehement, such as ziniar and zegi and things similar. Because they harm the nerves and contract them.
And do not place anything cold at all upon the wound: because the substance of the nerves is cold, and its continuation is with the brain, which is the most sublime part of the body: and let it be cured by medicines gently, such as chalk washed with sweet water several times infused with oil, or with rose oil, and thyme, when it is also washed with sweet water: and other mineral stones, in this way, and moist ointments.
If however the wound is large, then administer a suture: or constrict its lips with little bits of wool. Then care for it until it heals.
If, however, the depth of the wound is great, or a sinus has occurred in the lower part of it, in which pus is already gathered, then pierce it in the more depressed place within it.
If an artery has already been cut in a wound and its blood flow has continued, then separate or dry it out, and tie it up: or cauterize it if necessity requires it.
If however the wound has occurred in the throat, or all of it, and the al-hadege have been saved: then gather together the lips of skin with suture above the tube of the throat, and do not touch the throat, but rather equalize it, and bring it back to its natural form. Then tighten it with a suitable ligature and leave it for several days. Then treat it with ointment which contains astringency and drying power, until it heals.
If the wound has already made an impression on bone, then examine it: and if there are fragments of bone in it, remove them all, or as many as you can.  And what cannot be prepared, let it alone until the wound decays, and its exit is separated and relieved.
If the wound is recent, then apply the powder I have described upon it. If, however, a bone appears in the wound and a fistula is formed, then care for it should be taken with that which is remembered in its chapter.
On a wound in the shoulder blades.
If it is a wound from a lance or knife, and you see its depth, then consider it. If therefore from a wound there issues windiness, when he gasps from it, then know that the wound is mortal.
If it is not deep and is fresh with its own blood, then you shall not put powder on it from the first hour, nor bind it tightly so that blood is not held in its depth, and returns to the heart, and kills the patient: but place ointment attractant upon it, and loosen it every day twice.
If, however, ointment is not present to you, then place in the opening of the wound old cloth, so that it may draw out that which flows from it of humidities: and make that the sick person sleep upon the wound, so that it may cure what is gathered in it.
If now three days or more have passed since the wound, and no spasm has occurred in the infirm, nor a bad tremor of the heart, nor stricture in breathing, and you see the rest of its dispositions good: then know that the wound is safe. Therefore care for it itself and with licenses, and the rest of the cure, until it is healed.
If, however, healing is excused, and it always opens then you shall know that a fistula has been made. Therefore care for it from its own chapter.
And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple on the surface of the chest or back: then treat it with what preceded concerning suture, if it is large; or with powder, if it is small.
If however he has already made an impression on the bone, and a fragment has fallen out of it: then inquire about the wound, and hasten to extract those fragments, if they are separated. If they are not separated, then leave them until the wound has rotted, for extraction will be made easier.
The judgment of the accidents of wounds in the remaining limbs is in the cure, as we said.
On wounds of the abdomen, and the exit of the intestines, and their protrusion.
A rupture that happens to the belly, is great, and medium, and small.
Therefore sometimes a great quantity of intestine emerges, or a number of intestines.
Therefore, the introduction of them is made, and their suture more difficult and strenuous.
And even a small rupture can be difficult in another way. Therefore it follows that the reduction is more difficult if you do not hasten in its introduction to its place immediately; because it becomes inflated, opened, and enlarged; therefore the entrance into it becomes difficult.
Therefore, a middle disruption is better for ruptures because with it, the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, as it is difficult in these two kinds.
Know that suture of the vagina is done in four ways.
Two common sutures are used in the suture of the abdomen and in the suture of other wounds on the body; and two other sutures are proper to other wounds. Nevertheless, these are more appropriate for stitching up a wound in the abdomen: and I will tell you each one with explanation and declaration.
Therefore I say, that when a wound is small, and something comes out of it from the intestines, and it becomes difficult to reduce it: then it is because of one of two ways. Either because of the smallness of the rupture, as we have said; or because there is inflation in the intestine because of the coldness of the air.
When therefore that is so, then it is necessary that you heat it, so that you may submerge a sponge, or a piece of cloth wet in lukewarm water only. Or boil it in water with squill and cypress and saffron and embrocations with the intestine until the swelling resolves.
Sometimes it makes a wine with astringency; and it is better than water alone in resolving swelling.
When therefore you see that the swelling has already resolved, then moisten the intestine with water in which the althea or marshmallow has been boiled. For that, the entrance is eased with a small thing.
If, however, his return is excused after this treatment, then find in a small incision, with the instrument by which hemorrhoids are cut.
And the first cure is better when it is prepared than when it is cut; and there should not be compulsion to cut after necessity and lack of instrument.
Let there be a part of it that is twisted, sharp, and the other part not sharp, and the fine extremity not be with the fineness of Spatula, but rather be somewhat blunt: and it is that which resembles a spatula, as you see.
When therefore a wound is enlarged and enters the intestine, then it is necessary that there be a reduction of it according to its natural form in its own place, if it is possible above it: because it is better.
When a rupture is wide in the lower part of the abdomen: then it is necessary that you make the sick person lie on his back, and put his legs higher than his head. And if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then place its head and chest higher than its lower parts.
And similarly if there is a rupture in one of the two parts of the belly, then put your attention and your consideration always in this, that the part in which is the wound be higher than the other part.
And thus it is necessary that you administer it in large wounds, and in medium-sized wounds.
In small wounds, place it according to what is prepared for you.
Then have a devout assistant present between your hands who will hold the entire rupture with his hand: and bring together its lips. Then uncover from it he who follows the suture something after something: and this is the manner of a common suture of one.
And it is, that you take a needle, or a number of needles according to the quantity of the width of the wound. Then let go from the end of the rupture the quantity of the ring finger, that is, of the doctor: and fix one point with an awl, besides which you insert a thread into both extremities of the skin, with both extremities of the fascia that is under the skin from the interior, until you make it penetrate from the other side, and you have already gathered together two extremities of the skin, and two extremities of the fascia: and there are four rows.
Then bind with a double thread around the area of the needle several times from two sides simultaneously, until the two lips of the wound are joined together by a decent gathering.
Then let go of the thickness of a finger also, and set in them another point; afterward bind it with thread, as you did with the first point. Therefore, do not cease doing this with it as you need from the awl until you complete the constriction of the whole wound.
And let the awls be of medium thickness between coarseness and fineness; for fine awls cut flesh very quickly, and coarse ones are difficult to enter the skin: therefore they ought to be of medium thickness and fineness.
And it is not necessary that the needle be inserted in both extremities of the adjacent skin too much; so that flesh does not quickly cut, and the wound opens before its consolidation, and also do not lengthen with suture, so that the wound is not hindered from consolidation.
Then cut the extremity of the needle so that it does not harm the sick person in their sleep; and place small pieces of cloth on every side of them, which hold the extremities of the needles; and leave them until you know that the wound is already healed.
And this kind of suture with needles is more suitable for small wounds. Since one or two or about that many needles suffice for sewing them up.
The second kind of suture is common, as it joins the extremities with four sutures: two extremities of skin and two extremities of fascia in one vice, with a needle in which sits an equal thread in fineness and thickness.
Then when you have penetrated with the point these four extremities, withdraw the point from the part where you began, so that the thread may fall from the upper part of the wound: that it may be a suture, as a suture of cloth which is tightened on cloth, and place between each suture the quantity of thickness less than the smallest finger.
These stitches men know.
And with this suture I treated the wound which had happened to a man in his belly, who had been wounded with a knife, and the wound was a rupture one palm wide: and about two palms of intestine had come out from the middle intestine, and there was a rupture in the middle of the belly.
Therefore, after it stood outside the wound for twenty-four hours, I reduced it.
Therefore, the wound was consolidated in a space which was about fifteen days: and I took care of it, and it healed: and he lived after it for many years, unchanged in his habits.
And the physicians had judged that it would not be healed.
And it was a miracle that I did not treat it with ointment. Because I was in a place where no ointment was found, nor anything from medicines. Therefore I placed upon the old ulcer a poultice twice a day, and diligently washed it with water of honey until it was healed.
I shall speak of two kinds of suture proper according to the account of discourse.
And it is, as you begin with a sharp suture: and insert the point from the outer to the inner part.
When therefore a needle penetrates the skin and entering the flesh according to the length and width of the whole body: let go the extremity of the sifac on the side in which you introduced the needle, and make it penetrate into the other extremity from the inner part to the outer in the other extremity.
When therefore you have made it penetrate, then make it penetrate according to this in the same extremity miraculous from the outside part to the inside: and let go the extremity sifac, which is in this side, and make it penetrate the point into the other extremity from the inside part to the outside: and make it penetrate with penetration your own that you make it penetrate in sifac extremity miraculous, which is in its part, until it penetrates into the whole of it.
Then begin also from this same side, and sew it with the extremity which is from the opposite side, and extract the point from the skin which has pierced through.
Then bring it back into that skin, and suture its end, which is on the other side, with this end marvelously; and draw it out of the skin which is on its part, and make one of them, and the other; and make one after another, until its entire outside according to this example.
And the sum of this suture is that you sew with sutures of softer skin than these skins; so that you stitch one side of one extremity of the skin and let it go on the other side until you complete it.
The second kind of suture, which Gale called his own.
This speech of his is narrated so that he would imitate it according to the likeness with which some physicians do this, that they gather all the part to its own part fitting by nature: and they apply the end sifac to its other end, and the end mirach to its other end. And this is done according to what I tell you.
It is necessary that you place a pointed knife at the edge of the limb near you from the outside part, and make it penetrate to the inside there: and let go of the two ends of the knife. Then turn the point and make it penetrate from the outer part to the inner in two extremities, that is, on both sides.
Then turn both sides, even make them penetrate from the inside to the outside, into two extreme parts, which are on the opposite side.
And this method of suture is a better suture than the common one, and it is a suture whose previous explanation has been given.
This is therefore also the speech of Galen.
And some said. The suture of the abdomen should be made with two needles. That is, to introduce into both one thread: and begin with the introduction of a needle, from that which is with you, and make it penetrate to the other side, according to the suture of those who sew skins equally.
And know that when a rupture is in the middle of the belly: then its suture is more difficult than the rest of the places of the belly.
The judgment of healing a wound is the judgment of other wounds.
That is, because when you find a fresh wound with its blood, before the air alters it: and you reduce the intestine, and your own, and fit it: then place on top powdered charcoal.
If the air has already changed the wound: then put on it some ointment which is present to you, until they make pus, and the threads fall away, and the wound be closed up, and healed. Then care for it as is the treatment of other wounds until it heals.
If medicines are not present to you, then put upon it immediately, from where it begins to discharge pus, a poultice of old, rotten cloth; and change it twice a day, as I have taught you, until it is healed.
For you do not need other medication in many cases when wounds are simple.
If you fear that a wound may communicate to the principal members in the lesion, then it is necessary that you submerge soft wool in oil tempered with moderate heat, or in rose oil: and place it around the areas which are between the groins, and under the armpits.
If he feels pain, or pricks, or putrefaction in his bowels (for this often happens), then cleanse him with wine, thick, black, lukewarm: especially if the rot has already reached the intestine and made an exit passing through to its hollow cavity.
And know that that which is from the large intestine is of easier healing, and that which is from those [parts] is of more difficult healing.
The intestine called the jejunum does not accept healing from a wound that happens in it at all; and this is because of the multitude of its veins, and their size, and because of the subtlety of its body, and proximity of its nature to nerves.
If what comes from the wound is a protrusion, and you find it fresh: reduce it according to your method of reduction, by which you reduce intestines equally.
If however the space has passed and it is already green or black: then it is necessary that you tie it with a thread above the place which has darkened from it, so that there does not happen a flow of blood. In the finger are veins and arteries.
Then cut what is beyond that ligament, and put two hanging ends of thread from the lower part of the wound outside it: so that the traction of it above you may be relieved, and its extraction in case of zirbi, and the discharge of pus from the wound.
A remembrance of a wound that happened in the intestine.
When rupture occurs in the intestine and is small, it is possible that it may be restored in some people; for I have seen one who was wounded in his belly with a lance thrust, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old; and a fistula was made, and wind and excrement came out of it.
Therefore I made treatment, until I was not confident in his healing: and I did not cease to treat him carefully, until he was healed, and the place was consolidated.
After I saw that the place was already consolidated, I feared for the weak part, lest an evil accident happen to the weak part in his belly; and it did not happen to him from that evil accident. And he remained in better dispositions of himself, eating and drinking, and going to the bathroom, and entered the bath, and exercised on his diets.
And now some experimenters have said that when a wound happens in the intestine and is small, then it ought to be bound up according to this method. And it is, as you receive ants of great heads. Then bring together the two lips of the wound, and place a single ant that has an open mouth over the two lips of the wound. When therefore he seizes it above and tightens its mouth, cut off its head, for it adheres, and does not separate.
Then place another ant near the first one, and do not cease doing this with an ant after each ant according to the quantity of the whole wound.
Then reduce it and sew its wound. For these heads remain attached to the intestine until the intestine is nourished and healed, so that no harm is done to the weak person entirely.
And now it is possible to draw out the intestines even with a fine thread: which has been removed from the animal's intestine, attached to it after it is inserted into the wound.
And it is, so that you receive the extremity of this thread from the gut, and it be much cleaned. Then bind a thread of fine linen wrapped at the end of it. Then introduce that thread into the point and sew with it the intestine. Then bring it back to its break.
And this way of suturing with ants and intestine is nothing but according to the way of trust and hope.
Know that a wound that is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the small intestines, then there is no remedy except subtlety, and its healing is not at all.
On the treatment of a Zochen (or possibly Zychemen) and fistulas.
Know that every wound, or abscess when it ages and becomes old, and becomes an ulcer, and does not heal, and always emits pus, and is not cut off: then it is called universally in any member a fistula, and we call it Zuchemen.
And a fistula indeed is according to truth a knot filtered, hard, white: with which there is no pain, which has the concavity of a bird's feather: and because of this some call it Risati, that is, a feather.
And there are some hours humid, which emits pus. And perhaps moisture divides in certain hours. And sometimes this humidity is much and little, and is thick and subtle.
And I have already stated in the division, when I spoke of wounds, that every ulcer which does not heal and no flesh is born in it, this is not due to anything but one new cause.
One of these is, or because of the small amount of blood in the body; or because of its evil; or because between itself and above its lips is hard flesh, preventing the birth of flesh; or because it is full of dirt and filth; or because the ulcer on itself is putrid, and the matter that is sent to it is of bad quality; or because the medicine is unsuitable in its treatment; or because the corruption falling in the region is a kind of pestilence; or by the property of the region, as happens in Caesaraugusta: in which difficult digestion of diseases occurs, and the healing of abscesses is delayed by nature; or because it has one bone, or a number of bones.
And I have now shown all these causes and signs of them, and their cures with medicines in division: and it is necessary here that I make you know the cure of Fistula and Zuken, which is done by way of operation with the hand.
Know therefore that a fistula occurs in all members of the body. For some of these are fistulas that reach the large veins and arteries, or nerves, or fascia; or to the intestine, or bladder, or to one of the ribs; or to one of the vertebrae of the back, or to one of the joints formed by a composition: such as hands and feet; and from these there are some that reach the proximity of the main member and similar members.
Therefore, those fistulas according to this manner are from difficult diseases to heal, and do not receive treatment, and occupation with them is labor and ignorance.
If it is from a fistula of which the depth does not reach these places which I have said: and you hope and trust in its cure, and you wish to come to know it, then take a probe made of copper, or iron, if the fistula extends in a straight line, and explore it with it.
If, however, there is a tortuosity in the fistula, then investigate it with a probe of fine lead. Because lead, with the softness of its body, is raised and bent around a twist.
If a fistula has many openings, it is not possible for you to feel over it with your finger. Therefore, a clyster is administered from them through their openings.
For humidity which you use for douching it enters through other openings and flows out of them.
Then carefully inquire in whatever way is possible to you, so that you may know whether there is a bone or a nerve, and whether the fistula's concavity is distant or close: or whether it is one fistula which has many openings, and stand upon all of it with your utmost strength. With your questioning, as you interrogate the sick person, and by finding pain upon compression with your hand over the place, and by similar signs and accidental causes of the abscess.
When therefore you stand upon all these true stations, then go to cure according to confidence: and it is, as you consider then, if there is a Fistula near appearing, or in a healthy place far from the joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or one of the places which I have told you: then dry the Fistula according to what was said before from my narration, and remove what is in it from filtration, and corrupt flesh, which is born in its opening from flesh, or pus, and similar things: and care for it until it heals.
If however a fistula is of great depth and is straight, then it is necessary to cut it deep as far as you are able. Then cleanse it thoroughly of all its corrupted flesh.
Then administer a linen cloth rolled up in sharp medicines: and introduce it as far as the cavity of the fistula which you have grasped with iron: do this several times until the sharp medicine corrodes everything that remains in the cavity of the fistula from corruption.
Then restore it with ointments that generate healthy flesh, until it is healed.
If it does not heal through that, then cauterize it according to what we have narrated.
If therefore the cause of a fistula is bone, and you certify this to yourself; then examine that bone, and dry it according to what I have told you; if nothing prevents you from a vein, or nerve, or principal limb, as we have said.
If therefore a bone is discovered by you, and there is something of corruption and blackness in it, then scrape it until the whole corruption is removed. Then care for him with that which has become incorporated into him, until he is healed.
If it does not heal, and discharge pus as it did: then you know that you have not come to the complete eradication of corruption.
Therefore diligently cleanse it a second time, and make an exact reason of it, and its purification with your utmost fortitude.
Then restore it. If therefore it heals, it is good: and if not, then know that that corruption is in the deep part of the body, which you have not reached. There is therefore no need for you to have ingenuity in it, unless you let nature take care of it.
If a small bone is broken, and it is possible for you, draw it together with fine forceps that are suitable for it.
If there are many bones, then make a very careful traction of them all, and do not let anything escape from them with your strength.
If something from the moist things does harm to you, and there is no fear or error in cutting them: then cut those moist things and the flesh if they are there, and free the bones.
If you do not have the preparation to remove the bones from your hour, then place over the wound that it may rot; and let it be until it has rotted what is around those bones from flesh and moistures.
And guard the wound so that it does not close up. And tighten the section which you cut in your operation. If you wish, place on top of it a cloth submerged in sulfur ground with oil; or a cloth submerged in Egyptian ointment; or some ointment of viridarium.
For when those humidities decay and the bones separate from them, the removal of them is eased, and their drawing out.
If it is one large bone, such as the bone of the leg or the bone of the hip, and similar to these, and if that which has become corrupted from it is a large part: then carefully cut away the last part, until the black and corruption are removed. Then restore the wound.
If however what is in it is corrupted, and the part is large, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close it up and cut it entirely until the place where the corruption has arrived: then take care of it until it solidifies.
And I tell you a wound which happened to a man in his leg: that you may put it as an example and help to your operation.
There was a young man about thirty years of age to whom pain occurred in his leg, caused by something that moved into him from within the body, that is, from the insides, until the matter reached the leg, and it became a large abscess: and there was no external cause for him.
Therefore, time was extended with him in error of physicians, until an abscess was opened, and many materials converged with it. And after treatment had been applied, until the leg was healed and many openings were made in it which all discharged pus and bodily fluids.
Therefore, a multitude of physicians treated him for about two years, and there was no wise man in the art of hands until I was called, and I saw his leg, and the matter that flowed from those openings in great flow: also all the body of the man had become wasted, and its color was yellowish.
I therefore inserted a probe into one of the openings and it reached the mouth.
Then I examined all the openings, and found that they communicated with each other from all parts of the thigh.
I therefore proceeded and cut above one of the openings until I discovered the part of the bone: and I found it corrupted: which was already corroded and blackened, and rotten, and perforated until it had penetrated to the marrow.
Therefore I have seen what was shown to me, and prepared from a corrupted bone.
And I determined that there should not be in the bone except for that corruption, which was cut away and sawed. And I had already removed it.
Then I placed restoration of the wound with consolidating medicines over a long space. And it is not united.
Then I examined and found above the bone, second to the first detection, a continuous decay with the bone, and I sawed what appeared to me even from that decay.
Then I tried to restore it. And it has not been restored.
Therefore I examined it again and did not cease to cut the bone piece by piece, and attempt its restoration: and it was not restored until I cut out of the bone about one palm's length, and extracted it with its marrow.
Then I restored it with medicines, and it was consolidated quickly, and healed; and this repetition in his operation and section was not necessary except because of the disposition of weakness of the sick man, and the smallness of his tolerance, and my fear over him about death; for he fell into syncopes every hour from the excess of evacuation.
Therefore he was healed with complete healing: and flesh hard as bone was born in the place of the bone, and a good arrangement was made in his body, and his strength returned: and he turned back to his arrangements: and he did no harm whatsoever to him in walking.
If however the prominent bone in the place of the body has already been broken: then it is necessary that you fasten it, according to this manner: and it is: that you take a ligament, and tighten it at the extremity of the prominent bone: and order someone, who extends it upwards: and put another ligament out of wool thicker than the first ligament. Then bind it upon the flesh which is under the bone: and extend the extremity of it, so that you draw the flesh downward: and you will expose the flesh over the place which you wish to suture, so that it does not wound the flesh with the saw.
Place a piece of wood, or a board beneath the bone in a central location; for when you do this, it does not prevent the cutting of rotten flesh.
And it is necessary that there be a lock on the place corrupted for a short time, so that there may not be corruption in the concavity of the bone, and it may not appear in its appearance to the sense, and it may force to the lock itself vice another.
If the bone is broken and not protruding, rather its part continues with another part, and the break is in the middle of it, or in a part of it, then cover the flesh from all parts entirely. Then place the lower stick.
Afterwards, saw it from the first part, where there is corruption, until the saw continues on the other part: and let the saw be according to the length from the corruption a little, as we have said.
If corruption is in a joint, cut open the corrupted joint itself, and saw the bone where it continues from the other part.
If a corruption is in the continuity of two joints, then there is no remedy in it except scraping.
If corruption is in the breast of the hand, or in the breast of the foot: then the matter in it is very difficult. But truly you ought to inquire how the corruption appears to you. And having scraped it and cleaned it according to whatever arrangement you can manage, and with whatever ingenuity you correct it for you: when it does not make opposition to you Vein, or Nerve.
And know that saws and cutting instruments for cutting these bones are many, according to the location of the bones, and their preparation, and their thickness, and fineness, and size, and smallness, and hardness, and their rarity. Therefore it is necessary that you prepare instruments suitable for each kind of operation.
And know that these operations signify to you concerning the kind of instrument with which you will have need when it is with you a long study. And knowledge of the modes of this art is a testimony to the modes of diseases: for then indeed you will find by yourself that which is suitable for each illness from instruments.
And I am confirming to you at the end of this chapter the number of instruments, which you will place examples upon which you will cut, and a trial which you will try on others.
The form of another Saw.
The form of the surgical knife for joints. Let the head of this rasp be according to the form of the head of a star-shaped key: and its points be according to the form of the punctures of elischetfegi.
And it is not fitting unless they are rubbed with it, heads of joints, when they rot or a bone is wide and large.
Form of the Larger Scalpel
Form of a Broad Scalpel.
Shape of the razor in which there is a concave side.
Form of another fine razor.
The shape of a razor for another curved extremity.
The shape of the razor is small and fine.
This is similar to a chisel, and its extremity is like a saw: it is used in many places for cutting bone.
The form of a scalpel which is suitable for its use according to the way it has been perforated from bones.
The extremity of it is triangular, and acute at its extremities.
It comes from India. And similarly it is necessary that all things which we have said be done from Razors, and Cutters, and Saws.
On the incision of limbs, and the setting of bones.
The extremities putrefy, either from an external cause, or from an internal one.
When therefore you have treated that corruption with medicines, and the treatment does not help: and you see the corruption has affected the limb, which is not struck by anything: then it is necessary that you cut into that limb until where the corruption follows, so that the sick man may escape through it from death, or from the evil which is greater defect of the member.
And the sign of this happening is that the limb darkens until it is thought to be burned by fire or rotting after blackness: until that rot reaches what follows that limb, and spreads throughout the body.
Therefore, it is proper with the cutting of it, and similarly if the cause of corruption is from the striking of some venomous ones: such as the scorpion of the sea, and viper, and adder, and similar ones.
If therefore decay or a blow is in the extremity of the finger, then cut the finger, and do not make space for decay, that it may proceed to the rest of the hand.
And similarly if it happens in the hand, then cut it from the root of the finger, and do not leave space for corruption until it takes hold in the arm's focus.
And if it strikes him there, then cut the arm at the elbow at its joint.
If however corruption passes through and you see him about the arm: then there is death of the sick man in that. And in addition to that from healing, is the quantity of virtue.
And similarly do so with the foot, when corruption invades the finger, then cut it at one of the joints: and if it seizes in the arch of the foot, then cut the whole foot. If it ascends to the knee, then cut the leg at the knee joint.
If corruption has already come above the knee, then there is no remedy except dismissal, and to leave the sick person to death.
And the way of cutting a limb, or sewing it up is, that you tie one ligament below the place you wish to cut. And tie another ligament above the place. And let one assistant extend a ligament downwards: and let another assistant extend a ligament upwards. And you separate the flesh which is between the two ligaments, with a broad spatula, until the whole flesh is uncovered. Then cut, or suture.
And it is necessary that you place a linen cloth from all parts, and let the saw not touch the healthy place: and may there happen to the wounded one an added lesion and a hot abscess.
If a hemorrhage occurs internally while you are operating, then cauterize the place quickly: or put some powders on it that stop blood. Then return to your treatment until it is complete.
Then bind the wounded limb with a suitable bandage, and care for it until it is healed.
And I tell you what happened to a man in his foot, this same thing that I tell you.
That is because a blackness occurred in his foot, when it was burned and assimilated to the burning of fire; and that corruption first occurred in his finger, until it began the whole foot.
Therefore a man healed himself after he saw that corruption had fallen upon the limb with violence, which he found from the pain and burning of it: and it fell upon him at the joint, and he was healed.
And after a long time had passed, the same corruption befell his index finger of his hand.
He then came to me, and I tried to recover that superfluity with what I had placed on his hand from medicines after the purification of his body: and the superfluity was not found, and it began to walk into another finger; until corruption began in the hand.
Therefore he called me to cut his hand: and I was unwilling, hoping for a surplus of his recovery from me: and I also feared about him death at the cutting of his hand. For the man's virtue was above the wound.
After that, when he despaired of me, he returned to his land: and it came to me about him, because he hurried, and fell with his whole hand: and he was healed.
And I have not brought forth this narrative, except that it may be an aid regarding that which falls under the genus of this ailment: and that it may be a sign by which it is made known, and according to which it is treated.
On the care of sinuses, and the quality of clysters with medicines.
When a boil occurs in certain fleshy limbs and the space of the boil is prolonged until it forms a collection of pus: then it bursts or is perforated, and what is in it of pus comes out, and a hollow place remains as if it were a vessel: and the skin which is above it like a cloth that has already been finely woven: and does not reach the ultimate stage of corruption, nor presses into bone, nor into nerve, nor into ligament: it deserves to be called a Sinus: and it is not called a Fistula: however, if its space is prolonged until corruption presses into any of these members, then it is called a Fistula, or zuken.
And the care of it is that you cut that skin entirely as it revolves; and especially when it has been smoothed out and made like cloth; and trust that it will not adhere to the place because of its corruption.
If you hope that it will adhere to the skin, and last corruption does not follow from this; and if there is thickness in the skin from flesh, then care for it with a clyster, and it is, as you should consider, to the sinus.
If it is large, and the pus that comes out of it has a foul odor: then cleanse it with an Egyptian medicine, which is vinegar, oil, and ziniar, taking equal parts, they are gathered in a vessel; and they are boiled over a fire until the medicine boils; and it comes to the thickness of honey.
Then take from it what is necessary for you; and dissolve it with water and honey, and administer a clyster into the sinus with it. And bind the opening of it, and let the medicine remain in it for the quantity of two hours.
Then remove it with expression: do this for so many days until the sinus is purified and the stench is removed.
And sometimes it is given as a suppository with ash water, when this medicine is not present to you; and it is, that you take the ash of willow wood or ash from holly trees; and pour it upon the water. Then treat it with a suppository, and give a clyster with it, until you are confident that the sinus has been emptied.
If the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine or water of ash, then cleanse him with water and honey to which has been mixed something of crushed zinc. Or cleanse it with a clyster of honey and wine mixed together, because the property of honey is to purify and wash; and wine causes the wound to adhere, especially when there is an abundance of astringency and dryness in the wine.
When you have done this several times, and you trust that the corruption of the sinus is already removed: then irrigate it with that which makes flesh grow there.
And it is, as you receive from the plaster dyafinicon: and dissolve it with rose oil, and sticking wine: or clysterize it with certain medicines, and other ointments, whose properties I have written in the treatise of ointments.
If the opening of the sinus is narrow, in which a clyster cannula cannot enter: then widen it with a small knife: or put a linen cloth smeared with Egyptian ointment or basil ointment into it, until it widens.
And similarly if the opening is also wide, then gather its lips together with a suture: and release from it as much as can enter a clyster without addition.
And similarly if the opening from which the pus runs is elevated upwards: then dry it in a lower place which is within it, so that the pus may run out of it downwards: because when pus is constricted in the depth of the sinus, it prevents flesh from being generated in it.
If it is not possible for you to cut the sinus about lower part of it as you wish; then try to prepare the member with a preparation which will drain pus from it easily as it is prepared for you. Try so that nothing of the pus is retained in it at all; and take medicinal substances which are placed over the sign, suitable to what you wish. And spread them upon linen cloth. And let the cloth be of such quantity that it may communicate the whole of the Sinus. Then cut with forceps at the direct opening of the sinus foramen, a little larger than the opening of the sinus. Then extend from the ointment soft on another cloth, according to the quantity of the hole: and place it over it in a position far from the opening of the sinus, so that the exit of pus from it may be relieved: and do not remove the large cloth unless after some days once.
He who is over the opening of the Sinus is he whom you remove at every hour so that what has gathered there from pus may go out. And so that you know whether that which runs out of it is much or little; or digested or undigested.
And with this again consider the place of the Sinus, whether the lord feels pain in it or not, and whether there is an abscess in it or not.
When therefore your treatment is extended thus, and you see the matter which comes out above the opening of the Sinus, then know that the Sinus is already adhering, or approaching adherence: then therefore dissolve it in the morning, or on the third day; and when you dissolve the wound, then change the cloth, and renew the ointment.
If, however, a subtle virus emerges from the sinus after a long time, then do not despair of its adherence, because its healing is approaching, because there are some men who delay the generation of flesh in their wounds, and there are some who act contrary to this.
If after many days undigested pus exits from the sinus, then know that the sinus does not adhere.
If therefore the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and its matter is prolonged: then in the drying of the medicines, truly let physicians do that they be moist in their substance and dry in their virtue: such as unguent dyafinicon, when there is added to it superfluity of addition from zegi.
And from the last cure which is made, it is that you receive diaconical ointment and dissolve it with rose oil and return over it ancient wine equal in substance to its own.
Then make it with him, and use it.
And now he does something similar to this action, when you do not have dyafinicon ointment at hand, honey, when you have boiled it until it thickens, and use it. Or take frankincense, and aloes, and myrrh: pound the whole thing, and pulverize it over honey while it is over fire. Then a linen cloth over the same pad, and tighten it over the sinus: and a linen bandage with honey that you have boiled until it is thick, and dust it over the top, and place it on the pad, and tighten it.
And sometimes it is administered with long birthwort and roots of heavenly lily, and lily: and the herb's flour, and centaury. Use these simple or combined ones, rub them, and also the sieves themselves: and pulverize above honey which I have narrated, and use it.
If the matter of the sinus prolongs itself and does not heal with this treatment: then know that there is corruption deep within it; or it already makes impression on the bones, or on the other hard members, or on the ligaments: then cure it with the treatment of fistulas, according to what has been said before.
On the treatment of a felon and an abrased nail, and the addition of a finger digit, and sectioning.
A panaritium is an abscess that is born under the nail of the finger of the hand, or of the foot: and perhaps it is born in the remaining fingers.
When therefore the matter is prolonged and its cure is neglected, and it becomes inflamed with a hot abscess; or it decays and emits pus until it corrodes the root of the nail; and perhaps it destroys it entirely, and perhaps the decay reaches the bone until it has a foul odor; and the extremity of the finger becomes wide, and its color becomes dark.
When therefore you treat the flesh, with that which we said in the division, and your treatment does not help: then it is necessary that you cut with a knife all the superfluity that remains from the nail. Then cauterize the wound after that. A heated cautery is very useful.
If the bone is sound and the nail is also healthy, and the additions of the empty nail already press the flesh to the insides, and they begin to prick it, and wound it: then it is necessary that you place a thin Radicum under the angle of the nail which pricks the flesh, and drive it upwards: and cut into that flesh with ease, and place on top of that which remains of flesh from burning medicines, corrosives, until the whole thing is removed. Then care for it with ointments until it heals.
If corruption has already set into the bone, then it is necessary to cut into that bone and remove it; for it is never cured while the corrupted bone remains in place.
If you see that decay and corruption are advancing in the finger, then cut it at one of the nodes, according to what has been said before about its recollection. Then care for it until it heals.
If it happens that a nail is rubbed or struck and there is severe pain in it, then it is necessary to bleed the patient first. Then dry the fingernail with a sharp spatula, making a transverse section from top to bottom as desired.
And guard that the cutting does not reach the flesh which is under the nail, for you will cause to happen through it an intense pain on the weak one, and it will be a cause to the birth of flesh added in place.
Then care for the place with that which allays pains.
The finger which is born in some hands of men, perhaps is fleshy throughout: and perhaps there are bones in some of them, and perhaps there is a nail in it: and some of them are born at the root of the joint, or its nativity is in some nodes of the finger. Therefore, he who is born in certain knots of the finger, does not move: and he who is born at the joint of the finger, perhaps moves.
Therefore, the section of that which is fleshy from those things is easy. That is, that you cut it at its root with a wide Spatula.
The cure of him whose nativity is at the root of the articulation is difficult. Therefore, abstain from incisions of it.
In that one who is born in the finger at the last of the knots, then it is necessary that you cut first his flesh with a round incision unto the bone. Then saw with one of those saws suitable to it. Then take care of him until he is healed.
The solidifying together of the fingers, which often happens either from birth, that is, it is born with it, or from the closing of a wound, or burning with fire, and the like.
Therefore it is necessary that you cut away that consolidation, until the fingers return according to their natural form. Then place between them strips of linen or cloths soaked in rose oil so that they do not coalesce too quickly, and separate them; or place between them a thin lead sheet until the place has consolidated according to what is necessary.
And similarly if it happens that a consolidation occurs with some fingers and palm, then dry that consolidation according to how it is prepared and convenient for the figure of the limb.
On the incision of a tumor.
These are veins that are wrapped up, large and full of superfluous melancholic humors which occur in many parts of the body: and most frequently these happen in the legs, especially in the legs of those who travel and labor, and carry things.
Therefore it is necessary that you administer an excision of the body from black bile sometimes with a strong excision.
Then the surgeon should cut open a vein of the patient.
The cure of them with iron is according to two modes. One of them is that they are cut and black blood is extracted. And another way is, that the vein may be lifted up and taken out entirely.
The section is as follows. First soak the leg in hot water a great deal until the thick, foul blood dissolves. Then bind the leg of the infirm from the upper part of his hip, as far as the lower part of the knee with a band. Then dry out the vein in one place, or two, or three with a wide incision.
Then elevate, that is, draw blood from the lower part of the leg up to the top, and the phlebotomist should first attend to those who are ill. Then dry the nail with care until the amount of blood that you see is sufficient and which the strength of the weak person can tolerate.
Thereafter bind it: and order him to abstain from foods that produce black bile; and repeat evacuation and phlebotomy, when the veins are full, and this harms the sick person.
Its elevation is according to this manner. If the leg is sick and there are many hairs in it. Then introduce it into the bath: or embrocate it on his leg with hot water, until it turns red and the veins swell: or exercise it vigorously if there is no bath present, until the limb heats up.
Then dry the skin in a direct vein incision along its length: or at its end at the knee, or in the lower part of it at the heel.
Then open the skin with hooks, and scarify the vein from every part until it appears to the sense: and at its appearance, you see it red to blackness declining. When therefore it comes out of the skin, you see it white as if it were a string.
Then introduce a probe under it until it is elevated and emerges from the skin; suspend it with a curved hook, gently.
Then make another incision nearby the first incision three finger-widths away. Then scrape the skin from the upper part of the vein until it appears. Then elevate it with rays as you did, and suspend it with another hook, as you did at first.
Then a dry incision, or several incisions, if you need it so. Then elevate and make an incision at its last section near the heel.
Then extract it to the incision which is above it.
And do this until you have removed it from the incision which is higher, or higher incisions, until when it comes out completely: then cut it.
If it does not obey you to be extracted and lifted: then insert a needle with a strong double thread, and tie it, and extract it: or insert a probe under it: and revolve your hand to every part, until it comes out. And beware that it not happen. For if it is cut, it will be difficult for you to remove it well, and it will enter over the weak one harm from it.
When therefore you have extracted it whole, then place over the wound's location wool soaked in wine and rose oil, or oil: and take care of it until it heals.
If the vine is contracted, having a twisting which wraps around its parts, and it is not as we said according to straightness; then it is necessary that you find on every part of its twisting and the locations of its wrapping.
Then suspend it with hooks until you have lifted the whole thing up; and be careful at your incision upon it that you do not cut a vein or wound; for it will be difficult to lift or remove it from above you. Therefore, preserve your prudence.
The form of incision for healing a wound.
The form of an inguinal hernia.
It is not to be cared for like the rest of the hooks, nor does it have a sharp tip, so that it may not wound a vein; and it is of thick flexibility, gentle: because if it were fine, it would wound a vein with its fineness; indeed let its excess thickness be as we said.
On the Extraction of the Vein of the Leg.
This vein is generated in the legs in warm lands, such as Al-Jazira and the land of the Arabs, and in dry, hot lands, with little moisture, that is, where no grass grows nor trees.
And perhaps it is generated in other places of the body besides the legs.
And its generation is from putrefaction that happens under the skin, just as it happens inside the bodies of snakes and roundworms, and worms generated between the skin and flesh.
And the sign of the beginning of this vein's condition is that there is a vehement inflammation in the leg. Then it is sewn up. Then begins the vein to exit from the place of that incision, as if it were the root of a plant, or an animal.
When therefore the extremity appears, then it is necessary that you envelop upon the very same piece of lead, whose weight be from one drachm to two drachms and knot it: and let go the suspended lead from the leg.
Whenever anything issues forth from it to the outside, envelop that in lead and tie a knot in it. If it is prolonged much, then cut a part of it, and wrap the remainder. And do not cut it root and branch before it has entirely come out. For if you cut it, it contracts and enters into the flesh, and causes a boil to occur, and rot in the place, and a bad ulcer.
Therefore it is necessary that it be gently treated and extracted gradually until it emerges from its last part, and nothing of it remains in the body: and from this vein there exits in some men what is five palms long and ten. And now it has come to me because a man came out of twenty palms.
If it happens to you during your treatment time: then insert a ray into the hole of it, and perforate it with a long hole, with the body, until all that is in it from matter is evacuated; and administer the putrefaction of the place with medicines for several days. Then care for the healing of abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the ankle joint, or in the foot itself: and it happens to have many openings, and a branch emerges from every opening.
Therefore, treat the wound, as we have said in the division, and with that which has been previously stated.
On cutting out worms generated under the skin, and it is called the ailment of cattle.
This ailment is called in our region "Bull's disease" because it happens often to oxen and there is a small worm which is born between the skin and flesh.
And it moves throughout the entire body, ascending and descending: and it is shown to the sense during its walking from limb to limb, until it ruptures wherever it ruptures in the skin, and exits.
And its generation is from the rotting of some humors. As worms and serpents, that is, roundworms and pinworms, happen in the belly.
And it is feared because of its malice. Because when he enters the body and is raised to the head and arrives at the place: then perhaps he opens in it and exits and destroys the eye: and this happens many times.
Therefore, when you wish to treat him and remove him, then this is done only in his walking and appearance to his sense.
Therefore, it is necessary that you bind what is above it and what is below it with a strong ligament constriction. Then dry it over itself, and remove it.
If it goes deep into the flesh, and you do not find it, then put over the place a cautery with fire, until it dies.
And that which is feared more, is its corruption, which corrupts the eye, as we have said.
If you see it having arrived at the head near the eye, then tighten under it the eyebrow with a good constriction. Then dry over it, and remove it.
And it is necessary that the sick one use purification of his body, with medicines dissolving bad putrid humors.
And let him beware of foods that produce decay.
On the cutting of a wound for illness according to Nakir.
This ailment is called Nakir in our land: and it is a pain that occurs in certain limbs: then it changes from limb to limb.
And I indeed have already seen him, according to what I tell you. I was called to a woman who was ill with certain pains. And he exposed his arm, and I saw a slight swelling in the vein of the arm's cord.
And after I had waited for an hour, I saw one swelling move with a worm-like motion, ascending toward its shoulder faster than is possible; like quicksilver when it runs from place to place.
Therefore pain receded from that place, and it was fixed in the shoulder.
Then he sat for an hour, and it ran into the rest of his body until it reached the other arm.
Then he told me that he was turning over his whole body, as I saw.
I was amazed at the speed of its transposition from limb to limb. And I truly before that had not seen this illness with my eyes in this way according to this manner. Nevertheless I have seen many who find pain to be shifted from limb to limb: and I have not seen it with my own eyes, as I saw it in a woman.
And I do not think that this is anything other than because the woman was from those who have been found with dry veins of the body; therefore, it appears to the sense this alteration by wind.
And it is necessary that they not appear according to this reason in those who are delicate and have moist bodies, the hidden veins.
When therefore you wish to cure it, and the patient feels that pain: then if it appears to you, as we have said, then tightly grasp above it, and below it quickly: and dry above it, until that windiness has been driven out; and cauterize the place.
If you do not see it with your own eyes, then treat it with an expulsion of the body, and with that which expels winds, and carminates them with foul pills, and pills of sparrow, and similar things.
On the Extraction of Arrows.
Arrows differ according to their kinds and according to the places in which they fall from the body.
Their diversity is: because among them there are those that have large points, and small ones: and concave, and dull. And of these are those that have three angles. And from those who have tongues. And from those which have stars.
Those which are according to limbs in which they fall, are according to two modes. Or else the parts are concave from the main parts, such as the brain, and the heart, and the liver, and the lung, and the kidneys, and the intestines, and the bladder, and things similar to these. When therefore it falls into any of these limbs, and the signs of death appear to you, which I tell you after, then it is necessary that you avoid the extraction of that arrow from them, for death follows him in whom it is, in many dispositions. And when these bad signs do not appear to you, and the arrow is not hidden in the depth of the limb, then extract it, and care for the wound.
When an arrow falls into the brain and penetrates it, and exits through the foramen above the cerebrum, these are the signs: because violent soda, scotoma, vertigo, redness in the eyes, inflation, redness of the tongue, spasms, and a mixing of the intellect, and vomiting of cholera occur from it. And perhaps blood comes out of the nose, or ears. And perhaps speech is cut off and the voice is destroyed. And moisture white like a poultice comes out from the wound's place. And it exits from there like a watery consistency of flesh.
If therefore these signs appear to you, then abstain from treatment, and remove the arrow if it does not exit.
The signs of an arrow when it falls into the heart are: that it is near the left breast: and he feels as if it is fixed in a hard thing, not in a hollow thing. And perhaps the motion of an arrow is similar to the motion of a pulse: and blood black runs out of the wound. And follows that coldness of the extremities, and cold sweat, and fainting spells. Know therefore that death certainly comes.
And the sign of an arrow wound to the lung is the outflow of frothy blood from the wound; and the vessels which follow the neck become suppurated, and the color of the sick person changes. And expires great spirit, high: and seeks attraction of cold air.
If an arrow falls into the membrane that is in the chest: then it is near the ribs: and a great sigh is made with violent pain: and all the limbs of the shoulders move.
And if an arrow falls into the stomach, then perhaps something indigested will emerge from the wound along with food.
And if an arrow falls into the belly, and lodges there, something of feces will come out of the wound, or a piece of the intestine which is already torn. There is therefore no hope of healing it, nor of extracting the arrow.
If a shaft falls into the bladder and urine flows out, and something proceeds from it to the outside, and the pain is stronger over the weak, then you shall know that it is mortal.
The remaining limbs, such as the face, and neck, and throat, and spatula, and aid, and dorsal vertebrae, and collarbone, and hip, and leg, and similar parts of the limbs are cured according to various arrangements: when it does not find the artery or nerve; and there is no poisonous arrow.
And I tell you what I saw of these arrows, that you may know by this about your cure.
That is because a certain man had an arrow fall into the tear duct of his eye, at the root of his nose. Therefore I extracted it from the other part, under the fat of his ear: and he was healed, and no harm came to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew, which had fallen into the fat of his eye under his lower eyelid; and the arrow was already hidden, and I did not extract from it except its small end, with which it adheres to its shaft; and it was a large arrow from the arrows of the Turkish bows, with a blunt iron, in which there are no ears.
The Jew was therefore healed, and no evil accident happened to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from the throat of a Christian.
And there was an Arabic arrow, and it is that which has ears. Therefore I followed it upon its own between two guides: and now it was submerged in its throat. Therefore I worked on it until I extracted it: and Christian was healed.
And I extracted another arrow from a man who had fallen into his belly: and we thought that he would die from it.
After thirty days had passed, and nothing had changed in his condition, I cut above the arrow.  I worked on it and extracted it. He was healed, and no harm befell him.
And I saw a man who had an arrow wound in his back, and the wound had closed over it. After that, seven years having passed, a arrow emerged from the root of his hip.
And I saw a woman to whom an arrow fell into her belly, and the wound was consolidated upon her, and the arrow remained inside her; and nothing of her dispositions was changed, and the woman did not find harm to her in any of her natural operations.
And I saw another man to whom an arrow had fallen in his face: and the wound was consolidated, and remained, not finding much pain in him: and similar things like these many.
And I extracted an arrow from a man of the king's princes, which had fallen into the middle of his nose, and had already declined to the right side a little: and the arrow was entirely hidden.
Therefore I was called to his care after a gunshot wound for three days. Therefore, I found a wound caused by an arrow quite severe.
Therefore I inquired about it with a fine probe, and I did not feel it: and he himself found a prick and pain under his ear on the right side. Therefore, I believed that the puncture was from the end of the arrow.
Therefore, I applied a plaster to the place with a plaster that had attractive and digestive power, confident within myself that the place would suppurate and that there would appear to me the sign of an arrow so that I could cut above it: and it did not happen in the place an accident signifying that the arrow had followed the place.
Therefore I treated him diligently with a poultice for many days: and no accident happened, and the wound was consolidated in the meantime: and he remained weak from its extraction for a space of days, until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose. And he told me this.
And he told me this. Therefore I placed on that wound a medicine acute and corrosive for many days until it opened; and when I felt it, and sensed the subtle point of the arrow adhering to the wood.
Then I added to the incision of the wound with that sharp medicine until the tip of the arrow appeared visibly to us; and about four months passed for me with him.
Then after the wound was enlarged, and it was possible for me to introduce forceps into it, and to move it, and it did not obey to exit: then I did not cease to be subtle and ingenious upon it with modes of ingenuity, until on one day I began upon it with forceps properly made, according to what will come in the form of them at the end of the chapter, until I extracted it. Then I restored the wound.
And physicians judge that cartilage of the nose is not restored. Therefore I restored it, and the wound was consolidated, and the sickly man was healed in perfect health: nothing harmed him at all.
And I tell you the quality of extracting certain arrows: so that you may place that rule and meaning over that which I did not say.
Because the parts of this art and their distinctions are not encompassed with the narrative; nor does that book comprehend it, and a wise artificer compares with little to much; and with what is present to what is absent; and finds a new operation and a new instrument among the descents of foreign things of this art when they happen.
I say therefore that arrows do not come out of members in which they are fixed, except according to two ways. Or by drawing it out from the place where it entered. Or conversely, of the other part.
And that which goes out where it entered, is either an arrow proceeding in fleshy place: and it is drawn and goes out.
If it does not yield to removal by the hour in which it falls: then you ought to let it alone for several days, until the flesh that is around it has rotted, and the attraction of it has been lessened, and its exit made easier.
And similarly if it is situated in the bone and does not obey you for its exit, then let it be (released) even for several days; and repeat it with traction and motion every day until it emerges.
If it does not obey you at the exit after days, then it is necessary that you perforate around the arrow in the very bone from every part with a fine borer until the arrows are enlarged. Then draw it and extract it.
If now the arrow is already hidden in the place of the body, and is concealed and hidden from sense: then inquire for it with a probe. If you feel it, then draw it out with certain instruments which are suitable for its extraction.
If you cannot remove it because of the wound's constriction and because of the arrow's length deep within; and there is no bone, nor nerve, nor vein there: then leave it there until the wound is enlarged and it is possible to extract the arrow.
If the ears are those that are held fast, then free the flesh fixed in them from every part, with every means you can, and means, if it cannot be done by evacuation of the flesh in fractures of the ears and their torsion, until it is evacuated.
And you when you administer the extraction of the arrow, wherever it may be, then use the twisting of your hand, with forceps to all parts, until you make it come out: and with the subtlest last subtlety, so that the arrow does not break, and its extraction becomes difficult for you.
If you cannot operate on it within one hour, then release it for several days until what is around it rots. Then repeat it: for if the wound is relieved. But if the blood flow does harm to you, then administer what we said about the cure in its chapter: and guard your virtue from incision of the vein, or nerve, or cord.
And administer the skill in every way that is possible to you for the evacuation of the arrow, and let it be with ease, and tranquility, or slowness, and firmness, as I have told you.
And it is necessary that you do when drawing a shaft, that the weak point be according to the figure, according to how it was in the case of the shaft itself. Because it is more useful. If it is not possible for you to do that, then administer what is possible for you from the figures.
The arrow that comes out from the opposite part or something already proceeds from it to the outside: or it makes a hump of the extremity of the arrow by sense from the upper part of the skin nearby, and you see it prominent: therefore dry it above, and let the section be according to the quantity which they grasp in it with forceps.
Then draw it out: for indeed it becomes easy to extract.
If it is held in bone, then turn your hand according to the roundness until the awl presses into the bone and enlarges itself; then draw it out.
And if not: let it be released for some days; then repeat it, until it comes out.
If a piece of wood from an arrow is in it, then drive it out with it.
If a stick has fallen and you wish to administer a thrust: then insert into it a concave instrument so that the concavity of it enters the tail of the Arrow: then drive it with the same.
If however the arrow is concave, then drive it in with an instrument entering it. The arrow is therefore lifted by that.
If the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary to cut out all the flesh in which the poison is; if it is possible for you to do that. Then care for it as is fitting.
If the arrow is falling in the chest, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the side: and it is near because you touch it with your finger, and it is possible for you to cut above it: then cut, and beware of incision of the vein, or nerve, and remove it.
Then sew the wound, if you see it, and care for it until it heals.
And this is the form of Forceps, with which arrows are extracted.
Let the extremities be like the beak of a bird, which are made like iron: when they grasp upon the arrow, they do not let it go.
And many kinds, great and small and medium, are made of these, according to the quantity of magnitude of the Arrow, and its smallness, and the width of the wound, and its constricting.
Shape of the Concave Implement.
And the form of the Impeller for deafness.
This is for a deaf limb like the radius, so that its entrance may be relieved into a concave arrow, and it may be driven in with it.
On Bloodletting of Veins.
There are thirty veins that are commonly bled in the body.
Of these in the head there are sixteen: two pulsatile Veins, which are behind the ears, called the two Herbs: and two Arteries, which are in the two temples apparent: and two Veins which are in the two lacrimals of the two eyes, which are called Aspicientes: and the prepared Vein in the middle of the forehead: and the Vein which is in the extremity of the nose. And two guideges, which are in the neck. And two veins that are in the upper lip of the mouth. And two veins that are in the lower lip. And these are the veins that are called Algecherich. And the two veins that are under the tongue.
The veins that are opened by bleeding in the arms, there are five veins in each arm.
One of these is the Cephalic vein, and it is from the sylvian side: and the common people call it the head vein. And Fusca. And there is the Middle vein, and it is composed of the Basilica branch and the Cephalic branch: and the common people call it the vein of the body. And it is called Basilica, and is placed in the domestic side, and is also called Tilillicaris. And the common people call it a vein of the belly. And the band of the arm is placed over the vein, and it is that in which bloodletting is performed, and it is that which appears above the thumb at the incision.
And Saluatella: and there is a vein which is between the annular and the least; and it has two branches.
And in the leg and in the foot there are three veins. One of these is that which is under the curvature of the thumb from the sinister side. And the second is Saphena: and its place is at the heel from the inside side. And the vein of Nesse: and its place is at the heel from the side toward the inside.
And in the other leg there are three veins similar to those.
On incision of two veins behind the ears.
The incision of two veins which are behind the ears is beneficial for old catarrhs, and headaches, and inflammation of the eyes, and old sores of the head.
And the quality of bloodletting is as I have said. And it is, that the head of the sick person be shaved; and the back of the head, where there are two veins, be rubbed with a rough cloth with good friction. Then the weak man tightens his neck with a thread until two veins appear. And their places are behind the ears in two depressed places of the head. Therefore seek them with your finger, and where you feel their pulse under your finger, there mark it with wax.
Then take a surgical knife, and that one is called Incidens. Then introduce it under the vein in the skin until the phlebotomist comes to the bone. Then elevate your hand with vein and skin to the upper parts, and cut the vein with skin by an incision. And let the length of the incision be the quantity of two joined fingers, or about that much: and make blood to exit as much as you wish.
Then bind it with lint and release it until it heals.
And now he has come to the beginning of the book, the incision and cauterization of them.
Of the two arteries which are used in the two times of phlebotomy, one is for a very old headache; and one for bad gout, and one for frequent ophthalmia; and the course of excess discharges acute to the eyes.
And the quality of bloodletting is as I shall tell you. The weak person tightens his neck very much until two veins appear to the sense in a manifest appearance: and are demonstrated the pulse of them under your finger. Then indeed with encrustation signs.
Then elevate the skin from above with your index finger, and introduce a cutting lancet below, and elevate the vein upwards. And cut it as you have done in the two other veins: and make it flow out blood according to the quantity of your need.
Then loosen the constriction of the patient, and put your finger upon the vein for an hour. Afterward place upon the same cushion and pills, and bind it tightly from above with a strong constriction: and let it be until it heals.
And now has preceded the remembrance of them, and their incision, and their extraction at the beginning of the book.
A lesion from the incision of the vein of the forehead is after cephalic phlebotomy, for old pains in the face: and for headache, and redness: and foul ulcers.
And its quality of phlebotomy is, according to what I tell you. The weakened patient bends his neck with a rope until the vein appears. Then take the instrument that is called a Fossorium.
Place the pointed tip that is on the head of the scoop over the vein itself, and strike it above with a comb, or with something else in a similar manner: and let the blood flow according to the amount that you wish. Then dissolve the perforation of the sick person, and tighten it until it heals.
And sometimes it is opened with a broad lancet. However, it is not right for a phlebotomy at an acute extremity to be like the rest of the phlebotomies, but rather let it be at a blunt extremity. And let the lancet be passed across it; because the bone is near, and perhaps the lancet will break when it is fine.
An ailment of the two veins which are in the two tear ducts of the two eyes, is to the eye from scabies and redness; and it pains in the eye, and the pains in the face.
And the quality of phlebotomy of them is that the weak person should tighten his neck with a bandage. Then let him who is skilled in bleeding make it; and you stand over his head.
And let a phlebotomy be made transversely along the length a little, with a small, rather narrow lancet, for there is no flesh in the place. If indeed the lancet is fine in extremity, perhaps it will break.
Then make it flow from the blood as much as is necessary for you. And place over them a pad, and bind them one night, and untie them.
The phlebotomy of the veins of the nose is helpful for acute fever and vehement inflammation, and facial pain, such as migraine, and redness that occurs on the face, especially when it is old.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that it tightens the weak neck of the patient. Then hold his nose with your left hand, and take a fine, long lancet, and place it in the middle of his hare, between that which distinguishes the nose according to straightness. Since the vein does not appear to the sense there, and because the blood begins to flow immediately.
And it is necessary that you apply your hand with a lancet for a short time and make blood flow according to your need. Then bind it tightly at night alone. It is restored quickly indeed.
The use of phlebotomy according to Guidegi's writings is for the constriction of breath, and the beginning of leprosy, and melancholy illnesses, and sores and ulcers that are bad, and corroding, that is, those appearing as herpes.
And the quality of bloodletting is that the patient should be lying down with both arms under his neck with a bandage: and the surgeon should stand over the head of the patient, and the patient should be sitting on a seat.
Then a surgeon makes the vein as long as possible with a wide incision. Then withdraw from the blood a tempered quantity, or according to what you see is necessary for it. Then do likewise with the other vein.
Afterwards loosen the ligament, and tightly bind two veins in the middle section so that the patient will not be weakened. And let her rest until morning. A wound heals.
On Phlebotomy of Veins By Al-bu casis. Veins of Algeberich are helpful for phlebotomy: because it contributes to the mouthwash, and decay of the gums: and bad ulcers: and bad cracks of the lips, and bad ulcers, also those that are in the nose, and around it.
And the quality of bloodletting is that you make the sick person sit before you and tighten his neck with a band. Then turn back the lip and look at two veins: one is from the right side of the lip, and the second from its left side: and the demonstration of both is by the blackness of both. And this is true: because on the circumference of them are veins, small and black. Therefore cut both sides with a double incision.
If there is doubt about you, and you do not know which of them it is: then attend to the incision of the larger ones, and those more obvious.
And similarly do this with the two veins that are in the upper lip: and very much indeed is it customary to do so: and cut the two veins that are in the lower lip.
On venesection under the tongue after cephalic venesection. The benefit of two veins that are under the tongue from lancing is this: that cephalic phlebotomy is for ailments which are in the throat, and pain of the uvula, and pains of the mouth.
And the quality of phlebotomy is such that the sick person sits between your hands before the sun: and elevate his tongue, and look under his tongue on one side a vein, and on the other side a vein: and the color of both slopes towards blackness.
Therefore, cut both veins and guard yourself, so that you will not put your hand at the end in cutting them. For under it are arteries, and perhaps there may be a flow of blood from those arteries.
The three veins that are opened with a lancet on the arm are those in which the practice of cutting is customary in all men.
And bloodletting is done on them in two ways. Or by pricking with a broad myrtle lancet: or olive tree to the fineness of the slope: or cutting with a knife-shaped lancet, and it is Alnesil. And this is its form.
And of these there are broad and subtle kinds, according to the width of the veins and their constriction. The form of a myrtle phlebotomy should be broad, as you see. And it is fitting to open veins that are concave, full, coming forward, appearing, thick, and those which contain coarse, turbid blood.
And this lancet is of lesser width and more refined point.
And it is fitting for bloodletting of veins fine, which contain thin yellow blood.
The Basilica vein, which is one of these three veins for bloodletting, is helpful. Because it draws blood from illnesses that are in the throat and neck, because it follows the chest and belly: and it is fitting for the phlebotomist with the phlebotomy knife to be careful, and to be above fear from it, for under it is an artery. If therefore he errs, and adds in puncture of a vein, he incisions that artery, and there occurs the flow of blood. Therefore it is necessary that she be not bled with a sharp lancet: rather let it be cutting with an alnesil.
If the basilica does not appear with a clear manifestation, then it is necessary that one seeks out another, and transfers it to another, or seeks out another branch of it; or cuts the brachial artery instead of phlebotomizing. For it is manifest, and dry it with ananetil, as we have said.
If you wish to perform a bloodletting on him, then before the tightness of the arm, touch the place until you know the location of the pulse. Then mark the place over the area with a hot iron, then the arm, and cut the vein dry with a curved incision using a  phlebotome Alnesil, as we have said. And beware lest the percussion fall through the space from the place of the artery.
And when you see, when you tighten the ligature, an inflation in the place which you marked with the encaustic, then that inflation is the inflation of the artery: therefore avoid it.
If you see blood rising at venipuncture, like a boy's urine, and it is fine, reddish blood, then know that it is from the artery's blood. Therefore hasten and place your finger upon it in a long space, then remove your finger. If therefore the blood is cut (for it is often cut), then bind the arm and release it: and let the patient beware of the movement of it: and be above his fear.
And let it not be moved for several days until it is healed.
If blood does not stop flowing, and it overcomes you, and there is no medicine present at your moment, then cut the artery, if it appears to you. For its extremities are contracted, and blood is cut off.
Or take a piece of  bark and grind it fine. Take half of it and bind it over the place where the vein is narrowed with a bandage and poultice until the next day.
Then if blood is cut, it is good. And if not: then care for the one with him whose predecessor's recollection from the place of dust-cutting flow of blood: and the cutting off of his blood is not difficult in many dispositions, because of the small place of the wound, and the possibility of a ligament from the arm.
The veins of the Fuscae are a help in phlebotomy because they draw blood from the upper part of the head and lower part of the body; because it is composed of the Basilica branch and the Cephalic branch, as we have said.
And it is fitting for the bloodletter that he should be above fear from his phlebotomy, for under it is a nerve. If therefore he adds in the incision of venesection, and finds a nerve, there occurs in it numbness, and healing becomes difficult, and perhaps it is not healed completely.
And this nerve appears many times to the sense. If it is hidden in some people and is subtle and does not appear: then you must place your phlebotomy there, the incision with a sharp knife, and cut the nerves with your strength.
If the vein is between two nerves, then find the vein in length.
On the Cephalic Vein. The vein of the head benefits from bloodletting because it draws blood from the head and brings relief to eye ailments.
And it is necessary in this vein properly, if you wish, that the phlebotomist prick it with a lancet olive-shaped, or with a myrtle-shaped lancet: because it is the safest of all veins, because there is no artery beneath it, nor nerve.
Nevertheless, it is fitting for you in phlebotomy to avoid cutting the head of the lizard with the lancet so much, and to seek a softer place: and it does not harm him if it is not found with the first percussion, that it be repeated upon it several times with the lancet.
Yet perhaps a boil may develop in some people when it is not lanced in the first percussion, but this boil does not harm them in any way.
On the utility of phlebotomy, and the precautions to be observed in it. The quality of phlebotomy, and its accidents from it, about which you ought to think carefully.
First, therefore, you ought to know that bloodletting is not administered unless for the preservation of health and its perseverance, and caution against the approach of diseases.
And let a bloodletting be made in one of the three veins that are in the elbow, namely Cephalic, and Dark, and Basilica. And that venesection be done at the beginning of Spring on an empty stomach, in summer, and autumn, and in winter after a meal, when signs of fullness appear.
And let a bloodletting be done on the first day, or on the third, after three hours have passed.
Bloodletting, which is administered in illnesses, does not have a determined hour; but when necessity and convenience call for it, at night or day, and at every hour, and at every time.
And boys should not be bled until they come to fourteen years of age. A pregnant woman shall not be bled, unless from the fourth to the seventh month. The elderly who have passed sixty years should not be bled.
When therefore someone wants to have a bloodletting for any reason, it is necessary that he cleanse his bowels before the bloodletting with a gentle enema, if there is much retained feces in them: so that the veins during the bloodletting do not draw up putrid superfluities from the intestines which are harmful to the principal members.
Nor should a patient who is vomiting from fullness be bled, nor one who is drunk or suffering from drunkenness until that has passed from him. Nor one with dropsy.
And let phlebotomy be avoided again after colic passion, and vomiting, and flux of the belly, and multiplication of intercourse, and labor, and exercise, and vigils, and fasting, and all that dissolves virtue from the bodily or animal substance.
Then consider in the subtlety of humors before that, if blood is thick with foods and drinks, and medicines: if it is possible for him to do that.
Then he enters the bath, if nothing prevents him; or he is exercised with some exercise, so that the blood may be made more subtle.
And place the phlebotomy of him in his chest, about the third day, as we said: and endeavor that his chest be evacuated on that day from all accidents of evil animals: such as anxiety, and anger, and fear: and from all bodily accidents, such as labor, and punishment, and superfluity, and those similar.
And let him make present to his seat things of which use men have grown accustomed from fragrance and scent and excitement and similar things as much as possible.
Then the bloodletter should sit on a stool, which is higher than the patient's bed; afterwards he takes out his arm and rubs it with his hand twice, or thrice. Then tighten the bandage with corrections and wrap it twice.
And let the constriction be moderate, for when a constriction is unequal, either through an excess in the constriction, then it prevents the course of blood; or in softening, then also it prevents the course of blood.
Then after constriction, it is necessary that the surgeon rub his hands together with a cloth until the veins swell and are apparent to the sense.
Then the phlebotomist shall clean the lancet with a little oil, an old one in particular.
Then he places his index finger of the left hand upon the vein in the place where he wants to perform phlebotomy, carefully so that it does not slip away and the blow is not missed. Because of the veins there is which you find like a fleeing chord among the bloodletters: and from them is that which is full of windiness: and when you place the bloodletter upon it, it contracts under the bloodletter, and the bloodletter is deceived, and does not open the vein: and if he opens it, it is strict: therefore it is necessary that the bloodletter be firm, and be solicitous in all these things.
Then he should put down the lancet. If therefore a vein is opened from one place, then it is good. And if this does not happen, then repeat the same thing in another place nearby, or above it with haste: if the place does not suppurate.
If it is suppurating, or the patient grows weak, then dismiss him on one day, or two days: and let him not tighten a bandage. Perhaps it will draw a hot abscess. Let him not enter the bath.
Then let a bloodletting be done, if he desires.
If the incision is small, or if blood runs subtly and you fear that not the quantity of blood which you wish will leave; then repeat the phlebotomy in the very hole according to straightness, and add a little in the operation.
And do this with speed, before the place becomes closed up, for an infected place is in many men at a small operation.
If therefore you see the abscess itself, then you do not go over it at all, for it does not excuse anything to you. And place something of the oil of feces upon it; because it will lessen the course of blood. And it is better in this place than oil itself, and than the rest of the olive.
And similarly administer the feces of oil in all your bloodletting, where you bleed veins at the stopping of the flow of blood; and they do this with tyriaca alfarach, and sagzena, when it is placed from one of them on the spot.
Blood is refined and dissolved when it is thick.
If it happens that a large abscess occurs at the site of phlebotomy, for often this happens, especially to those who are not subjected to phlebotomy except when necessary, or whose vein opening is small, then immediately place a sponge soaked in water and salt, heated briefly, over the site; and bind it for one hour: because it will be resolved.
And it is necessary that you do this after the blood has exited from the vein itself, with its complement, or from another vein.
If something remains in the place after days, some blackness, or greenish color, it does not harm. And if you wish, place upon it something of aloe, or myrrh dissolved, or something from the juice of mint, that is, spearmint, or something similar to it.
And very often indeed abscesses and swellings occur at venesection in the Basilica.
Place therefore your hand upon it, then if you find softness at your compression upon it, then that eminence is bad. Therefore, be careful that you place something upon it from what we have said. For perhaps blood will flow from it of an artery.
But make a poultice for him with that which has astringency so that the place may close. Then care for it as well as the rest of the treatment until it is healed.
And it is necessary that you remove from every man according to the quantity of his virtue. And what appears from the color prevailing over blood.
If the blood is black, then let it exit until it becomes red; and similarly if you see it thick, then let it go out until it becomes fine; and similarly if it is sharp, until its sharpness is removed.
And he who is full, strong, and needs a single bloodletting, let the vein be widened, and the incision should be wide. And in him who is weak, let it be the opposite of this.
And it is necessary that he removes it with a probe and that the opening be narrow; and better yet which is administered in phlebotomy of the vein is, that there be a transverse section, not a puncture.
And this way of bloodletting is safe from the flow of blood, and from the cutting of the nerve: and it is more praiseworthy, and healthier than bloodletting across width and length.
And to him who is accustomed to faint during bloodletting, it is necessary that he eat before bloodletting bread moistened with a little pomegranate juice, or heated cumin, if it is available; and draw from his blood in three or four veins.
And if he is of a cold constitution, then let him take before the bloodletting bread soaked in syrup of honey, or in syrup of honey flavored with spices, or in aromatic and fragrant syrup.
If fainting should occur during bloodletting and the cause is the exit of much blood, then it is necessary that he takes a drink of meat water and a subtle aromatic syrup. And let him use the aroma with algae, and anoint his chest with it. And let him use the rest which we said in the division in the chapter on syncope from evacuation.
Whoever wants to bleed his arm and release his blood the second time: he who has a phlebotomy for the sake of great evacuation, and whose strength is weak, must let his blood out gradually by the amount of strength over continuous days.
He who wishes to open his arm and let out his blood a second time, and his body is strong, then let him do this after seven hours, or nine from his first incision.
He who wishes to draw blood from his body to the opposite part from which it inclines: it is necessary that he be bled on the second or third day.
In the body which has a great deal of blood now heated and sharpened, and causing fever to occur: it is necessary that the blood should exit from it in one vein, and a large quantity be extracted: and the opening should be widened until fainting occurs: after you have carefully observed all the conditions of phlebotomy: and so that you place your hand over his pulse at the course of the blood, so that death may not occur instead of fainting. Often indeed it happens when the bloodletter does not know, and negligence falls.
And it is not necessary when you wish to loosen the arm and loosen the blood second, with the opening of the vein already closed, and let the blood flow out be difficult, that one should apply excessive force upon it, and it is quickly extended. For that is a great evil, indeed let it be put aside until it is lanced a second time.
Or remove with the sharpness of a lancet what has clotted from blood at the opening of the vein, and put something salt dissolved in water on top of it. And place upon it something of tyriaca alfaroch, or sagzenea, and place it with a gentle compression, until the blood comes out.
If however a vein has already become part of an abscess, then release it, and do not hold it until the abscess sits.
If necessity compels to let blood a second time, and there is no excuse, then either the phlebotomist should cut him above that place, or in another arm in another vein.
But the vein of the arm is cut at the place of Fucus and Basilica, when they are not found, and are hidden, because it is composed of them.
And the quality of bloodletting is that the sick person should insert his hand into hot water until the vein becomes red and appears clearly.
Then it shall be bound over itself with a ligament with moderate constriction in the middle. Then the incision of the vein according to transverse section gradually, not laterally, nor lengthwise: and let the opening be wide, and let your incision of the vein be such that it cuts above the joint of the hand a little.
If he prevents the outflow of blood, then repeatedly put your hand in hot water and let the blood flow into the water until you achieve your need.
If, however, you are on summer days, then you are excused from the repetition of hands in hot water. And indeed very much the course of blood is placed in warm water in time of winter.
And bloodletting of this vein is healthier than all veins, because under this vein there is no pulsating nor nerve.
Phlebotomy of Saluatella's right hand is good for ailments of the liver.
And the quality of phlebotomy is that you should tie up the vein with a bandage or your hand after you have introduced it into warm water until the vein swells and is demonstrated to the sense very much. Then the phlebotomist cuts across it. And if you cut it completely, it will not harm it in any way.
And be careful, lest you cut with your hand as you use a lancet. Under it are the nerves of the fingers stripped of flesh.
Then apply your hand to warm water and let blood flow into it. If you do not repeat it in hot water, blood clots at the opening of the vein and is prevented from flowing.
When therefore you shall have extracted from the blood the quantity of necessity, then put upon the vein oil and salt: that it may not solidify quickly.
And similarly it is necessary that you do with every branch tight.
The wound from the left-hand vein is: because it is connected to spleen sickness; and similarly do you act in its phlebotomy, just as you did in the second equally.
The benefit of cutting the saphenous veins is for ailments that are in the lower part of the body, such as pains of the womb, and retention of menstruation, and infirmities of the kidneys, and ulcers of the hips and legs old, and similar kinds of ailments.
And the quality of phlebotomy is that the sick person puts his foot into warm water and makes friction above it until the veins are full, and ties above the joint of the foot with a bandage. And indeed the vein is situated near the heel, appearing towards the thumb: and they branch out from it on the face of the foot many branches.
Therefore, let the phlebotomist make the incision in the larger branch of it, or near the heel in its collection, because it is better and safer.
If he incisions her on the sole of the foot, then carefully avoid the nerves which are beneath it on the surface of the foot.
And place your incision for phlebotomy as if you wish to cut it transversely, and let the lancet be Nisil.
If the exit of blood is prevented, then bathe his foot repeatedly in warm water: and let the blood flow into it until it is evacuated.
If the bloodletter errs in the first attempt, then return with phlebotomy to the upper parts for a short time, for the location is safe, and you do not fear evil from it, when you avoid the nerves, as we have said.
And similarly with the saphenous vein of the other foot equally.
The location of the sciatic veins, as we have said, is at the calcaneum from the left side.
And the treatment of this vein-cutting is for pain in the hip, when it is due to hot blood.
And the quality of his phlebotomy is that he enters the bath and hastens: and he tightens his leg from the side of the buttock to above the heel four fingers' width, with a fine long bandage: for it does not appear otherwise because of this.
When therefore it appears, then the phlebotomist it according to whatever ingenuity is to you possible, or according to the transverse section: and it is better, either that you cut it with incision, or you sever it with a section. The place indeed is safer, and it itself is hidden deep in many people.
The place indeed is safer, and it itself is hidden deep in many people. If you do not find it and it does not appear at all to the sense: then the phlebotomist should take some branch of it, and it is the one that appears on the back of the foot, and towards the ear: and beware of the nerves, and make it run from the blood as much as you wish.
Then solve the stricture and place leather over the site of the incision and tighten the area. It heals quickly indeed.
On Blooding and the quality of its use.
Instruments are made from horns, and from bronze, and from glass.
And ventosaion is performed according to two modes. With incision and bloodletting, and another is ventilation without incision.
And this blowing which is without incision, is according to two modes. Or it is with fire. Or it is without fire.
And there are fourteen places in the body which are treated with cupping and scarification and bloodletting. One is Ventosatio Alnocrati, and it is at the back of the head: and Alkehel, and it is in the middle of the neck: and ventosae Alhagdahim, and they are two plates of the neck from two parts simultaneously: and ventosae menti, and it is under the jaw in the lower mouth: and ventosae of two spatulas: and ventosae Alachosos above the end of the tail: and ventosae of two focilium, and they are in the middle of the two arms: and ventosae of two legs: and ventosae of two tails.
And indeed ventosaion does not draw blood from the small veins scattered in flesh, and therefore there is no loss of strength from them, as there is in the case of phlebotomy. It is not necessary to administer pessaries with or without fire in any illness that arises from repletion, until the whole body has been evacuated.
If necessity requires ventosaion from illness, or because of custom, we administer it at any hour at the beginning of the month, at its end, and in the middle of it, and at any time it may be.
That is, because it happens to some men that when blood multiplies in them until the need arises for its removal by venesection, they find heaviness and pressure in their head.
And among them is he who has found a swelling and redness on his face, head, and neck. And of these is one who has found itching in his face and forehead, and darkness, and blurring in his eyes.
And there is one who digs a place for his ventilation. And there is one whose laughter multiplies. And of these there is one who finds a taste of blood in his mouth: or his tongue becomes ulcerated and discharges blood. And there is one whose sleep multiplies. And there are those who see in their sleep blood and redness, and slain and wounds, and things similar to these.
When therefore we see something of these things, and properly if it is in the third week of the month: we then prescribe that ventilation should be done, after two or three hours have passed.
A wound of the neck's windpipe is, because it brings together to the heaviness in the head, and that which pours out to the eyes. And it is necessary that this be after evacuation of the whole body.
And this indeed is a suction cup in the place of cephalic venesection.
And it is not permitted to use it by one who has a cold constitution, or who has a cold. For it inflicts great harm upon him.
And because of this, it is not necessary that they should use these things, the elderly, and those whose head are afflicted with cold pains.
Whoever is diligent about it, oblivion is generated upon him.
And for this reason it is necessary that you instruct the Ventilator to lay his hand with a somewhat windy lower, fearing from the generation of oblivion.
Bloodletting or Alkehel is done in the place of Fuscae phlebotomy and Basilicae phlebotomy, and for this reason it relieves asthma, and constriction of breath, and instruments fissure of breath, and cough, and repletion.
And it is necessary that the Alkehel be driven by a suction cup for a short time, because if it is placed below, it generates weakness in the heart and stomach.
Bloodletting, however, of the alhagdahim relieves headaches caused by accidents, and ophthalmia, and migraine, and perforations, and pain in the roots of the teeth: and it is in place of phlebotomy at the Basilica.
And it is necessary that you instruct the Aspirator so that he does not press his hand when making a cut, lest he hit an artery and there be a flow of blood.
The suctioning under the chin, helps with alcohol in the mouth, and for gum disease, and similar ailments that are in the mouth; and it takes place in the place of phlebotomy elsewhere, which are in the two lips.
The inflation of spatulas is helpful for cauterization, which is done by reflection and heat.
The suction of the interior parts with two foci helps the phlebotomy of the three veins, Basilicae, and Fuscae, and Cephalicae: because it draws blood from all those small veins that are in the flesh; and these small veins draw from other thicker veins until the attraction reaches the three veins.
And it is necessary that you instruct the Ventosa to not proceed too far in the scarification; for the place is laid bare of flesh, and beneath it are nerves and arteries.
The suction cup, when applied over boils, helps with hemorrhoids of the anus and lower ulcers.
And it is necessary that you instruct the Ventor (Suction Pump) to be large and made of metal; because the place needs strong suction, and perhaps finer Suction Pumps break. And let it be scraped with a deep incision.
Leeches on the legs reduce by manifest decrease because they draw blood from the whole body, and contribute to old pains in the kidneys, uterus, and bladder: they cause menstruation, and contribute to both pain and shortness of breath: and they stand in the place of phlebotomy of the two saphenous veins and of the groin.
Nevertheless, they weaken the body greatly, and cause syncope to happen in many people.
And the healing of the windpipes is close to the healing of the two leg winds.
The quality of the placement of the vents is that you place the vent first empty, and draw (with) a moderate suction: and do not prolong the position of the vents, but place them quickly, and remove them quickly, so that humors come to the place with equal arrival: and do not cease to repeat this and continue, until you see the place already red and swollen, and the redness of blood appears: then therefore scarify, and repeat suction gradually. Then consider the arrangement of the bodies.
For he who is of men tender flesh, rare pores, it is necessary that he scarify him once, no more: that the place be not ulcerated.
And tell the Ventusator to enlarge the incision and make it only slightly deep: and temper the suction in ease, and speed, and his own movement.
If there is a thickening in the blood, then it is necessary to scarify it twice. In the first incision indeed there is opened a way to subtle bloodletting and its moistening; and in the second indeed, examination of delicate extraction of thick blood.
If the blood is foul indeed, then let a third scraping be made, so that it may reach its end.
And lastly, when we wish to draw blood gradually, or a little, one incision is sufficient for us. If we wish to make an extraction of blood, we shall scarify many times with a multiple scarification.
And if we measure that the blood is thick, then it is necessary that it be scarified with a deep incision; and the equal limit in the incision is the depth of the skin.
What thing ought to be administered from oils at the positioning of Winds, and what should a Wind-stopper beware of.
In that case, whose skin is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are narrow, it is necessary to anoint the places with Ventosare with open, soothing, resolving oils: if it is in summer time, such as alkeiri oil, or violet oil, or almond oil, or gourd seed oil.
And if it is in wintertime, then oil of narcissus, or oil of lily, or oil of chamomile, or syrup: and similar ones.
If, however, the surplus is coarse and cold, then the oil should be bitter almond, or balm oil, or white oil, or anise oil: and similar ones.
If a large incision is to be made in the tender flesh, it must be prohibited from oil, and this place must be washed after the operation with rose water, or cold water, or solar water, or water of cucumber, or water of purslane, and similar ones.
He whose blood is of much moisture, wash wounds with vinegar, or myrtle water, and sumach, and the like.
If these superfluities are coarse, he should wash his windy parts with old wine, or with wormwood water, or an infusion of anise or chamomile: and the like.
And it is necessary that ventilation be avoided in the bath, or in the vestige of the bath, indeed it is necessary that it be administered after exiting the bath for an hour, or for two hours.
And it is not necessary for someone to sleep after venesection.
What is that which ought to be regulated before venesection, namely phlebotomy?
And after this it is necessary to consider first: then if he be suffering from a wind or phlebotomy and is choleric, and his blood is overwhelmed by sharpness and inflammation; then it is necessary for him to receive cooling things, such as pomegranate juice; and also endive with vinegar and lettuce, and secanabin, and iuleb; and similar things.
And place his food chicks and meats of sheep, and foods cooked with herbs: and similar things.
And if its complexion is cold, it is necessary that it take in drink syrup of honey, or of althea, or asclepion made from seeds: and it should take medium fragrant wine, which is between old and new: and it should be prescribed that it use little food. And put food for him of chicks, and canebir: and sparrows, that is, small birds: and collared dove chicks as well.
And it is necessary that the drink on the day of venesection and phlebotomy be more than food; and it is necessary that in some men in the hours before venesection,  tyriaca alfaroch or medicine of musk, that is to say muscata, or alesselithe be given before venesection: and before phlebotomy, or after: so that the main limbs are strengthened and the blood is refined. And it is not right that they should take it in a heated drink.
On varices without incisions. Those incisions which are without incision are called evacuations which are placed over the liver, and spleen, and foot, and over the abdomen, navel, and places of the kidneys, and hip joint; because these members do not allow incisions upon themselves.
And it is not sought through these, except for either attachment from a member of blood to a member: such as we place the Ventose upon the nipples in the affliction of nasal blood flow. And we use them to loosen coldness of wind unseen in a member: as when we place a poultice over the belly and navel. For it indeed thins out the limb, and heats it, and removes pain because it dissolves that windiness.
It is also placed over the kidneys when there is a swelling or stone in them. For with the force of its pull it perhaps opens up a wound, or removes a stone from its place.
And similarly he does when it is placed over the liver, and the spleen in case of inflammation in both.
And these ventouses are administered with incisions only. And sometimes they are administered with fire.
And sometimes they administer tepid water filled in affections of the pleurae: and that is so that it may be filled with a ventouse, and be large, hot water only, or water in which herbs which are suitable have been boiled.
The form of a pessary administered with fire.
Let the width of its opening be two finger-breadths, according to what we have formed: and let its quantity in depth be half a palm: and let there be on its side, in the place which is about the middle of it, a small hole, according to the quantity which would enter it with a needle: let it be made simultaneously of copper or brass, of gross margin, soft, equal, and smooth: so that it does not injure the limb when it is placed upon it: and let there be in its middle a transverse rod of copper or iron, where a candle is placed with fire.
And now this is made wind-filled large, larger than we have narrated, and somewhat less than that, according to the ailments and age of him who uses it.
For boys and thin people there are other kinds of ventosaes than those for men and those with large bodies.
The quality of placing this wind-blown one with fire on the limb is, that you light a torch with fire from linen properly, or a small candle from wax: and place it above the middle of the transverse bar which is in the middle of the wind-blown: so that the fire be kindled about the lower part of the wind-blown, so that the body of the sick person does not burn.
Then a finger is to be placed over the limb, and the finger should be over the opening that I have said, until when we hold the windpipe: while we need it, remove the finger, and vapor will emerge over that opening, and the windpipe will immediately loosen.
Then apply the fire lick according to its measure, and repeat it if needed.
In the Ventous however which is administered in the pain of pleuritis with water, there is no transverse rod, nor hole: and it is not administered unless it is filled with water, and placed upon the limb only.
And this is its form.
And this suction cup, the larger it is, so that it may take much water, is better.
On the suspension of bloodletting.
Leeches are not administered in many cases, except in those members where the position of venesections is not possible, because of their small size, such as the lip, and gums, and similar ones. Or in a denuded limb, such as a finger, and nose, and things like them.
And the quality of using them is: that they be obtained from leeches which are in sweet waters, pure from corruption.
Then let them be placed day and night in fresh water until they are famished, and nothing remains in their belly. Then the body shall be evacuated first with phlebotomy and with cupping. Then wipe the limb of the infirm until it turns red. Afterwards they are to be placed upon it.
When they are therefore filled and fall and there is possible suction of the place with a windpipe, then it is more ultimate in healing: and if not, then wash the place with vinegar. Then with much water it is rubbed and squeezed.
If the course of blood continues after the application of leeches, and it is still oozing, then place a linen cloth soaked in cold water on top, until the bleeding stops.
If the blood multiplies, then pulverize upon it  zegi or ground gall, and similar things from styptics, until the bleeding is stopped.
Or let half beans, their outer skin removed, be placed over the place: and they be left until the beans adhere to the place, for the blood is cut off.
And it is necessary if repetition of bloodletting is necessary, when possible, to change them.
If leeches are forbidden from suspension, then the place shall be wiped with fresh blood. Either fix a point (of) an awl in places until something comes out of the blood. Then they are to be placed, for when they themselves feel something from the blood, they immediately adhere.
When therefore you wish them to fall, pulverize upon them something of crushed aloe, or salt, or ashes: and they will fall immediately.
This Chapter is also many times necessary in the art of Medicine, and it is the restoration of fractures and dislocations of accidents in bones.
Know, O Sons, that those who boast about this Chapter are the foolish doctors and the common people, and those who have never looked at the book of ancients or read a letter from it.
And because of this cause, this mode is deprived of sciences in our land. And I have never found anything good in it whatsoever, and I have not attained from it that which I have attained except because of the length of reading ancient books, and study above understanding them, until I extracted knowledge from them.
Then by experience and study throughout my life's length.
And now I have described to you in this Chapter all that contains my knowledge: and above what has passed experiment, after I have abbreviated it for you, and freed it from the occupation of elongation, and abbreviated it at the end of abbreviation, and showed it at the end of declination: and I have formed in it many forms from the forms of instruments which are administered in it, as it is by addition of declination, just as I did in the two preceding Chapters.
Head II.
It is necessary, as we say at the beginning of this Chapter, that the greatest discourse and chapters, to the understanding of which the artisan first must be brought to the station over their truth: namely, that you, and those who are ready, may know or learn this noble art, and others from you.
I say therefore, that when it happens to anyone a fracture, or dislocation, or torsion, or fall: then it is necessary, that you hurry first to bleed him, and release him, or both together; if nothing prevents it, such as weakness of strength: or he is one who has happened something of those children, or an old man decrepit: or the time is vehement heat, or vehement cold indeed.
Then let him be content with his food, with cold herbs and the flesh of birds and hares: and forbid wine, and coarse meats, and filling oneself from foods and all food that fills the veins with blood. Until when you are secure from the hot abscess, and do not fear the effusion of matter to the limb: then let the sick person return to his first regimen with which he used to custom.
When therefore a broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary for the sick person to be fed with nourishing foods, much, thick, heavy, containing viscosity: such as food made from boiled wheat with water, and rice, and heads, and feet, and bellies of oxen, and eggs, and fresh fish: and thick wine, and things similar to these. For with this treatment clotting of a fracture occurs more quickly and better.
And know that fractured bones, when they are in old men who are in the first old age, and decrepit, it is not possible for them to be continued and consolidated according to their own nature always, because of the drying out of their limbs; and those that are consolidated and continued from them are at the end of their softness, like the bones of young children.
Nevertheless nature attaches something like glue to a broken bone from every side, which has thickness, so that it adheres and binds it until they are joined together, and bound together, until it comes to the end of strength and firmness, as it was in the first place, until nothing prevents it from its operations: and because of this cause it is necessary that you put food for the sick with heaviness, viscosity, and thickness, as we said.
And know that the kinds of fractures are diverse, according to the diversity of the limbs; for a fracture of the thigh is different from a fracture of the bone of the head: and a fracture of the bone of the chest is different from a fracture of the bone of the back: and similarly all the other limbs exist diversely one from another: and I have come with remembrance of every kind of fracture laid out in its own chapter distinct from another. And there are various kinds of bone fractures even within themselves.
Because it is fractured with an arc, besides which stars occur in it. And sometimes a fracture of it is made according to the length of the bone: and there are fractures of it stars, that is, splinters, and additions proceeding, as they are in a reed, when it is fitted with a knife to write. And if it does not proceed: and there is a fracture with a wound and disruption in the head: and there is a small fissure fracture.
And every kind has its own natural talent, or proper instrument in the restoration of it, according to what comes to mind, distinguished in its places.
And from that which is known to be a fracture of bone, is its crookedness, and its prominence: and its appearance to the sense, and its sound when you compress it with your hand.
When therefore there is no apparent twisting in place, nor a sound at your touch when you touch the bone with agitation, nor does the patient find great pain: then there is no fracture there, indeed it is possible that there is a twisting, or a small fissure: therefore it is not necessary that you move it with your hand and compression at all, rather put on top of it medicines of which remembrance comes, after the time that is convenient in place: then the constriction is tightened finely.
And know that when the place is bent and split into two, and besides this abscesses occur in it, nevertheless, all parts are removed from their counterparts: then you must begin at your hour for its rectification, by leveling it before a hot abscess occurs to it.
If a hot abscess occurs, then let it alone for several days, until the abscess is quiet. Then equal it with whatever means it can by gentleness and skill.
And know that its restoration and its equalization is easier than bones, in which wounds occur often.
Then bind it, according to how you will remember it.
If there are splinters in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this limb fractured from two parts, if it is a hand or foot: or with your hand, if the limb is small: or with two ropes, or with a rope and a hand.
And let your position be such that you place the limb upon a level place, according to its natural figure, until when the parts of the broken limb are extended; then endeavor, that you may return those additions with all skill, and according to whatever way you can in their places. And beware, according to your strength, lest there happens super infirmum through your operation pain, nor injury: and endeavor, according to your strength, that you apply one of the two bones with its companion, according to better forms.
And it is necessary at that hour, that you test and touch him with your hand. If therefore you see something different, rectify it, and equalize it by the quantity of your virtue.
And beware of vehement extension and strong compression, as many fools do. For many times they cause a hot abscess to happen by that operation of theirs, or a contraction in the limb: as we have already seen from their operations many times.
Then bind after setting, and a proper operation, and constriction of that limb, and rest, and tranquility: and warn the sick person about it. And make him guard himself so that he does not move himself at the hour of his vigils, and in his sleep, and at his revolution, and agitation, and at his excretion, and all his movements with his last virtue. And that it may prevent (the member) from being placed in a position that follows with pain. That is, because when he feels pain or injury in the arrangement of a limb's position, then it is necessary to change it to another arrangement from that with which he does not feel pain.
And be careful with it, that its position be equal and straight, so that there does not happen crookedness in the limb when it is restored.
And the quality of the constriction of the broken limb is, according to what I relate.
Know that broken limbs are diversified in their smallness, and their magnitude, and their form.
Therefore, those which are small, such as the arm, and finger, and foot, and similar to these, then it is necessary that there be a wrapping of soft cloth, fine. Those which are gross among them, such as the hip and leg, ought to have a wide, tough bandage applied to them.
Because the broad ligament connects the large limb and binds it on every part with an equal constriction so that it does not enter upon it a stain.
Then after your evacuation, begin to apply a suitable liniment to the equation, on soft wool over the place of the fracture itself. Then begin to wrap the bandage over the place of the fracture itself with three or four wrappings, according to what the limb deserves: and tighten your hand a little with the bandage.
Then go with him to the upper part from the place of the fracture, and tighten less than was your constriction, which you constricted the broken place. Then stretch yourself with the winding from the place of the fracture a little, and soften the stricture gradually, until you grasp a large thing from the healthy place.
Then take another strip, and again wrap it over the broken place with bandages. Thereafter go with the wrapping towards the lower part from the fracture. And let your operation be on stricture of involution, and its softening, according to what we said in the first superior involution.
Then place between the bandages lint or cloth, with which the curvature of the fracture may be matched, if it has curvature; and if not, do not put anything in it.
Then wind a bandage over the wound itself. Afterwards, equal superpositions of these involuted stars are made centrally, immediately, if there is no inflation in the place, nor a hot abscess.
If there is inflammation or an abscess in it, then place over it what sits upon that abscess and remove the inflammation, and leave it for several days. Then bind above it the very stars.
And let the Astrellae be from the middles of broad canes, scraped and wisely shaped; or let them be from wood from which sieves are made, which are made from pine, or geraid, that is, palm branches, or calingi: and let the breadth of every Astrella be according to this form, and this same figure.
Nonetheless, the asterisk placed over the very area should be thicker and a little wider than the rest of the asterisks: and the length of the asterisk should be according to what is permissible for the limb in terms of size and smallness.
Then tighten over the Astellas with another witta, according to the first tightening. Then bind above with threads properly, according to what we said about constriction: and let it be, that your constriction be above the place of the fracture more: and the less the constriction, the farther it is from the fracture.
And it is necessary that threads be of medium thickness and fineness, and that they be made of soft linen.
Because if the threads are thick, as I saw from the operation of foolish surgeons who put their threads from twisted hempen cords, it is a great error because the constriction falls with them outside of quality.
And very fine threads are not suitable again; because you do not attain through the stricture with them what you wish.
And it is not right that there be less than a finger's width between star and star.
If a sick person is injured by the extremities of the stars after constriction in healthy places: then put under them soft cotton or carmine wool until nothing is hurt from it.
When, however, there is a fracture with a wound, and rupture occurs in the skin, I shall come to it with remembrance of it in the second chapter according to singularity.
And know that not every broken limb ought to be bound with splints from the first day. That is, because when a limb is large, it is not necessary to place stars on top of it, unless after five days, or seven, or more, according to your security from the event of a hot abscess.
And this is the way of plasters which ancients used to restore, which are placed upon a fracture and dislocation.
The Method of a Common Plaster, Shortened for Restoring a Fracture, Suitable for Many Complexions, Especially Women and Children; because it is from that which does not conquer heat, nor cold.
And it is, as you take from the flour of the mill, and there is marrow of flour which hangs on the walls of the mill near the movement of the millstone: and you make it like this, except that sieves it with the membrane of an egg white: and put its preparation not thick, nor subtle. Then use it.
One method of poultice for restoring a fracture, dislocation, and torsion. Take  of mass, and laudanum, and acacia, and enula, and mugath; and juice of all, each  X, myrrh, and aloe both, each  V and alethil  XX. Grind all together, sift them, and mix with alethil water; or with egg white, if the patient's condition is heated. Then use this plaster. For it is of good composition, it restores broken bones quickly, and helps many people.
Another mode of plaster which also helps with fractures and twists. Take powdered mugwort, and meal, and white clay, each in quantity of X grains; myrrh, and aloes both in quantity of V grains; acacia VI grains; Armenian bolis XX grains; grind all together with much trituration, and sift them, and make into a paste with water, or egg white: and administer.
A method for plasters on joints and bones separated from their places, and it soothes pain that happens to them, and a crack in the bone, and a fracture. Take wool fleece and immerse it in vinegar and boiled oil, and place it over the area.
And in this plaster there is no virtue of restoration, but it is good in the calming of a hot abscess; and it expels pains properly.
The Method of a Plaster for Restoring a Broken Bone. Take leaves of fig tree and leaves of wild poppy; and pound all, and make a plaster from both.
The method of abbreviated plaster application, administered at the restoration of a broken bone; and when you desire the resolution of the remaining abscess. Take the root of althea, and chamomile, and violets' flowers, and herb flour, all one part each: grind everything together, and mix it with wine, if the limb is not heated.
If it is heated, then apply it with moistened coriander water, or with water, and use it.
A stronger mode of plaster for resolution, than this first one, is used when a hard abscess occurs at the restoration of a limb. Take root of althea, and flaxseed, and balaustiae, and melilot, and tansy, and violet flowers, and chamomile, each one part, grind them all together, and make them with willow water, or with sweet water, or with wine. The whole thing according to the heat of the limb, and the quietness of its heat.
However Hippocrates did not say in his book that upon the restoration of a broken limb, anything should be placed upon it except for a plaster made from linen and oil: nothing else; and he narrated that it should be a medium between thickness and thinness.
Galen thought it was necessary to place on the broken limb during its restoration things that have dryness of heat, such as myrrh, and aloes and frankincense, and similar things to those which we have narrated.
A method of a poultice which is applied to injury and pain. Take mugwort, chickpeas, and human hair cut or feathers of a bird,  and plantain, and salt in equal parts; grind them and sift them, and make a plaster from it.
The quantity however according to what is proper, when the bandage should remain, then be dissolved, is, that you consider then, if it does not happen to the sick person pain, nor itching, nor is the broken bone moved from its place: then do not dissolve it for many days. If it happens to him in the place itching vehement, or unrest pain, or inflation: then hasten, and solve in an hour him, and remove the plaster from him: and take a soft cloth, or a soft sea sponge, humid: and submerge it in tepid water, and wash with it the place, until itching calms down, and sits the pain.
If it happens to him in the place itching vehement, or unrest pain, or inflation: then hasten, and solve in an hour him, and remove the plaster from him: and take a soft cloth, or a soft sea sponge, humid: and submerge it in tepid water, and wash with it the place, until itching calms down, and sits the pain. Then let the limb rest for an hour. Then place over it a cloth soaked in vinegar and oil, or rose oil: and bind over it at night one, until you are secure from the hot abscess, and the swelling of the limb rests, and its pain is removed.
Then bring him back again to the slight stricture, and a small plaster; and do not tighten him with your first constriction, and more subtle with him, until he heals.
If you see that the abscess, redness, pain, and swelling, and all accidents have been completely removed, and it is no longer painful from plaster or constriction, then treat it again as you did at first, equally well.
If nothing of those things which we have said happens to a limb, then do not unwrap it, unless after three, or four, or five, or seven days. And when it is released after twenty days, the whole thing, according to what appears to you from the solution of the limb, as we said, until when the fracture adheres and coagulation of flesh approximates upon it: add also then in stricture more than your first stricture altogether: and add also in the increase of the sick person's food, according to what preceded recollection of it.
If you see that the place of a fracture has already dried up and widened more than is necessary, then know that nourishment is prevented from reaching it. Therefore, embroider it with warm water at every turn where you have dissolved it, and let it be in all three days, and alleviate the stricture a little.
Therefore, by this operation nourishment runs to the limb and it is healed quickly.
That which foolish restorers do from a broken limb with another vice, when it is not restored at first, according to what is right, and restored according to crookedness, is an error from their operation, and great fear: and if it were straight, they would have said this in their books, ancients, and operated upon it.
And I did not see anywhere among them a trace of it, and it is better that it not be done.
On the making of an accident in the head.
There are diverse kinds of fractures, and its figures are many; and its causes are distinct.
For from a fracture is made which happens by a blow with a sword: and the blow takes away the bone entirely as far as it reaches to the siphac, which is under the bone, just as an ax does in wood: and for this reason this kind of fracture is called Axial.
Or if a sword strikes something of the bone and strikes its face, and the incision does not penetrate to its very end: this kind of fracture is called Kalaan, that is, absolute loosening.
And there is a wound of two fractures, either great or small.
And from a fracture is, which is crushing, or attrition: and its cause is percussion with a stone, or a fall onto a stone, or things similar to these.
And this fracture is also either penetrating, which already approaches the flesh under the bone; or it is on the face of the bone; and is a wound of these two fractures even small, or large.
And from a fracture is this one, which is hidden in the bone in the fineness of hair: and it is a small crack, and because of this this kind of fracture is named capillary.
And from these is a fracture, which is made by chance, or by the striking of a stone, and things similar to it, which cause the layer of bone to go into the inside, and concavity is made: as happens to kettles of air, when a blow occurs to them, and part of them goes into the inside.
And most of all this happens in the heads of damp bones, such as are the heads of children.
And with all these types of fractures, splints are made separate, and I come with a recollection of the whole thing in its place.
And we recognize all these kinds of fractures by detection upon it, and inquiry into them with probes, and removal of corrupted flesh which is upon them.
The type called capillary is recognized by this, that it is discovered over the bone, and removed, and smoothed over it with encaustum; for indeed a fracture appears black.
In the treatment of a fracture, first consider the patient's condition: then if you see from the conditions that signify clearly dangerous symptoms, such as vomiting of bile, and stretching, and loss of intellect, and cutting off of voice, and fainting, and acute fever, and discharge from the eyes, and redness of them, and similar to these in many dispositions, undoubtedly he is not healed: and if you see non-earthly conditions, and hope for salvation: then begin his treatment.
That is, if a wounded person comes to you first when he is wounded, and it happens on cold days, then you must strive for the removal of the bone before the fifteenth day according to all arrangements.
And if it is in the summer days, then it is necessary that you hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, before what is under the bone from the flap spoils and those accidents happen which we narrated.
If a fracture of the bone has already reached the membrane touching the brain, and it is with small pieces, and attraction: then it is necessary, that you cut the broken part, and rubbed, according to what I tell you.
And it is, as you cut the head of the wounded: and cover over the bone according to any manner possible to you; and according to the figure of the wound, and what is light upon the weak.
If it happens to you in the detection of a bone that there is bleeding, or a hot abscess; then oppose it with what is fitting. And it is, that you fill the place with cloths soaked in wine, and rose oil: and make the wound rest until the abscess sits, and be secure from blood flow. Then begin in the cure of bone, and its removal.
And this is done according to one of two modes.
One way is to cut the jaw with a sharp, straight knife: and this is its form.
Then administer another incision after the incisions, a little wider than the previous ones: and this is its form.
Then administer also another incision wider than the second.
And the second method is that you have a number of different incisions, some wider than others, and some shorter than others: and let them be at the end of their sharpness, and let them be made of iron or lead: and use ease in striking upon the incision so that it does not strike the head and harm it.
If the bone is strong and hard: then it is necessary that you perforate around its edge, before you administer the cutting instrument, with boring instruments which are called Trebelles which do not go deep: and they are not named thus, unless because they themselves do not pass through the boundary of the bone to that which is behind it; for Terebellum has a rounded end above that which is below its sharp head, similar to a margin, and a small circle prevents submerging and passing through the thickness of the bone.
And it behooves you to take from these terebrums a great number, each one corresponding to the quantity of thickness of the bone, until you have for the present skull all terebrums: whose acute extremities' quantity in length and shortness shall be according to the quantity of thickness of that skull.
And this is the form of three kinds of Borers, or Trephines.
The quality of piercing around the broken bone is: that you place the borer over the bone, and turn it with your fingers until you know the bone has been pierced. Then move the terebinth to another place, and put it where it is between every hole the quantity of thickness of a radius, or about that.
Then cut with the Incisors which is between every foramen out of bone: and make it more delicately than you can over it from the end of levity, as we have said, until you eradicate the bone, or with your hand, or with some other of certain instruments which you have prepared for it: such as tenaculae, and fine forceps.
And it is necessary that you carefully avoid letting the terebrum or scalpel touch anything from the sheepskin.
When therefore you surround the bone by perforating it, and having separated it from the soft tissue if it has been continuous with it, and having extracted it, it is necessary that you smooth, and make equal the extremity of it which remains in the bone with another similar instrument incisor. Nevertheless, it ought to be thin and subtle more than other scalpels.
If anything remains of the small bones, and bandages: then take those with ease, with what you have among your instruments. Then care for the wound after that with ointments and what we have said.
And another mode of operation is easy, far from fear: which Galen said, and praised him with great praise: and this is his word. It is necessary for you first of all, to begin to uncover the part of the bone from the place in which the fracture is more violent and more evident: until when you have uncovered that part, and placed under it the extremity of this lenticular Incisor, whose this is the form.
And the lens-shaped part, it does not strike anything gently: and the pointed part of it, cutting into two sides of itself lengthwise, as you see: so that the lens-shaped part rests against the sphenoid bone, its sharp face incident upon the bone.
Then strike upon the incision with one side of a small hammer until you cut through the entire bone with ease, as it turns; and be secure from the cloth that no mishap will occur in it which you should fear at all.
And if the surgeon were not more foolish than men, and less ignorant of this, and were not asleep, then if something remained attached to the bone from the flesh in some places, he would cut it off from there with the pointed end of a lenticular knife, and free it from there with ease. It can be removed from him without harm, and without fear.
And if the bone fracture does not penetrate to the subcutaneous tissue, and what is cut off from the bone is its surface, and there remain in it roughness and subtle chips: then it is necessary that you scrape that roughness, and eradicate those chips with fine razors of which you have prepared a number of different sizes, so that it will be possible for you to administer them in every suitable place, and make them straighter, according to what the operation leads you to, and the broken bone, and its shape. And it is necessary that you administer in your cutting, where in first rays of bone, wider those of razors. Then use a finer one after that.
And it is necessary that you administer in your cutting, where in first rays of bone, wider those of razors. Then use a finer one after that. And do not cease doing this according to continuity, until you come to administering finer and more subtle of them all.
In every small fissure or capillary fracture, one must administer care according to that which leads to its straightening.
And there is a thing that is not hidden from everyone who studies this art, and it stands upon what we have written and shown in major fractures.
If however the subcutaneous tissue is exposed and remains when you eradicate the bone, then it is necessary that you take a linen cloth, according to the quantity of the wound, and submerge it in rose oil, and place it over the opening of the wound. Then take another doubled or tripled cloth and immerse it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first cloth: and do this as easily as you can so that it does not chafe it.
Then administer above this wide ligament: and do not tighten it unless by the quantity which holds the wound only: and release it with this care on one day, or two days, until you are certain about the absence of a hot abscess. Then dissolve it and administer after that medicines with which there is superfluous dryness; such as lily roots, and herb flour, and frankincense powder, and asarabacca, and things similar to these: and let it be, so that you make a powder out of these medicines, which is powdered over the wound like those that are dry.
And universally administer in it all medicine of its property that it may cleanse and not bite. And care according to your skill, so that the wound in your treatment may be clean; and let there not be in it filth of ointment, nor uncleanness.
And care according to your skill, so that the wound in your treatment may be clean; and let there not be in it filth of ointment, nor uncleanness. Do not allow the virus to gather in it at all; for when the virus gathers above the brain's padding, it spoils and putsrefies it, and a great evil happens to the sick after that. And this happens in the head's siphac, when it is cleansed from it os, especially when care of it is neglected, blackness on its surface.
Therefore consider, if misfortunes of the kind we have said happen to the sick person, know that it is undoubtedly harmful.
And if blackness does not occur, unless from the medicine which is placed upon it, and it is in the virtue of that medicine, to make that blackness: then it is necessary, that you take one part of honey, three parts of rose oil, and linen cloth with them. Then place it on a sieve: afterwards care for it with appropriate kinds of treatment until it heals.
On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that the parts of the nose are not broken except the two upper ones together, or one of them; because the lower part is cartilaginous and does not break, and it happens to it only attrition, and twisting, and things like these.
If one of the two parts is broken, then it is necessary that you introduce a small finger into the nostril opening and equalize that fracture with your index finger and thumb until the nose returns to its natural shape; and let this be done skillfully and easily. And beware lest through your operation that pain befalls the weak.
If the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and the finger cannot reach it, then it is necessary to level it with the end of the radius, where there is a small thickness.
If a fracture is in two parts, then make a likeness of it; and hasten with its restoration on the first day of the fracture, if it is possible. And if not, then after the seventh or tenth day at rest of the hot abscess.
Then introduce into the extremity of the Nose a liniment made from linen cloth, if the fracture is in one part: or introduce two ligatures if the fracture is in two parts: and let the ligature be of such thickness as to fill the nostril opening.
And some of the ancient restorers said that they should be infused with linen in butter and changed every day. It does not appear to me, indeed it ought not, that licinium should be poured into the albuginea, after being mixed with mill powder. Then dismiss the splint until the bone is firm and the cartilage hardens.
And sometimes a goose feather is inserted into the nostril in place of a splint, after it has been wrapped with a soft cloth: and it is done so that it holds the fracture of the nose more firmly, and so that the sick person is not prevented from breathing.
And this thing is not necessary. If you wish, do this; and if you wish, do that other thing.
If it happens that the nose again becomes hot during the operation of a boil, apply a plaster to the nose with cauterium, or with cotton wool soaked in rose oil, or a small amount of dyacylon.
If a hot abscess does not occur, then it is necessary to cover it with a plaster made of sesame meal and the powder of frankincense mixed with egg white. Then place a soft wad on top of it, and do not apply anything at all to the nose.
If the bones of the nose are broken in a small fracture or splintered, then it is necessary to cut over them and remove them with instruments which are suitable for this purpose. Then suture the incision, and treat it with what is becoming, that it may become flesh and consolidate from suitable plasters or ointments.
If a wound occurs between the nose, then it is necessary to cure it with linens: and administer a lead tube until it heals.
On the restoration of the lower jaw when it is broken.
When the lower jaw is broken, and the fracture is not with a wound, then look if it is only a break on the outside, and does not break in two, and is curved inwards: then its knowledge is easy.
Therefore, if there is a fracture in the right part, you must insert your left index finger into the bone of the injured: similarly, if the fracture is in the left jawbone, then introduce the index of your right hand: and drive with it the prominence of the fracture inward with ease to the outside with your other hand from the inner part of the bone centrally, and with it equalize it.
If the fracture of the jawbone has already been separated into two parts, then it is necessary for you to administer extension from both parts, according to the straightness; until it is possible to equalize it.
If a tooth has been shaken or broken, then bind those of which you hope will remain with a thread of gold, or silver, or silk. Then place a splint over the broken jawbone. Then place upon that doubled cloth, and place above the cloth a large splint made centrally: or a piece of sole leather equal in length to the mandible.
Then bind it above, according to how the bandage is prepared for you, and it is fitting that its application should be made until it is destroyed: and order the sick person, that he may have peace and quiet: and put food of his intake soft.
If, however, you estimate that something is changing in form in some way: then hasten, and dissolve it on the third day. Then correct what has been altered from it, and apply a plaster to it from ground powder, with albuginea or with sesame flour, after you have removed the caper. And place wool on top of the plaster.
While therefore that plaster remains attached to it, and the arrangement of the bone does not change, let him release it, so that he may not loosen it, until it is healed: or bind the fracture. This fracture is often set in three weeks.
If meanwhile a hot abscess occurs, then administer that which we have said many times for its suppression, until the abscess is removed.
And if the fracture is with a wound, consider. Now the fragment is separated from the bone, or from the saw: then be more careful in this, so that you may remove those fragments of the saw with that which is convenient to you in their removal from the instruments.
If however the opening of the wound is narrow, then widen it with a surgical knife according to the quantity of necessity.
Then when you have removed all the scabs and there is nothing left of them, then close the wound opening if it is wide; and if not, place over it from cloths which are suitable for it, and cover it until it heals.
On the restoration of the collarbone when it is broken.
The collarbone is broken most frequently from the front part from the side of the shoulder, and its fracture occurs according to one of three modes.
Or else it is broken and separated into two, besides which things may happen in it; and it is easier to restore it.
Or so it happens in bone fractures; and it is more difficult to restore.
Or so, which is a fracture with a wound.
And the operation on it when there is a fracture without a wound is, that you have two assistants present, so that one of them holds the instrument that follows the fractured fragment, and the other extends the neck towards the side.
Then equalize the fracture with your fingers until it forms its proper shape, so that there is neither prominence nor concavity in it.
If the indiges extends more, then it is necessary that you place under the patient's sphere a piece of cloth, or wool: and let its size be according to the quantity of your necessity: and extend, and elevate the furculum, and constrict the sphere with your hand, until the fracture is equal, as is necessary.
If you are unable to draw the extremity of the clavicle outwards because it has reached deep inside, then it is necessary for the patient to lie on their neck and place a pillow medium in size under their shoulder. Have an assistant press the patient's shoulder downwards until the clavicle that is in the depths is raised upwards. Then straighten the fracture and align it with your fingers.
If you feel a splinter from the clavicle, and it moves: then it is necessary that you find it above it, and extract that splinter with ease.
If it is held in the bone, then devise an incision into it with one of the Incisors that you have prepared for it, after you have placed under the Furcula the instrument which saves sifach; and it is an instrument out of wood, or out of iron. And this is its form.
It is similar to a drinking horn that has no concave shape.
And let its width be according to that which you require it from the magnitude of the bone, and its smallness. The length of it also according to what is possible for you to the operation.
And it should have two extremities, as you see; and one extremity be wide, and the other narrow.
If, however, the wound that you opened when you extracted the bone fragment is wide and you fear an abscess from heat, then bring together the two edges of the wound with a suture.
And if the rupture is small, or a hot abscess threatens: then fill the wound with pads and lint according to the size of the wound's cut.
If a hot abscess occurs, then pour linen dipped in rose oil, vinegar, and wine onto it and place it on top.
A stricture of bone when it is without a wound and without a section, is, as you put upon the bone a plaster made from mill flour with the white of egg. And place a soft plug upon it. Then place a sphere under its [titillicum], if it does not fit. Then take a hemamat, that is, a wheel which the Saracens hold, which should be long quite a bit; and let its width be that of one palm, or about that. Then place a small doubled pad over the cotton and plaster. Then take a star from a fine board, whose width is three fingers, and in length likewise. Then wrap it in a cloth. Then wrap that cloth with a star in the place of the splints which falls over the fracture and place. Then place a splint on the fracture as it revolves, and wrap it over its neck, and under its healthy collarbone, and under its injured collarbone: and reduce it over all parts, and how you see that constriction holds the fracture, constricting properly: and this is what is not hidden from you, and the whole, so that it is not removed star from above the broken bone. And for this reason it is necessary that you look at the sick person every day. Whenever therefore the ligament is softened, and you see the starlet already being removed: then straighten it, and tighten the ligament.
Then place the sleep of the patient upon his back, and place under his pillow near his sleep a small cushion at night, so that when he is lifted it may aid him from his side. Therefore, a fracture of the clavicle is raised by elevation of the shoulder.
Either bind the arm to the neck of the person: and do not loosen the bandage unless an accident happens in the place from itching, or from a boil, up to twelve days.
Then renew the dressing, if you see its face suitable for it. And add in the stricture, and release it, until it is restored and coagulated.
And a fracture of the clavicle is bound and supported for as many days as twenty-eight; and sometimes it happens in some men in less time than that.
On the restoration of a spatula fracture.
A spatula breaks rarely, and in a wide place of it: and the margins of it only break from it.
When therefore that place is broken from it, and broken in the middle of it, and it is not known except by touch: then according to what the fracture's figure is, attempt its preparation. And reduce it back to its natural form in every way possible to you.
Then place over the place powder of mill with albumen of egg, and a soft plug, and place on top a small piece of doubled cloth. Then place upon it a broad board from a table according to the quantity of the whole spatula, or slightly larger than it.
If, however, there is a hollow in some places of the spatula under the star, then level that hollow with soft cotton wool until the star descends according to equality.
Then bind it above with a long linen cloth, using a tight but not excessive constriction, and firming the splint until it is no longer movable from its place.
And consider the ligament every day. Whenever therefore the ligament is softened, tighten it, and equal the bone if it is moved from its place; and let the sick person lie on his healthy side.
And a spatula indeed is restored in twenty days, or in twenty-five days.
When therefore this number is complete, then loose the ligament: and you be in safety. For it is from bones whose union is not feared, nor their separation.
If it proceeds from bone in a fragment and punctures under the skin: then cut over it and remove it. And do what we have said for a fracture of the clavicle from the heat of an abscess, if anything happens from it.
On the restoration of a broken breastbone.
The chest sometimes breaks in the middle of itself, and this rarely happens. The extremities of this are indeed broken and splintered very much by accidents to it.
When the middle of it is broken, which inclines to the lower parts, and there happens to it a severe pain, and difficulty in breathing and coughing: and perhaps he vomits blood, and the concavity in the broken bone is declared, and is not concealed from the sense, Restoration of it is, that he who is ill lies on his back: and put between the spatulas of his ribs.
Then press his shoulder bones and bring the ribs together from two parts or sides with your hands: and with subtlety in its alignment, according to every way that it is possible and fitting, until it returns to the shape of the bone, as it ought.
Then place upon it a dressing and a plug, and place above it a plate from thin willow board, or calamine, and from things similar to these in lightness, after you have wrapped it in cloth. Then bind it carefully over the fractured bone, so that it does not move: and go with the bandage according to the roundness towards the back several times, and tighten it with a decent constriction.
Then consider the bandage at all hours, and whenever it softens, tighten it. And if necessity causes it to be loosened because of itching, or corrosion that happens in the place, or pain, or abscess: then hasten, and loosen it, and eradicate the plaster, and correct what happened with the way of its treatment.
Then reduce the plaster if you see it forming that face: and bandage it tightly until it heals.
On the restoration of ribs when they are broken.
Know that a fracture of the ribs does not occur except in the thick places which follow the back, and from their extremities on the front part. And they do not suffer attrition, unless because they are cartilaginous. And its knowledge is not concealed from the sense during examination with the fingers.
And restoration of it is made so that the fracture with the fingers is equal according to the possible manner, until the figure is equal, according to what is necessary. Then apply plasters, and bind the broken bone with a splint if it is needed.
And if the fracture of the ribs is sloping inwards: then there happens to the sick person a very severe pain, and a piercing, like the piercing which happens to him who has pleurisy: because the bone pierces the membrane, and also it happens to him difficulty in breathing, and coughing, and vomiting blood much: and this is difficult to cure.
And now the ancients have been ingenious in this matter with many ingenuities: and among them are those who say, that you should place foods in the sick man which generate inflammation and windiness, so that the belly may be inflamed, and extended, and the fracture driven to the exterior.
We however abhor that it not be a cause for quickly making a hot abscess, if it does not happen. If this has already happened, then he adds to it.
And some of them said: a wind-filled vessel should be placed over the place, then it should be suctioned with force, and this is similar to reasoning. Nevertheless, it is feared that it will attract windy superfluities to the place because of the predisposition of weakness.
And some of them said that the place ought to be covered with wool which has already been immersed in hot oil: and let little pads be placed between the ribs until it is filled: so that there may be an equal bandage when you wrap it according to the roundness.
Then the sick person is treated with treatment for pleurisy from food and medicine.
If the weak body is distressed by something too great for it to bear and the bone pierces the flesh with a piercing point, and we fear for the weak one: then it is necessary that we cut above the place and uncover from the broken rib. Then we place upon it an instrument that preserves the wound's edges, of which the mention preceded; and we cut the bone with ease, and cut it.
Then we shall bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a suture: and we shall care for it with plasters, until it heals.
If it happens that a hot abscess occurs in the meantime, then hasten and pour in grains in rose oil, and place it over the spot: and let the patient be treated with what is fitting for an abscess.
Meanwhile, he is also laid on his side on which he sleeps until it heals.
On the restoration of a fracture of the spinal vertebrae of the back and neck.
Sometimes a fracture of the bones of the neck occurs, and rarely attrition happens to them; and similarly with the vertebrae of the back also. When therefore it happens to someone, and you want to know, whether he will be healed or not, then trust. If you see his hand already softened and numbed and dead: and it cannot move them, nor extend them, nor constrict them: and when you constrict them with your fingers, and prick them with a sharp point, he does not feel it, and does not feel pain in them: then know that it is not healing, and in many dispositions it is mortal.
If he moves them and feels a tightening in them with his fingers and pricking, then know that the nape of the bone is safe, and that the sick person will heal with treatment.
If it happens to the vertebrae of the back, similar to this, and you wish to know if it will heal or not: then consider his feet: then if you see that they are softened, and what happened in the hands has happened to them: then when he lies on his back, wind and involuntary defecation occur: and when he lies on his stomach, involuntary defecation occurs: and when he lies on his back and wants to urinate but cannot: then know that it is mortal. Therefore, do not labor in its cure.
If nothing of that sort happens to him, the matter is lighter.
And the cure for this which happens from it is, that you try sedation of the hot abscess: so, that you put upon the rubbed (or, anointed) spine only rose oil: or with beaten eggs saturated with wine.
Place on top of it several times a day until the hot abscess settles. Then place one comforting, drying plaster over the spot and bind it firmly with a bandage: and order the patient to use rest and tranquility. Nor should he sleep upon the part where he found pain until it is healed.
If it happens that in rubbing a bone is shattered, or something which is already separated from it: then it is necessary, that you cut above the skin, and remove it. Then gather together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with suture. Then care for it with some ointment until it heals.
If the last bone of the thigh is broken and reaches the end of the tail, then you must insert your thumb of your left hand into the anus, and with your right hand, equalize the broken bone as best as possible.
Then place upon it, and remove it: and care for the wound with the care that preceded, until it heals.
On the restoration of the anus.
Chapter XI.
Bones of Anchars are rarely broken. If these are broken, then their fracture is not, except for a crushing at the extremities of them: and they are split lengthwise, and they incline inward: and there occurs in the injured place pain and a puncture: and the leg that breaks becomes numb.
And the restoration of it is that you stretch your hand over it until you stand upon the fracture as to its figure.
If the fracture is only in the extremities of it, then equal that fracture, according to what is prepared for you from the equation, until it assimilates to its natural figure.
If, however, the fracture is lengthwise, or already inclines inwards: then make the sick person lie on their stomach, until you prepare the restoration of that fracture. When therefore you have leveled it, place on top of it a plaster; then place on top of it a splint of wood or skin: and bind tightly with a bandaging which you do not fear will cause rearrangement of the fracture, nor removal of the splint.
And an equal concavity of them with that which fills it, until it takes it tight according to equality: and order the infirm, that he sleep upon his back, or upon his healthy side.
If however it happens that a hot abscess occurs to him, then cease from its extension and restoration until the hot abscess settles: and place upon it that which has been said before, then return to its restoration: and tighten it as is fitting.
If, however, a splinter has entered the bone, or it is broken, remove it.
On the restoration of a broken bone with assistance
That which is between the hip and the head is a spatula helpful.
If therefore it is broken, then its restoration is according to one of two modes.
One of these is: that you take a plank of wood of medium thickness, according to this form which follows.
And two ligaments shall be tied at both extremities.
Then let it be suspended from an elevated place: and let the sick person sit upon a seat. Then he should throw his broken arm over a piece of wood until it reaches the place where the curve of the wood is attached in the middle.
Then suspend something heavy from above so that it extends the instrument downward. Then the physician sets the fracture with his hands until the fracture returns, as is necessary.
And another way is that the sick person be laid on his neck, and his hand be suspended from his neck with a band. Then command two assistants to hold one of them who is above the fracture with his hands: and let the other hold below it, and let each of them extend to his own part.
And if you wish it to have stronger extension, then bind below the fracture with a ligament, and above it with another ligament: and each of the two attendants shall extend it to their own parts.
If therefore the fracture is near the extremity of the shoulder, then it is necessary that one ligament be placed under the little bone, and the other under the fracture towards the elbow.
And similarly if the fracture is near the elbow: then it is necessary that a ligament be placed over that place, and over the elbow itself.
Then equalize the fracture with ease without effort, until the fracture is made equal as it should be, and apply a good application: then bind it, if there does not occur a hot abscess.
If a hot abscess occurs, then release the constriction until the seventh day. And place upon it wool dipped in vinegar and rose oil, until when the abscess is quiet: then bind it; and the way of binding it is, as you would place a plaster over the fracture.
Then place a bandage made of fresh cloth over the dressing. Then he will bring the arm above his helper, and place his open hand upon his shoulder.
And place a cloth, and bind over the auxiliary arm, so that the arm may stand in place of the stars; if nothing prevents you from this, and nothing is altered upon you from the broken bone.
If you are afraid that something will be changed on you from a broken bone, then use splints; and it is, that you place over the fracture itself the splint which is wider and stronger than the other splints. And place between every splint the width of a finger: and let the length of the splints be according to the fracture with an addition of three fingers from every part.
Then tighten over the stars the constriction that I said at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is, that your constriction be above the place of fracture stricter. And the more elongated the fracture is, let the constriction be less.
If therefore you see the position of stars and constriction, as we have said, in the hour when you restore the limb immediately do this: and if you fear a hot abscess, then release the constriction and stars until the seventh day, as we have said.
Then consider the ligament in all three days, so that it does not happen in the place itching, or inflation, or food is prohibited from reaching the limb, because of the arrangement of superfluity of constriction. Therefore straighten it as we have said.
If you are over confident, so that nothing may happen from it: then do not loosen the ligament, unless after three days, or more.
And let the patient's sleep be upon his back, and his hands upon his stomach: and put under the assistance a cushion full of wool equally.
And consider at every hour of night, or day, that the figure of a broken limb be not loosened, nor the ligament softened. Therefore rectify it with your virtue.
And place food for the sick according to the order which we have previously given, so that it be fine food at first, until he begins to tighten his mouth; then it is necessary that you make his food coarser.
According to custom, the aid and leg should be bandaged for forty days; therefore, it is necessary that it be untied, and a bath be administered, and it be medicated with ointments which straighten it.
If the fracture is foul and rubbed, then you do not separate it from its ligaments and splints for up to fifty days, and up to two months.
On the restoration of a broken arm.
The arm is composed of two bones which are called the two radii.
One of these is small: and it is that which follows the thumb. And another is large, and it is that which is placed below the small one from the lower part.
Perhaps therefore a larger weapon breaks alone, or a small one: and perhaps both break at once.
When therefore a small upper bone is broken, its restoration is easy, and its healing is easier.
And when the lower bone is broken, it is a bad fracture, and its healing is difficult.
And it is worse when two bones are broken at the same time.
If therefore the bone that is broken is little above the socket, then it behooves the physician at its restoration, to place a small extension with ease, until it equalizes itself.
If however the fracture is large, then it is necessary to put a stronger bandaging.
And it is necessary that he place the figure of the hand at its restoration, and its extended extension over the pillow. And let the thumb of the hand be higher than all the fingers; and let the lower joint be higher than all the fingers, or the rest: and let the weak one sit square upon itself, and let the pulley be before it, or in its direct line, in altitude, so that the weak one does not incur labor.
Then let the assistant extend the arm from the lower part, either with his hand, or with a bandage. And another assistant shall extend similarly from above.
Then the physician aligns the bone until he restores it to the best possible shape.
If, in a fracture of bone, there are fragments, then try to reduce every fragment back to its place with your skill.
If however it appears to be separated and stabbing the skin, and there is no hope in its restoration, then find over it, and remove it according to the manner which we have said in those things which precede.
If, however, the fracture is with a wound, I have already done so to that particular chapter, therefore take care of it from there.
If it happens at the beginning of your restoration that a hot abscess occurs, then line cloth with a cauterized piece made from rose oil and white wax, and let it be medium between thickness and thinness: and tightly bind the cloth over it with a fine bandage until when the abscess settles: then remove the cauterized piece, and place a plaster prepared from ground powder with egg white. Then place splints, and let the splint placed over the fracture itself be somewhat wider and stronger.
And know that the number of stars on the arm is six in various arrangements: whether it be a fracture in one fossa, or in two fossae at once.
Then place your splint over the fracture site stronger and more firm, and a little more with the splint to the upper part of the fracture, or to the lower part of it; or place a softer splint, its edge slightly less, according to what was remembered before at the beginning of the chapter.
And let cloths be wound over the fracture, soft, moist cloths, and not hard, rough ones. And let the thread for tightening be made of linen, of medium thickness between fine and coarse, as we have recounted.
And consider the limb and the ligament after days. If something happens which requires correction, such as an itch that happens to a limb: then it is necessary to embrocate the limb with hot water until the itching subsides, and let go of the limb not constricted, until it subsides, then repeat the constriction.
If the constriction has already been softened, and the bone has already been removed, and similar things to these: then correct it all with your skill, and consider it again.
If nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb because of the excess tightness, then it is necessary to soften it a little and let it go for a few days until it heals to the nourishment, then tighten it again.
If, however, nothing of what we said happens to the sick person, then it is not necessary to loosen (it), unless after twenty days, or about so many.
Then the hand of the infirm person shall be suspended to his neck. And let its neck be equal, and may it be guarded by its virtue from agitated motions. And make him lie on his back.
And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days, or in thirty-two days: and perhaps it is restored in twenty-eight days. All of it is according to dispositions of complexions, and dispositions of virtue.
On the restoration of fractured hands.
Know that fractures of the fingers and the knuckles are rare. And this does not happen to him unless through much rubbing.
When therefore occurs a fracture of the foot, or attrition: then it is necessary that the sick man should sit square and in front of him a seat according to equality. Then place his hand upon it extended.
Then let the assistant extend the broken bones, and the physician straighten them until they are joined together in a good connection.
Then it is necessary that he place a plaster and a wad, if there does not occur a hot abscess. Then put a splint above according to the amount of space: and you have already wrapped it in linen cloth.
If the fracture is near the lower part of the foot, then make a sphere like shape out of cloth: and order the sick person to bind it over the broken foot: then bind it with a long strip of cloth.
Let a pad be made of leather, which has some softness, so that it can be applied to the skin with the body of the plant, and bind it as is necessary.
If the fracture is external, then you must: place one splint above and another below in the sole of the foot; and let the hand be open and straight. Then place a ligature as one turns the hand; and extend it between the fingers with a band.
If a fracture happens to one of the joints of the fingers, then if it is the thumb, it shall be set according to what is necessary. Then it is bound with a plant, and if you please, put in for it a straight spindle, small: that the fracture may be raised up, and not moved.
If the fracture is in the remaining fingers, such as the middle, index, or little finger, and ring finger, then it should be aligned and bandaged with the healthy finger that follows it; or all of them should be bandaged according to their continuation; and this is better. Or place a small bandage over it, as we said about the thumb.
And consider in your restoration, and after the same arrangement of the hot abscess: and oppose with it what is necessary, when something happens from it, according to what the narrative of its recurrence says.
On the restoration of a fractured hip.
The hip bone is broken many times and is made known to the senses because it turns to the inner and outer part.
And restoration of it is made so that a ligament is tightened above the fracture, and another ligament below the fracture. And the sick person should lie down upon his face.
Then he shall extend the entire ligament to its own part according to equality: and this, when there is a fracture in the middle of the bone.
If it is a fracture near the root of the hip bone, then one ligature should be to the side of the wingbone, so that extension goes upwards; and another ligature below the fracture.
And thus similarly if there is a fracture near the knee, then let the ligament near the knee be, so that it extends to the lower parts.
Then the physician straightens the bone with both of his hands, until he brings it back according to the likeness of the natural figure: and the bone is joined together with a good joining.
Then it is necessary, that you place a plaster and a constriction, if an abscess does not occur in the limb. If it happens that an abscess occurs there, then leave it alone for some days until the abscess settles and becomes warm, then return to your treatment.
Its stricture should be so. It is necessary that you wrap a hard bandage over the fracture, namely, twice or three times; and let there remain from it an excess. Then wrap the leg until it reaches the heel at the root of the foot.
And introduce a long thread between the hip and leg near the knee to the lower part, and let the ends of the thread come from the upper part of the two parts. Then roll over the Leg and Hip what is surplus from the meal.
Then place upon the hip at the site of its fracture a splint, and place one splint from it on the bone of the leg.
Then fill the cavities between the thigh and hip with soft cloths so that the tightness is equalized.
Then begin with a strong constriction in the middle above the fracture site for three, or four turns. And the more elongated it is with the ligament from the place of the fracture, the stricter and smoother, and gentler will your constriction be.
Then attend to the two extremities of the thread that you introduced between the hip and leg. Therefore, tie with both three stars which are above. Then go with two ends of thread to the lower part until you reach the heel of the foot. And when both are tightened also the extremities of the stars from the other part: so that the ligament may not be moved from its place.
Then loosen the constriction over it while it remains, so that it does not happen to the member, corruption, or abscess, or inflation, and similar things to these. If something happens from that. Therefore, with its solution, and rectify that which happened from it altogether, according to what we have said many times.
If there is a piece of bone within a bone that pricks, then it is necessary for you, if it is possible, to make it equal. And if not, find upon it, and remove it: and care with him whose precedent recollection, until it is healed.
And sometimes this fracture of the hip is tightened, besides which stars are added to it, as we said in the aid and arm.
However, in the restoration of it thus broken, lameness does not occur in the weak person. And if only one leg is restored, besides applying another leg to it, then it is necessary that the one whose it is will always limp.
And know that the hip is bound for fifty days, or a little is added, or a little is taken away: all this is according to the diversity of constitutions and other arrangements.
On the restoration of a broken kneecap.
Know that a fracture of the kneecap rarely occurs, but attrition happens there often.
If a fracture occurs to him, then not unless a fissure or hole in his parts. And it is that with a wound, and without a wound. And it is placed over the whole with sense.
And its restoration is so that it may be equal to what was broken from its parts with the fingers until it is brought together, and joined according to what is possible from equality and ease, and fabrication.
Then place a plaster of sesame meal, or millet flour, with egg white: and place on top of it a round splint, if the latter is necessary: and tighten from above with a suitable bandage to that.
Then consider all the arrangements that we have related in other fractures: such as a hot abscess, and similar ones: so, that you may oppose every accident to what is suitable for it, until it heals.
On the restoration of a broken leg.
Know that there are two bones in the leg, one of which is thick and called Femur; and the other thin and called Fibula.
And it happens to both kinds of fractures that happen to the two bones of the arm: and because of this restoration is made of it, just as the restoration of the arm equally, and the operation is one.
If two bones are broken at once, the leg turns in every direction.
And if a bone is broken more subtly, the leg is turned to the front part.
And if a thick bone is broken, you will find it below; and it is among those which are not hidden from you.
Then administer extension, and equation, and ligation of the stars according to that equally.
Nevertheless, if a fracture of the leg is a foul fracture, having many fragments: that the extension be less and with gentler alleviation.
And in the leg indeed there is something from the operation above the arm: and it is, that when you equalize the stars, and compile all your operation, then take two fascias from pine wood, which is administered in the making of sun dials that are put under tables: and they are made from palm spatulas: and choose from them those which have small thickness, and do not be from the smallest: and let their length be according to the length of the leg from the knee to below.
Then wrap over each piece of cloth two foldings according to its length. And place one part of the thigh from one side, and the other from the other side: and let them be from the knee down to the foot.
Then tie two fasciae in three places from the two extremities and middle. When, however, constriction is prevented, the limb leans to the right and left, and stands in good position.
And now indeed let a splint be made from wood according to the length of the leg, and lay the leg in it so that it will keep it from moving.
And most importantly, you must do this in a fracture when there is also a proper wound with it.
Then consider the bone on every day, and study it with utmost diligence from abscess, or inflammation, or other ailments. If therefore something of these things happens, then oppose it with that which is necessary, until it is healed, if God wills.
On the fracture of bones of the foot and fingers.
A fracture of the calcaneus does not occur completely.
Sometimes a fracture occurs in the bones of the foot, and sometimes also in the fingers. And it does not occur to them except by attrition in many positions.
If a fracture of the bones of the foot occurs and you see those bones rising above each other, then let the sick person put his foot on the prepared ground, as if walking.
Then stand, and put your foot upon that which rises from those bones: afterwards press, or tread upon it: and make it even, until it returns to its places.
Then place a plaster, and a wad on top: and place under the foot a small board with two flat heads.
Then bind it with a foot band of good measure, after you have wrapped it with cloths and whatever else it needs.
When therefore three days or four have passed, then loosen the ligament. For you will find bones that are equal, whether they are broken or displaced. The operation therefore is, as you see.
If some fingers are broken, then restore them and make them equal according to what I have told you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand. Then place your finger like a small stick in accordance with the length of your finger, and let it be slightly wider; then place under the foot this table which I have told you about, and tighten it with a decent constriction.
If however that which is broken from the bones is two, or three, or more, then place over every finger a starlet of its own quantity, wrapped in linen cloth: and bind the board to the lower foot: and let it stand on one head of the board outside the foot's belly, so that it may hold good retention.
And it behooves you, that you do not forget, but consider all that I have said to you in the remaining fractures from accidents which we have discussed: and oppose every accident with what is fitting.
On a fracture of the woman's vulva, and of the breastbone, and of the male thigh bone.
When a woman's vulva is fractured, then make her sit squarely. Then incline it toward the back part of him a little, and it shall be held back.
Then the midwife fills the womb with cotton until it is full; and let a sphere be made in the womb from it.
Then beat the woman and raise her back gradually. This one comes out again, until it is made before the gate of the vulva like a sphere, and the broken bone returns.
Then place a small thing upon his back. When therefore he wants to urinate, remove the catheter with ease, then let him urinate: and replace it according to the way you inserted it at first: then return to his bed.
Let him do this for seven days, or thereabouts, for the bone itself is being restored.
And if you wish, take a sheep's bladder and place over its opening a reed tube, and introduce the whole bladder into its vulva. Then blow into the tube with force until the bladder within the Vulva is inflated, for the fracture will return.
Then it should be filled with a poultice, and stand for several days, according to what we have said, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the breast of a man or woman is broken, then administer in its restoration and its setting that which we have narrated about the bone of the hip.
And the rectum is not concealed in these nearby fractures, which happen little, especially to one who has some study or use of it.
And understand this book of mine very well, because the fracture itself signifies to you in many arrangements the straight way in the restoration of itself, and its constriction: therefore understand.
When a man's phallus breaks, take a goose gullet and insert it into it. Then place over it a bandaging from cloth and bandage it, and let it be left for three days, or about that many, and it will heal if God wills.
On the restoration of a broken bone when there is a wound.
It is necessary for one who has a fracture with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the hip bone, or of the arm, or similar to that, to act quickly, and immediately have him bled; if the conditions for bleeding are present, as we have previously stated.
If a wound is flowing blood, then you should hasten to its severing, so that powdered earth may be placed upon it, if you have nothing else.
Then begin to restore the fracture on that very day; and do not postpone it, unless an abscess occurs.
If however a hot abscess occurs, then dismiss its restoration until the ninth day, until the abscess settles. And you will not approach him on the third day, and on the fourth at all, for you would cause misfortune to happen to him.
If however the broken bone is protruding above the skin and exposed: then it is necessary that you try to reduce it, and level it with your hands with ease and small extension.
If, however, it is not prepared extension of it, and its equality by your hands; then reduce it with this instrument. And there is an instrument which is made of iron, whose length is the quantity of seven fingers, or eight: and its width is according to the quantity of the wound. Therefore, it is necessary for a physician to take from them three, or four, according to the quantity which he needs for that curing in every kind of fracture.
And let it be round: and let there be a small thickness in it, so that it is not doubled upon itself during compression at the time of the operation: and let it have a sharp extremity, which has an edge at its extremities. And let its upper part be equal in thickness from the middle to the lower part.
And this is its form.
It is necessary in this operation that the sharp end be placed upon the prominent end of the bone, and to drive it with one vice until when the bone returns and becomes equal to some equation.
Therefore, try to equalize the extremities of the fracture against each other.
If the extremities of it are broken finely, and does not receive it well with the instrument, then it is necessary that you cut the extremity of that bone until the instrument has power over it.
If you cannot restore them with what we have narrated at all, then cut it with what is fitting from the incisions which we have said; or saw it with a saw in any way possible to you.
Then rasp that which remains in the bone from roughness and tiny bark.
When therefore the bone is set, and the weak one finds after its setting a violent pain that wounds, then know that the bone has not returned to its natural place.
Do therefore that. For you will bring great injury to the infirm limb when your restoration is completed which you make of bone.
Then immerse the cloth in black wine vinegar. And especially if it is in summer. And do not place a cauterizing substance over a wound, nor anything that contains oil: so that it may not cause rot and corruption within it.
Then administer splints at the hour of completion of your restoration of bone. And let the wound be opened: so that with forceps you make a hole in the folds according to the size of the wound.
And with all caution, lest you bind a wound with a fracture. Many times indeed foolish physicians have done this, and they have caused to happen upon their sick either death, or corruption, or zuchem, that is, gangrene. And let your constriction be soft, gentle, different from the constriction of other fractures.
If the wound is bad, or is a large wound, and fears something of the evils which we have narrated occur upon it, and you find pain in the suspended place: then it is not necessary that you put upon it stars. And make for them bandages of hard cloths in place of the stars, and bind him with these.
When however it is after one day, or two days, and you see the wound already beginning to produce pus in it; then remove from above that cloth which you placed over it with wine. Then administer a linen cloth and ointments with which it is our custom to heal wounds, such as ointment of four drugs, and those similar to it.
And it is fitting for you that you loosen the ligament. And consider the wound every day morning and evening until it consolidates and heals.
And it is necessary that the limb be prepared so that pus may run from it downwards with ease.
If many days pass by a wound and it does not heal, and the pus is not cut away from it: then know that there are small fragments of bone there. Therefore, it is necessary that you inquire about the wound with a probe. How many of those abscesses are separated, remove them, and extract them. And those that are not separated from them, and prick the limb, and cause pain to happen, try to cut them, and remove them every way that is possible for you.
If it happens that a wound is festering, or has a discharge of pus, that is, an abscess, or any other kind of corruption and putrefaction: then it is necessary to oppose each of these with what is suitable for its cure, whose preceding account is in its own chapter.
And in that which it is necessary that my speech should stand, and to whom you make your present mind when a bone breaks, and protrudes above the limb, like the hipbone, and of the thigh, and similar to them from the large limbs, it is that you do not presume the traction of it, for many times it happens from this death, even let it go, until it rots.
Perhaps it will fall of itself after twenty days, or thirty.
Therefore, if you deem it necessary, care for the wound; otherwise, let it be.
On the treatment of a knot in the track of a fracture.
Many times this Knot occurs in the course of healing a fracture. Especially that which is near the joints: and it defiles from this figure of the limb. And perhaps it prevents the limb from its natural operation.
Therefore consider if the knot is recent: administer to it medicines which have astringency, such as aloe, and frankincense, and myrrh, and sarcocolla, and acacia, and things similar to these.
Therefore, so that you may receive some of these, or all of them: and make them with a stich wine, or with the white of an egg, or with vinegar: and place them on the knot in a wad, and tighten them over it with a good stricture.
And let the stricture be released, and do not delay it for many days. Then loosen it and repeat another until the knot is removed.
Or tighten over the lead plate itself centered. For lead is a property for removing all that is feared from the limbs.
If, however, the knot has already been turned into stone and is tight, and urgency demands that it be removed; then cut above it from its upper part, and cut away the protruding superfluity; or shave it with certain razors until it is removed; and take care of it until it heals.
On the healing when it is restored, and the limb remains afterward subtle, not according to its nature.
When a bone fracture is repaired, and the limb remains after it subtle, weak: then it does not become unless for many causes. One of these is the multitude of the solution of the ligament and its ligature not as it ought; or because of the superfluity of the stricture of the ligaments, until nourishment is prohibited from running to the limb; or because of the multitude of superfluous embrocation in the wrong hour; or because of the scarcity of blood in the body of the infirm, and its weakness.
And the treatment of this is, to feed the sick person, and make his body soft, until blood multiplies in him. And administer a bath. And introduce joy and gladness upon him.
Then place pitch over the limb so that it may attract the nourishment of the pitch itself. And diligently apply its fomentation with warm water until it drains nourishment and returns to its natural shape.
On the treatment of fractured bones when they are set crookedly.
When it happens that after the healing of a limb there is crookedness, and prominence of the broken bone, or a knot; and it is defiled by this form of the limb, yet the limb is not hindered from its natural operation: then you should not take heed of the speech of him who thinks that the limb ought to be broken again.
And now there have been many foolish physicians and restorers who have done this in our land.
And this operation is indeed blameworthy and very dangerous, leading to death or great fear, so that it may be mortal.
But if the lameness and knotting are recent: then it is necessary that it be embrocated with tepid water, in which softening herbs have been boiled, such as the leaves of altaea, and its root, and melilot, and those similar to them. And let a plaster be made for him with a softening plaster, like dyachilon properly prepared.
Either a mucus of althea root is taken and beaten with chicken fat, or sesame oil: and it is plastered on with this.
Or take fat figs and pound them with dove dung, and similar things which are called from medicines diminishing the consolidation.
And sometimes a knot is loosened with constant, old-fashioned, and gentle friction, which is done with wet hands. And let movement of the limb be given to every part throughout the hours.
If the twisting has already preceded, and it has become strong, and it has been turned into stone, and necessity has been brought about for its treatment with iron: then it is necessary that the upper part of it be cut, and the continuity of the bone be loosened, and what is superfluous from the knot or bone be incised with delicate cutters; and ease should be administered in it with care and diligence.
On speech in dislocation.
Dislocation is an exit of a certain joint from its place. Therefore it is forbidden from movement, and its figure is defiled by the limb. And he causes pain and grievous wounds to occur upon the sick person.
When therefore dislocation happens to anyone, then it is necessary to hasten to its restoration: and do not delay it at all.
For if it is delayed, the place will become a boil, and perhaps with it a reduction of the dislocation.
Therefore, it is not necessary that it be moved or extended during the hour of its suppuration. For often it causes spasms and painful pains.
But when this happens, then it is necessary that you hasten to bloodletting of the sick man. Then it shall be left alone until the abscess rests.
Then the limb will be sutured with warm water and oil. Then it should be reduced with ease.
And every limb is cured with that which comes to its place.
I have indeed arranged the chapters on dislocation, also as before with respect to fracture, from the upper part of the body to the lower part of it.
On the treatment of a dislocated lower jaw.
Two jaws are rarely dislocated.
And dislocation of both occurs according to one of two modes. Or they are removed from their places with slight removal and softened for a short time. Or they are dislocated by dislocation, whole and complete, until they are softened to the part of the chest, until the saliva of the sick runs and he is not able to hold it, nor can he close his mouth, and his tongue is entangled with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it returns to many positions by itself with little effort.
If it is a complete, entire dislocation, then it is necessary that reduction be administered quickly, and it should not be delayed at all: and let the minister hold the head of the sick person, and let the physician insert his thumb into one side of the jawbone's root between its bones, if the dislocation is on one side. Or he may insert two thumbs at once, if the dislocation is from two parts. And the remaining fingers of his hand be outside, with which he may equal it.
And command the sick person to cleanse his jaws and finish them for eating on every part. And the physician sets the jaw and pushes the jaw until it returns to its place.
If the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are involved, then administer an evaporation with hot water and oil until easy reduction of both is achieved.  Do not delay the reduction of both at all, as we have said.
When therefore they return and become equal, and the bone of the infirm is closed, and are not softened: then put above them small cakes of cloth, with cerate which is made from wax: and rose oil.
Then it is bound with ease with soft ligaments.
And let the sleep of the sick person be upon his back: and his head should stand between two pillows, so that he does not move it to the right or left: nor try, or be compelled to chew anything: indeed put his food in a gentle broth, until when the pains are removed, and the jaw is knotted: then eat what he wants, and administer it with ease.
He shall not toil upon the operation of his mouth at eating and drinking, and speaking, until the jawbone is knit together, and has healed.
If the reduction of the two jaws is difficult when they are dislocated at some time and do not return to their places, then often fevers and persistent inflammation occur, and perhaps the patient's belly loosens, and perhaps he vomits pure bile.
When therefore you see this: then know that it is destruction, and many times he who has this dies within ten days.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the clavicle and the extremity of the humerus.
The collarbone indeed does not dislocate from the inside, because of its continuity with the chest. And it is sometimes dislocated to the outside: and that is made known to the sense.
And its restoration is, that he lie down sick on his back, and extend his arms. Then bind the place with your palm firmly, for it will return.
Then place over the same dressing, and pillows, and bind it.
The extremities which follow the elbow and continue with it, are not dislocated, except rarely. If it is dislocated on some day, then it is necessary that it be reduced and made equal according to what we have said, and which has been prepared for you.
Then place over the same plasters and pellets and constriction. And command the sick person to adhere to tranquility and quiet until he is healed.
And with this same treatment the extremity of the Humerus is reduced when it is also separated from its place.
On the reduction of a shoulder dislocation.
Know that the humerus is not dislocated unless in three ways.
One of these is that it be dislocated to the part of the thigh towards the lower region. The second is, that it be displaced to the side of the chest. And perhaps it is dislocated to the upper part of the humerus: and this happens rarely.
And it is not dislocated posteriorly, because of the spatula. And it is not dislocated anteriorly, because of the nerves.
And it is most often displaced and moves downwards towards the groin, especially in those whose flesh is little. Because it goes out quickly and enters quickly.
In those, however, whose flesh is much, there exists the opposite, namely that it comes out with difficulty and enters with difficulty.
And perhaps it happens to some people a blow, or a fall, and the humerus becomes inflamed with a hot abscess, and it is thought because of this, that it has already been dislocated.
Therefore, you ought to test it until you stand upon its certainty, and then proceed in its cure.
And it is known that dislocation is when there is a pulling downward of the shoulder; and distinguish between a dislocated shoulder and a sound shoulder. For you find among them a manifest diversity, and you find in the head of the Humerus concavity, and under the little one at touch the head of the humerus as if it were an egg: and the weak cannot reduce his hand to his ear, nor move it with all movements.
And similarly, if it is dislocated towards the chest, or upwards: then you find a manifest touch, and it is not hidden.
And the reduction of this dislocation is easy when it is recent, or when the boy is weak.
And its reduction is, that the minister raises his hand upwards. Then place your thumbs under its edge, and raise the joint with strength upward to its place: and the assistant will lift his hand and extend it upward. Then he places it lower, for he himself returns quickly.
If however it does not return by that which we have said, and there are many days from the time when the dislocation occurred: then it is necessary that the sick person bathe in hot water, and an embrocation be given which softens and soothes, as if roots of althea, fenugreek, and melilot were decocted in water, and be administered.
Then the patient is laid on his back: and under his chest a sphere and wool are placed, which is equal between softness and tightness.
Then the physician places his heel on the sphere and raises the shoulder with strength, and pulls the hand of the infirm to the lower part.
And if you wish, reduce him according to this method: and it is, that you make present a man who is longer than the sick one, and stand on the side, and introduce his shoulder under the arm of the sick one: and elevate his arm upwards until the sick one is suspended in the air. And another assistant shall draw the hand of the infirm to his lower belly. If, however, the weak person is light: then it is necessary that something else be hung with him, so that he may weigh down. For dislocation immediately returns.
And it is reduced also according to another way: and it is, as if one were to fix in the earth a long piece of wood, whose head be round in shape: like the sleeve of a mourner's robe: that it be not coarse, nor fine. Then soft cloths should be placed under the patient after they have been placed above the head of the wood: and the patient should stand according to the length of the wood.
Then the hand of him shall be extended to the lower part on the other side, and the body shall be extended from the other side with force: for the joint returns to its place with speed.
If its reduction is difficult through all that we have said, then use this treatment: and it is, to take a piece of wood whose length is the quantity of two arms, and its width is the quantity of four fingers, and its thickness is the quantity of two fingers: which has a rounded head, so that the entrance of it into the deep titillus may be eased, according to this form.
Then soft cloths are bound over the rounded head so that it does not harm the weak wood.
Then a plank should be placed under the patient's arm, so that the hand or arm can be extended over the wood up to the lower part: and the wood is fastened over the assistant and arm and extremity of the hand.
Then the arm is placed upon the step of the ladder across its width, and the hand is extended downwards, and the rest of the body is suspended from the other side. The junction then enters immediately.
When therefore the entrance is completed according to whichever way is possible: then it ought to be, that you place under the titillinum a sphere equal in quantity out of wool. Then place a prepared plaster made from ground flour with frankincense and egg white over the entire shoulder, as it is turned upwards.
Then bind with a strip of linen under the bandage; and roll the band above the plaster; and attach its hand to its neck, and let it go, and do not move its hand for seven days.
And it is necessary that little food be given to the sick person until the limb is restored; because it is more rapid to its healing.
Then a larger one is to be placed after seven days, or five, and it is taken out with motion. If therefore it is strengthened and not softened, then it is already healed.
If a joint is dislocated many times, because of the humidity that happens to it, or because of another cause: then it is necessary that cautery be administered to it with three holes, according to what was said before in the chapter on cautery.
If all of this is done, and the ligament is loosened after seven days, and the joint does not hold together, and the plaster is reapplied and tightened repeatedly over it, and it does not hold firm, and falls off, and it cannot be elevated to a higher position: then know that the nerves which are to the head of the humerus, have already been cut or stretched or softened: and know that the joint will never heal in its place.
As for a dislocation that occurs towards the chest and nipple, or to the rear, reduction is carried out with impulse and extension with hands; until it returns, and the rest of the constriction and care are administered until it heals.
If it happens after healing that there is heaviness in the limb and slowness in its movement, then let the sick person use a bath many times, until that heaviness is lessened and it returns to its first nature.
On the treatment of elbow dislocation.
Know that the joint of the elbow is dislocated with difficulty, and similarly it returns with difficulty; and indeed it is dislocated to all parts, and especially to the anterior or posterior.
And its dislocation is not hidden from you: because it falls under sight and touch, according to whatever form it is dislocated. And when you join a dislocated limb with a healthy one, it will be made manifest to you. For the joint is concave and cannot flex the arm, nor touch its own shoulder with it.
And it is necessary that you hasten, and reduce the dislocation immediately, before a hot abscess occurs to it.
For if a hot abscess happens to him, its reduction is difficult; and perhaps it does not heal at all, especially when it is towards the rear. For it is worse than all kinds of dislocations, and of more violent pain; and often death descends with it.
And the restoration of it when it is one of those things that can be reduced, is, that the hand of him be extended with two hands: and his arm be expanded, and the hands of the physician be above the elbow and below it, and he himself impels the joint with the thumbs of his hands together, or with the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Or if the dislocation is to the front, then it returns so that it doubles its hand with its own hand until it strikes with the root of its palm the elbow which is dislocated.
If the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then administer a violent and strong extension; and let two servants extend the arm, and let two others also hold it, so that it may not move during the extension.
Then the arm is rolled back to every part after it has been wrapped above the hand with a double length of cloth or a broad bandage.
And when the physician touches a joint with his hand, he should anoint it with oil so that it may be one of those things which help in the lubrication of the joint with ease. Then drive the joint with a strong thrust until it returns.
And after setting it, it is necessary that a plaster be placed upon it which has astringency and drying power with the membrane of an egg; and let the bandage be tightened decently. And the arm shall be suspended from the neck of the sick person: and let it be released after several days.
Then it shall be loosened. If therefore the joint is fixed in its place, then loosen the ligament from it, and release it.
And if you see the joint not well joined, then apply a new plaster and ligament, and leave it for several days until it is tightened. Then dissolve it.
If, however, heaviness occurs to him after reduction of the joint, and the position is in motion: then administer humidification in bathing, and gentle friction, and compression, until it straightens, or put on above the hip joint, that is, a fat ram's fleece. Then it is bandaged, and it is left on it day and night. Then remove it, and introduce it into the bath. When therefore he sweats, then rub the joint with friction tempered. Then repeat upon the same wound with one and then a second and third bath until it softens.
And if you wish, place over it moistened dung of cow, heated with butter, and bind it on top of it.
Do that several times. For it is softened, and returns to its own arrangement.
On the treatment of dislocations, Al-Zahrawi.
The joints of the hand are often dislocated, that is, the joint between the arm and the hand.
And the reduction of its dislocation is easy. Against the other joints. Nevertheless it is necessary that speed be in the reduction of a dislocation at the hour in which it occurs, before the place becomes suppurating; or else there may happen to it a hot abscess.
And the reduction of a dislocation in this is, that you place Mahassems hands of the weak hand upon a table, and extend the minister's hand: and let the physician put his palm upon the prominence of the joint, and push it until it returns.
Nevertheless, it is necessary to consider, if the palm has already retreated to the belly of the hand: then let the sick person place the back of his hand on a board at extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is proceeding toward the back of the hand, then let the position of his hand be intrinsically upon the board, that is, the inner part of his hand upon the board, so that the hand of the physician may fall upon that eminence of the joint.
If it returns immediately, it is good: and if not, then bind it with a soothing poultice for the abscess: and dismiss him, and do not repeat this.
If he does not tolerate it, and you are unable to reduce it after days have passed, but the joint nevertheless remains according to its tortuosity, and it does not harm the patient except that his hand is softened, and cannot grasp anything: then know that the nerves have been severed or rubbed.
There is therefore no skill in it unless it is tightened with a cautery near its edge. And perhaps it doesn't matter something.
When therefore Al-Maghassi returns not, then place upon him the plaster which we have recounted. Then it is bound and left for five days; afterward it is loosened and left again, and the hand is exercised.
If its movement is hindered and something heavy falls upon it, then soften it with warm water and friction several times until it softens.
On the treatment of finger dislocations.
When a finger is dislocated from any part, or from the palm of the hand, or from its belly: then extend the finger, and drive back the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns.
Then support the head of the finger, and suspend it towards the part to which it is dislocated, and release it for two days.
Then suspend him and stretch him until he is equal to straight on that day of his.
When therefore night has come, bind him according to the same account: and do not cease to loosen him in the day: and exercise him with movement: and bind him at night.
Do this for several days until it tightens.
And similarly do this, if it is dislocated to the belly, hand; and bind him to that part itself, and do with him your first operation, until it heals.
And similarly do this when it is dislocated to the other parts.
On the treatment of a dislocation of the lumbar vertebrae.
When it happens to someone that there is dislocation of the spine of the back or neck, complete, or many vertebrae are removed from their places: then there is no cure for it, because death hastens the weak.
And the sign of this is that the stool of the sick person comes out without his will, and he cannot hold it; and many times some of his limbs are softened, or two legs of him, or two arms of him, or one of them; or a single hip bone is removed from its place.
For it is often removed, which is often removed to four parts.
That which is removed toward the rear, is called Gibbosity.
The cure of this is, as you consider then, if gibbosity happens from childhood: then there is no cure in it, nor is there any healing at all from it.
In those things which happen by chance, or blow, or similar events, ancients have already spoken of modes of healing in lengthy speech. Of which most does not return with profit.
I myself have now abbreviated from that one, which little excuses itself from much of its proximity to my intention: and in the exposition which I have exposed it, and formed its instrument in a different way from how they showed it and laid it out.
Therefore I say that in a hunchback which occurs from the front part, there is no remedy or cure.
And similarly in that which is done to both sides also.
And it is not cured from these things, except that which happens on the back properly, as I say: and it is, that the sick person be extended on his face on a level platform near the wall: and that a wet covering be spread under him, so that his chest is not harmed.
Then a straight fixed piece of wood is to be placed in the pit in the ground, at the end of the foot, about its head: and another piece of wood about its feet at the other end of the foot: and let the servant hold the wood, and let it not be fastened in the pit. And another assistant shall hold another.
Then wrap above the head of the sick person, and under its hairline a soft, firm bandage: and extend the extremity of the bandage to the wood which is at the head; and bind it there.
Then bind another ligament above its groins, and above its knees, and at its hip joints. Then gather all the ligaments and bind them in a piece of wood that is at his feet.
Then let every assistant extend the limb to the part of the wood, and let not two ligatures be removed from their places where they are fixed; however, they shall not be fastened, as we have said.
And the physician places his palms upon the vertebra with strength until it returns; or he places a board upon it. Then he binds his feet upon the table until he returns.
If it does not return through this treatment, then take a board whose length is about three cubits. And the cavity in the wall of which we said was near the infirm, place where the end of the board may enter. Then place the middle board over the Spina. And let the physician place his feet upon the other extremity. And he should bind it well until the joint be contracted and return to its place.
Then if you wish, operate with a lathe which is wrapped with your hand: and it is, as you fix in the earth at the head of the sick person at the farthest foot two beams, whose length shall be the length of one arm: and at his head at the farthest foot two beams.
And let the length which is between every piece of wood be one palm; and now a hole has been made in every place, through which a rope runs; and let the whole wood be firmly fixed in the earth very much, so that it may not move at all.
And a round piece of wood is inserted; and it is a whorl in which the ligament revolves in two holes of two pieces of wood.
And at its end is a hole, in which wood is fastened, whose length is a palm with that which turns: and in two other pieces of wood there is similarly that of it.
Then bind the ligaments which you have bound in the chest of the sick man to the band that is at his head: and the ligaments which you have bound in his legs to the band that is at his feet.
Then let there be at every lathe a minister, who twists his hand with linen, with which the lathe is turned; and the physician straightens the spine, according to what we have said.
This is the form of the tourniquet that follows.
Then after the sponge has been returned and the place is leveled, it is necessary to place a dry plaster with egg white. Then a plug. Then place above the plaster a star made of wood, whose width is three fingers, or thereabouts. And its length is the quantity which it takes up of gibbosity, and above the part of the healthy vertebra.
Then a bandage is applied with the ligament which we have said. And let the sick person use fine nourishment until he is healed.
If some elevation remains in the place at the end of healing: then it is necessary that softening and soothing medicines be administered, along with the tablet which we narrated for a long time. And now a plate of lead is administered in that.
And sometimes there occurs a prominence on the last vertebra of the back: and it is thought to be dislocation through it, and this bone which now protrudes. Therefore it ought not be presumed that this medicine should be given to him, for perchance it may happen to cause death.
On the treatment of a dislocated hip joint.
Know that the joint of the ankle and the joint of the shoulder never occurs except for a dislocation only; nor does it occur to them as happens to other joints by slight removal and concavity.
And indeed the joint of the Ancha is dislocated in four parts. Which is, because it is displaced forward and backward.
It is indeed most frequently dislocated towards the interior, and little towards the front and back.
And the treatment of dislocation inward is: because when you join the sound leg to the unsound, it is longer; and the knee of it is more prominent than that which is sound, and the unsound cannot double its foot at the groin; and there is a place following the groin, an abscess with hot pus, because the head of the hip has already come there.
And the sign of him who has a dislocation toward the outside is that those things which are contrary to these happen to him.
And the sign of one to whom a dislocation has occurred anteriorly is that he expands the sound leg according to its complement; however, he does not double it without pain which is in the knee: and if he tries to walk, he cannot go forward over it: and his urine is retained, and his groin suppurates, and in walking his foot falls upon his heel.
And the sign of one who has a dislocation to the rear is that he cannot extend his knee, nor can he bend it before he bends his groin: and his leg is also shorter than the other: and his groin is softened, and the head of the hip is at the place of the ilium.
The reduction of this dislocation, however, as you consider it, is, if the dislocation is old, which has already aged with the one having it. Then if you administer a reduction of it, and it remains according to its disposition: then there is no treatment at all in it. Therefore it is not necessary that presumption be made of him entirely.
In that case, in which the dislocation is recent, and it belongs to one of the four kinds of dislocation: then hasten to this, so that you will join the joint, and extend it both inwards and outwards, and move it with your right and left hand: for perhaps it will return, and does not need other cure.
If this method does not work, then it is necessary that you prepare a strong assistant, and he should extend the leg from its lower part: either with his hands, or with a bandage, which is tied above the knee: and another assistant should extend his hand from above, so that he may insert his hands under the pubic bone. Then he binds with a soft ligament over the root of the hip, and holds the extremity of the other ligament.
And let its extension be either from the front part of the groin to the shoulder blade, or from the back part to the back.
And let the extension of all of them be one vice, until the sick person is lifted with his body from the ground and remains hanging.
And this kind of extension is a common kind of the four kinds.
If therefore the dislocation returns with what we said, it is good: and if not, then it is necessary to do all kinds of that which I shall say about proper cure.
When indeed the dislocation is inward, it is necessary that the sick person be laid upon his sound side in reducing it. Then he places a ligature over the root of the hip, where it is between the head of the hip and the place which is under the groin. Then extend the ligament upward from the groin region to the higher part of the body, to the clavicle area.
Then let another minister take strong arms and reduce the large place of the weak hip, extending it to the outside with vigorous extension. For now it returns to its place.
And this kind is easier of cures than the other kinds, in that this member is reduced.
If however he excuses himself from you and does not obey you for the entrance with this kind of cure at all: then it is necessary that two feet be bound together along with a strong, soft ligature above two heels and two knees: and let the length of each be four finger widths from its fellow: and let the weak leg be extended more than the other by the quantity of two fingers.
Then the sick person should be suspended over the head of a log, which is in the house: and let its length from the earth be the quantity of two arms.
Then command a strong young man to support the head of the hip: and let another support him who is weak when found: and let another young man push, supporting the hip with strength, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
In setting it properly, when a dislocation is external, it is necessary that the sick person lie on a stool, as we have narrated in one with hunchback. And bind the ligament above his leg, which is weak properly, and above his chest.
Then two cords are placed, one at his feet, and the other at his head. Then a piece of wood is to be placed in the middle of the footbed, firmly fixed: upon which cloths should be wrapped that it may not harm the patient; and let the wood be between his hips so that it may not be pulled down when extended.
Then let every assistant extend to his part, and the physician equalize the reduction with his hand.
If therefore he yields to reversion, it will be good.
And if not, place upon the same table, and press it as we said about the prominence, equally. Nevertheless, it is necessary that the sick person lie on his sound side.
And when the dislocation is to the front, then it is necessary that the leg of the infirm be stretched quickly: and it is according to this same story on a platform: and the physician puts his right hand palm over the groin of the infirm. Then he constricts it with the other hand, and with that constriction puts it extended downwards towards the lower part of the knee.
And if the dislocation is to the rear: then it is not necessary for the weak one to be extended downwards and raised above the ground: rather, it is necessary for him to be placed upon a hard object, as is fitting, as it also happens if the dislocation of his arm occurs outwards, according to what we said about his lying on two planks: and it is over his face, and the ligaments are extended, according to what we recently said.
And it is necessary that a compress be applied with a board also over the place to which the joint goes out, when reduction is completed as it ought.
And the sign of its return is not hidden from you: and it is, that you extend the two legs of the sick person: and when you see them equal, and the sick person tightens his leg, and expands it without excuse: then know, that now the limb returns, as it ought: then join the two hips, and put a plaster, and bind with an imemati, that is, a wheel: so that it may not move anywhere at all: and the sick person adheres to quiet for three days, or four.
Then loosen the ligament and the plaster, and compare the leg with the other; then if you see them equal in condition, then know that the dislocation is now firm: therefore discharge the sick person to walk.
And if you see any softening: then return, and apply a dressing to it, and bind it according to your first constriction: and leave it for three days.
Then dissolve it and make it slow down in walking on both sides for several days, until it is well fortified.
On the dislocation of the knee.
The knee is dislocated in three ways. It is dislocated outwards, inwards, and downwards, namely to the rear.
And it is not dislocated anteriorly.
And the sign of its dislocation is, that you bid the sick man apply his leg to his hip. If it does not adhere with the hip: then you shall know that the knee is dislocated.
And the restoration of all types of dislocation is to make the weak leg straight, so that it may now extend its leg if it can over it, and adhere your back to its face: and place his foot between your feet.
Then cause his knee to adhere with your palms, and straight make them between your fingers upon his knee. Then apply with your palm both sides of his knee with strength. And another attendant shall extend his foot until the knee returns to its place.
And the sign of recovery is that the leg adheres to the hip with ease, not with effort.
Then place a plaster over it and make the leg adhere to the hip. Then tie that with a thread for three or four days. Then loosen it.
And let not the sick person walk for several days until he is healed.
If reduction is refused to you, then administer a strong extension with ligaments, the previous account of which in the treatment of the ankylosis, until it returns.
On the treatment of calcaneus dislocation.
Sometimes the calcaneus is removed by a small incision, and sometimes it is dislocated according to the completeness. And its dislocation is made either inwards or outwards.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you see the heel bone swollen, proceeding towards the part to which it is dislocated.
The treatment of its removal is easy restoration: and it is, that it be extended with facility with hands, and be made equal, until it return.
In the care of it when it is dislocated according to the completion, it is necessary that you make the patient sit straight; and let him hold him strong by the posterior part of his back, in the middle of it.
Then hold his foot with your right hand from the upper part of it, and with your left hand from the lower part of his foot in the place of the heel.
Then draw the foot toward you with your right hand. Then with two left stitches.
Then extend with the left hand and drive the breast of the foot with the right hand towards the leg without effort.
Do that twice, as we have narrated.
Then press the chest of the foot toward the leg in a third position, and you pull the thread.
If therefore it returns in one or in two according to this mode, and you see the foot equal, it is good: and if not, then repeat the operation upon it; for it itself will return.
If you are prevented from reduction by that which we have narrated: then make the sick person lie on his back on the ground, and fix a small piece of wood firmly on the ground, so that it falls between his hips: and now you have enveloped him with cloth, so that he is not harmed.
Then let the assistant take hold of his hip: afterwards let another assistant extend the foot, either with his hands or with a bandage that is tied above the ankle. Then let every attendant extend against the extension of his own comparison: and a pad be standing between the two hips of the infirm holding him, so that the body of him is not drawn down in the extension.
Then the physician reduces the dislocation with his hands, and another assistant holds the sound leg downwards. For a dislocation returns with speed.
When therefore a dislocation returns, and the health of its restoration is declared to you: then place a plaster and a wad, and tightly bind it with ligaments, and tie the foot with a ligament to the leg.
And you ought to be careful or fearful of the nerves which are above the heel bone, so that the ligament is not too strong over them and harms them.
Then let him be dismissed after two days, or three. If the ligament is softened, tighten it; then loosen it on the third or fourth day; and forbid the infirm from walking for forty days. If he attempts to walk before that time, it is not safe unless the dislocation breaks apart above him, and it is corrupted, and does not receive healing afterwards.
If it happens to him that he has a hot abscess, then you must administer to him the same thing which we mentioned before in another place concerning its cure, and an ointment, until it is removed.
On dislocation of the toes and their treatment.
It is necessary that what is dislocated be put back in place with little extension without labor; and indeed this is not difficult, but easy.
If the dislocation is in some joints of the back of the foot: then it is necessary that the sick person make his foot sit upon a level place of the earth, or upon a board: and he stands as if walking.
Then you stand, and place your foot upon that which projects from those joints. Then press that with your foot with strength until it returns and you see it leveled, and there is no prominence in its place.
Then place under his foot a board which should hold the whole foot, having two heads. Then bind it tightly with a bandage for three days. Then loosen it and make him rest from walking for many days until it tightens and is secured by the reduction.
On the kinds of dislocations with a wound or fracture.
When something happens from this, and you try its healing and restoration, many times death follows: and for that reason it is not fitting that he should presume to cure it, of this kind, unless he is prudent in the art, long used, merciful, pious, slow, not bold, nor presumptuous: and that he should use in the beginning medicines which calm hot abscesses only: and dismiss the sick by divine judgment. Unless you hope for salvation from death with gentleness of sickness, and in which appears something of hope. Therefore, attempt the reduction of it immediately at the beginning of the matter, before a hot abscess occurs.
If therefore the limb returns, according to what we want, then administer a treatment that calms the abscess; and care for the wound with that which is fitting for it from drying ointments.
If the dislocation is with a fracture and these occur in separated bone fragments, then attempt the removal of them, and do what we said in simple ailments from what precedes regarding their places.
And beware according to your strength, and guard yourself from entering the way of fear: according to what my prediction has preceded for you.
For that is better for you with your Creator, and more lasting for your glory, and more healthful for your body among those in your time.
