To you, my dear son, I have completed this book which is the last of the medical science together with its fulfillment, and have made an end through its explanations and by its declarations. And it came to me in a vision that I complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery.
And because the work of hands is strong in our region and entirely foreign everywhere else, the science has perished and been cut off, and nothing remains of it except the small descriptions in books of the ancients that hands have moved. And from this have come the errors and the vanities, and closed are the attentions and alienated is the science.
It seems to me that I want to revitalize together the arrangement of this treatise according to the method of exposition and clarification and abbreviation; and will come together the forms of the iron instruments for cautery, and of the other tools of the work with the adjustment of the explanation and preparation of them, as is necessary.
And for the reason that no good masters of the craft are found in our time, the art of medicine is diminished. And it is necessary for those who engage in it to excel in the science of anatomy, as Galens says, so that they know the judgment of the members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations, and have knowledge of the bones and nerves and brains and the number of them, and the movement of the moving veins and the resting ones, and the place of their origin.
And for this reason Hippocrates says that the name with the name is much, and with the work is little; and especially in the art of manual skills.
We say at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things previously mentioned should beware lest he fall into error and harm people;
Thus, I have wanted many times those who engage in this science and abandon themselves to their knowledge and experience.
For I saw a foolish doctor who cut the abscess of the scrofula on a woman's neck, and cut the arteries of the neck; for which so much blood gushed out that the woman fell dead at his hands.
And I saw another doctor extracting a stone from a man's eye, and the stone was large; he carried away with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
And I had already been called to treat him, and saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and knew well that if it were cut out he would die.
And I saw another doctor who took in charge a duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the break there was a wound;
and the doctor full of ignorance holds the fracture on the wound with splints by strong binding, and leaves no salve to the wound at all, and leaves it thus for the end.
and he commands that he does not undo it;
and leaves it thus until the leg is entirely swollen and the foot comes to destruction.
I was called to come to him, and I hurried to come and untie the leg; and when I untied it, he was at ease and felt no pain.
But nevertheless, the corruption was already confirmed in the member, and could not be healed;
and the corruption did not stop from spreading through the limb until the limb was completely lost.
And there was another doctor who burst the infected abscess and then inflamed it due to the malice of his authority.
For a chancre, when it is pure of melancholic humor, should not be touched with iron unless it is in such a place where one can completely remove what is corrupted.
And for that reason, dear son, you must know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: that is, where there is danger in many positions;
and I will show in each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
For that reason, it is necessary that you be careful so that the foolish doctor cannot speak ill of you.
So take up your weapons in discussion, and undertake your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best method so that by the grace of God you come to salvation and be praised;
and leave the appalling diseases of severe sickness;
and remove your doubts from that which makes you fear, and have faith in yourself so that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galens says in some of his admonishments: Do not take on a bad disease, lest you be called a foolish doctor.
I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapter is about fire cauterizations and medicinal cauterizations, and the chapter is ordered from head to toe;
and about the forms of ointments, and the tools for cauterization, and everything that is necessary for the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about cupping and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things;
and the chapter is organized and the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and torsions, and similar things;
and it is ordered from the head to the feet, and about the forms of the instruments.
In order that we remember the work, it is necessary that I speak of the quality of the aid and the harm of each temperament.
I say that the qualities of aid and harm are the longest discourse and most subtle science and the secret responses;
and about this, many of the wise spoke and agreed upon it;
and they blow slightly with their words, for I fear the length.
I say that cautery universally aids all complexions where there is matter, except for two complexions: that is to say, a hot complexion without matter, and a dry complexion without matter.
In a complexion that is both hot and dry with matter, some have differentiated and said that cautery is of great help; and others said the opposite: that cautery is not useful for disease that comes from heat and dryness. For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be treated for hot disease by heat, nor by dryness;
and says he who said the opposite that cautery provides great help to a hot and dry disease that comes into the bodies of men. For when you compare the body of man and its moisture to the temperament of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this statement. For I have found it to be true by experience.
And in any way, let no one interfere except those who have experienced it and who understand through long usage the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of human temperaments, and the dispositions and causes of their diseases, and the occurrences and the span of time;
we have no fear of other temperaments, especially in cold and wet diseases. And all the physicians assembled and agreed on the cautery.
And know, son, that cautery together with fire is among the secrets of treatments, and of greater goodness than burning medicine.
For fire is simple, and does not affect any other member except the one that is burnt, and does no harm to another member unless by chance.
Burning medicines move from one member to another in the distance and cause severe diseases in the member that require difficult healing; and perhaps kill the patient.
The fire, because of its height and the goodness of its substance, does not do this, if there is not an excess.
And this have I found by experience and by the length of service and the study that I have put into the art, and it was upon the truth of things;
and for this I excuse myself for the length of the speech, for it does not please me to take from you the secret that is contained in the fire, and the quality of the work, how it cures the diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; or receive it in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agreed on when the cauterizations should be done, and chose spring.
And I say that cautery is appropriate at all times, because the harm coming from below is removed by the help of the cautery; and especially if the cauterization is for pains that are severe and urgent which cannot wait until a time when greater harm may come to the limb.
And never think, dear son, as foolish physicians do; for the disease that is healed by cauterization has no return; and they say it thus;
and they say it thus; but it is not as they believe, for cauterization is merely a medicine that changes the temperament, and dries the humors which are the cause of pain, and is more effective than other medicines due to the speed of its action, and for the power of its effect and its sovereignty.
And it is possible that the disease may come sometimes according to the temperament of the patient and the site of the illness and its property;
and the excesses are gathered in him by the acquisition of foods and similar things, unless cauterizations are administered where there is little excess and moisture, such as dental cauterizations for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why cauterization is called the last resort of medicine, and it is true;
but they do not believe that cauterization is effective after medication, but their understanding is false, and cauterization is the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of treatment in any disease and they are ineffective, then we apply the cautery, and it works.
Then it is clear that cautery is the last resort in medicine, not according to the intention of foolish doctors.
The ancient said that cauteries of gold instruments are more gentle than those of iron, and they said this only because of the quality of the gold and the excellence of its substance;
and they said that the fire of cautery does not cause putrefaction, but this is not true because I have experienced it, and have found that it is true in some people;
and cauteries of gold are gentler than those of iron, just as they said. And nonetheless, when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it cools down quickly;
and if it is heated too much; so they do with fire; and thus there is enough hindrance.
Or I have ordered this chapter from head to foot, so that the way may be easier to find.
This cautery is useful for moisture and cold on the brain, and it is used twice due to a disease called "soda," and because of various humors that descend from the head to the eyes and ears, and for a multitude of dreams, toothache, and throat pain, and particularly for all diseases that come from cold, such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged by a dissolving medicine modifying the head for three nights or four, according to what the strength and age and habit of the patient can endure; and then shave the head of the patient.
And then have him sit crossed between your hands, and place his hands on some weight;
afterward put the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and there where your middle fingers will come, bleed from the joint then heat the cautery which is called "olivary", of which this is the form: and place it on the marked spot with ink, and do so by relaxing and tightening your hand little by little while turning it around; then lift your hand gently, and examine the spot if you see the small bone; and if you do not see it, repeat the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you;
after take a little tar, and put it in water and moisten cotton inside, and place it on the spot, and leave it for three days;
after put on moist cotton in butter; and leave on until the scald is removed; after treat the wound with the ointment which is called "tetrafarmacon," until it heals.
And the ancients said that the longer the wound remains open, the more it is cleansed; and for this reason, it helps to move.
And some say that one should let the cautery remain so long that part of the bone is burned, and then remove what is burned from the bone, and it should be cleaned.
And others say that the cautery should be left on for so long and pressed so hard that it abates the bone as wide as the thread that women put in their spindles so that the humors are moved out;
and one must leave the wound open for a long time; afterwards it must be cleaned and soaked.
And these two methods of cauterization do not seem to be entirely good in every case, except in some people where there is a cause for fear;
and it seems to me that I should leave it alone;
for the joint is weakened by the continuous dislocations of nature, as we testify in other limbs;
and likewise when the joint of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization is safer and better for me, and with this method I work then towards a healing assembly.
When throughout the head comes chronic pain, and lasts for a long time, then should the patient use berries and pills which are called "cochie", and of purging of the head and oils and plasters; and if the cautery that we have mentioned before is done to him and it does not work. Be careful if the shoulder of the patient is of strong nature, and that it is not too cold; then cauterize below that cautery a bit as we have said above. After make cautery on each corner of the head up to the bone, as we have said before, and make a cautery at the place which is called "vasselz"; and there are places where one applies leeches; and hold your hand so that you do not see until the bone: the patient feels much greater pain in this cautery than the others, and I will speak of it elsewhere;
and it is necessary that the cautery for the horns be finer than those used to cauterize the middle of the head, and this is the form:
For the cautery of the head When in one part of the head comes sudden pain, and the disease spreads to the eye, and the brain is cleansed with purgative medicines, and all other treatments that I have mentioned in the section on diseases are done, and none of this helps: then he makes cauterizations according to two methods, namely with aqua medicinae and with fire.
The cautery with aqua medicinae is such that you take a piece of elder, and remove the bark and pound it once to twice at the shoulder, and then make an incision in the temple where the pain is so that you can place the piece of elder under the skin;
and when it is placed, you bind it well and keep it that way for twelve hours; and then you unbind it and remove the piece of elder, and leave the wound in this manner for two or three days; then apply cotton soaked in butter until the pus comes out.
After the treatment of ointment until he is healed;
and if you wish to use some of the burning medicines that I have written about in the twelfth treatise on burning medicines.
The cautery of iron is according to this method. Heat the cautery of which this is the form:
And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a ball where it has a bit of curvature, and in the middle, there is a small appearance;
and place it on the painful area, and hold your hand and turn the iron slightly, until half of the thickness of the tumor is burned;
and lift your hand so the artery does not burn, which is on the outside, and let an abundance of blood flow out.
After put cotton on the awl of the nail, and place on the site for three days; then put moistened cotton in butter, and then clean the site of ointment until it is healed;
and if you wish to cauterize this migraine with the cautery which is called "cultellare," at the entire tip, and beware of cutting the artery in this recent migraine.
of migraine
When you treat a migraine as we have said before in the divisions of diseases, and it does not help, and you see that the previous cauterizations with medicine and iron do not suit him, then you must heat the cautery which is called "cultellare" until it is white;
and sign beforehand on the painful area a line of half a thumb in length, and remove your hand once, and hold back so that you do not cut the artery and do not reach the bone;
and beware of the jaw that moves when one eats, and the nerve should not be in sight so that it does not move and spasm does not come to the patient, and beware of the flow of blood from the artery when it is cut, for cutting has great fear especially for those who are not experienced and trained; and leave the work halfway;
but I will tell you how to stop blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it applies in this book.
And if you see that this cautery does not help the illness, and the patient endures it, cauterize him in the middle of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed;
and if you wish, administer the cautery that we have described in the chapter of the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has two blades; and this cautery is better than the other and more helpful.
of the pain in the ears from cold
When pain from cold comes into the ear, and one has applied soluble medicines and other treatments that we have mentioned in the section, and the pain does not subside, then heat this cautery which is called "point," of which here is the form:
After puncture all around the diseased ear, or around both if the pain is in both, and move a bit away from the root of the ear once you have marked the spot to incise; and have ten points around each ear;
after treat the place until it is healed.
of the torture of the mouth
Torture which must be treated by cauterization is none other than those that are moved by phlegm, as we have said in the division of diseases;
and do not apply cauterization to those that come from dryness and nerve spasms.
When you treat this form of torture that is moved by phlegm through hydros and purgatives from the head and gargles, and if this does not work, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear, and the other a little outside the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips;
and place the cautery on the part that appears healthy, and make a cautery directly at the top of the ear about an inch below the tip of the ear, and another one on the temple as long as a thumb; and leave the cautery on top until the middle of the heart is burned;
and this is the form of the cautery:
And it resembles the scalpel that we have mentioned before, but it is a little finer and it is necessary that the blade be a little thicker;
after treatment the place as I have said before, until it is healed.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, and it does not help, and the patient has no fever, then make four cauterizations: two on the two horns of the head, and one in the middle of the head, and one at the place called "vasselz" as we have said before, and the last cauterization on the mouth of the stomach;
and let it be treated as we have said before.
of lethargy
For this disease, it is necessary to give the patient large decoctions and pills that purify the brain;
after raise the head of the patient all, and put on the occiput the plaster of mustard which is written in the treatise of plasters;
and this is the manner of the cautery: do it as I have said.
if he is healed thus, it is good; and if he is not, make three cauteries around the head descending to the neck, and have one inch of space between each cautery;
and treat it as the others, and if you see to adjust, and the patient is enduring, make one cautery in the middle; and if necessary, two others on the two horns, and treat until it is healed;
and let the cauterization which is called "olivare" be as I have said before.
It is necessary that the head be cleansed of sores and what we have said before;
afterwards, raise the patient's head, then apply the cauterization in the middle of the head and on each horn, and one at the back and three on the spine of the neck;
and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is strong, apply four cauterizations on the spine of the back; and he leaves until the most of the heart is burned, and lifts his hand; after the cure until he is healed, and let the cauterization which is called "olivare" that we have mentioned before be done.
of the epilepsy
The epileptics should not use cautery except those who are phlegmatic, and one must first modify the brain with herbs and other treatments that we have mentioned in the section when the patient is old and suffers from prolonged medication.
And if it is a child who cannot endure it, give him gargles and chewing, modifying the brain often with good food;
afterwards, cut the head in half, and make the cauterization according to what we have said before, and the cauterization on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is strong and enduring, give him cauterization as I have said for one who has paralysis and weakening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauterization be olive-shaped according to the method that I have described.
If the patient is angry, make a fine cautery on him according to this method:
When by the cause of melancholy the superfluities or the moisture is corrupted and phlegm becomes thick, then cauterize with such cauters as we have said to him who has paralysis.
And if by the cause of melancholy the superfluities are inclined towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him to drink something by which the brain may be purified, according to what is mentioned earlier in the division.
After raise the head of the patient; after make the linen bandage well made, just like the circle, and place it around the head;
and the patient sits crossed, and be well held on all sides;
after present the ointment, and it is worth using wool grease of old barberry; and heat it over moderate fire, so that when the doctor applies it, the patient can tolerate it; after empty the circle inside around the head, and let it cool;
and do this for the patient once a week with other good treatment, until he is healed.
For if you wish to cauterize it, make several points all over the cautery.
This manner of cautery moistens the brain evenly;
and then put on moistened cotton with butter and goose grease.
of the eyelid sweat When sweat comes first to the eyes by the signs that I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient something purifying for the head, and keep it away from all moisture, and make him sweat in the bath several times on an empty stomach.
After that, instruct them to lean their head back, and perform a cautery in the middle of the head, and make two cauterizations on both temples if the descent of the water is to both eyes together, or one if it is to one eye;
and cut all the veins and arteries that are beneath the skin completely with the cautery, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple;
and beware of excessive bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stop it with whatever power you have.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision how you will stretch it;
And sometimes a cautery or hot iron is used under the two rear bones.
and one sees that it is due to cold phlegmatic excesses, then he makes the cautery that I have said at the beginning of this chapter below the eyes: I make a cautery in the middle of the head, and two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries with the hot iron under the two bones; and if more is needed, then cautiously cauterize above the eyebrow with a very small cautery.
When you treat it according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give the patient three nights of decoctions to drink; after the king's head, and make a cautery in the middle of the olive-shaped cautery; and make two cauteries of the cautery which is called "clavilis" on the two eyebrows, a bit below the hair;
and be careful of the artery so you do not cut it.
And this is the form of the cautery which is called «clavilis»:
When the membrane of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery which is called «olivary». of which here is the form:
And if you want, make two cauteries on the two eyebrows as long as the eyebrows are;
and do not leave your hand there except until a third part of the paper is burned, according to the method I have said.
of the hair that pricks the eye Sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyes turn inward and prick the eye, and a cautery is performed according to two methods: that is to say, with fire, or with burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they have grown and are even, then place the patient in your care; after place on the eyelid a figure that is like the leaf of myrtle, and let the beginning of the sign be near the hairs;
then place moistened cotton in egg white and marjoram juice on the eye, then heat the cautery of which this is the form:
after cautery on the figure that you have marked little by little many times, until the keratin is burned in that place;
and the signs of the health of the work are that you see the eyelid retracted, and the hairs raised at the corner of the eye;
then lift your hand, and leave it this way for three days, then place moistened cotton in butter until the heat is removed; after the treatment of anointing until he is healed.
and if afterwards the hairs come back and the scab softens then restart the cautery on that same spot just as you did first;
and if the hairs are weaker, then cauterize until the scab is lifted to its natural place and is even, and the hairs do not prick the eye.
The fire cauterization is when you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow until they are long and even, then make a shape of mirtle leaf from parchment;
then take French soap and live charcoal, of each a third, and grind them together well; and do it quickly so that it does not cool down, then spread it over the shape as you are made like the leaf of myrtle, and put on the paper of the eyes; and if the illness is in one eye only, then one should operate on it, and if in both equally; and put beneath the eye moistened cotton in egg white;
and the head of the patient should be in your hand and place your finger showing on the medicine, and press the pouch and the swelling every time the patient feels a bite from the medicine, for it feels like a bite from fire.
When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine at its due time. And when the bite has passed, then lift the area with water, and observe if you see the paper lifted as though it were lifted by the constraint of fire or by incision; and if it is thus, then it is well.
and if it is not so, then apply more of the medicine on the spot where the medicine has not worked, until your work is equal and your eyes are set in place;
then apply moist cotton in butter until the burnt area falls off, afterwards clean the ointment area which is called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healed.
And if it is necessary that you guard your work well with great care so that none of the medicine falls into the eyes.
And if the parchment becomes soft afterwards, and the hair pricks in the eye, then restart the medicine on that area which is softened by the parchment properly, just as you have done before; then clean it until it is healed;
and this is the form of the myrtle leaf:
and know that the eyes of men are different in size and smallness, and according to this be your constraints;
and do not divert the right way from him who is studying this art.
of the treatment of fistula by cautery
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not help, then it is necessary that you apply cautery according to this method.
Instruct the patient to place his head on your healthy [part]; and hold the patient's head between your hands in such a manner that it does not move, nor does he turn his head;
after put moist cotton in egg white or in juice of parsley on the eye;
after heat the cautery which is blue:
and it is shaped at the head like the form of an arrow feather, along with which should be the cautery;
if you want, let it be pointed from one end to the other, and if you wish, let it also be like a tent;
but nevertheless, this one that is shaped is much better for your work.
after press the fistula if it is open, and draw out the pus, and dry it; and if it is closed, then open it, and draw out the blood forcefully;
After place on the hot cauterize very strongly, and hold your hand at the cautery part of the knave under the eye, so that your hand does not act foolishly; and place the cauterize in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
If you come to the beginning of the cautery until the bone, it would be well. If not, then repeat the cauterization once more, and again if you need to, and leave it for three days;
after put on moistened cotton in butter, and treat it with a drying ointment until it is healed, and if forty days pass and it is not healed, then apply an aggressive corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and treat it according to what would come in his chapter.
And there is a method of cautery for fistulas that some of the ancients mentioned. Understand about fistula, and open the area; after put in the cut some subtle camphor of this form: and apply an amount of three grains of lint; and hold your hand on the camphor firmly, and the patient must not move at all, so that the melted lint does not run into their eye;
and it is necessary to put on the patient's eye cotton moistened in egg white or in oil;
the lint thus adheres to the area of the fistula, and it heals with marvelous sanitation.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have mentioned, it is good. If not, it is necessary to administer the puncture to the naval area, and to bring the fistula back to the proper place in the body according to what is appropriate.
cracks in the lips Very often sores appear on the lips which are called "hair," and especially on the lips of children.
When you treat these sores that we have mentioned in sections, and the treatment does not help, then heat the small knife-shaped cautery according to this form:
And he quickly places it in those cracks until it reaches the bottom;
after treating it with cerote until it is healed.
When an abscess comes to the root of the tongue or in the throat, or in the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, it afterwards becomes putrid and rotten and is inflamed and turns into a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, and it does not help: then you must have the cautery according to the size of the fistula; then apply it to the opening of the fistula, and hold your hand until the hot iron reaches the bottom of it, and at the deepest part;
and do thus once or twice after the treatment of what we have said in treatments, until he is healed;
and if it is treated thus, it is good; and if not, it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines and that does not work, then place the head of the patient on your knee; after heat the cauterize in such a manner that you place a cane on the tooth;
and put inside the hot cautery quickly, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth;
after lift your hand and restart the cautery according to your will;
after the patient fills his mouth with salty water, and holds it for an hour and rinses outside.
And in this manner, the tooth that was moving is confirmed, and the softened gums are restrained, and the corrupted moisture is dried.
of the pain of the teeth
When tooth pain comes from cold, or there is cold in the gum, and medical treatments do not work, then it is necessary to use cautery according to two methods: and cautery of butter and cautery of fire.
Cautery of butter is such that you take cow's butter, and the end in a iron or brass spoon; after take cotton and wrap on the tip of a tent, and smear with boiled butter, and put on the painful tooth quickly and hold until it is cooled;
and thus do often until its virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and if you want, smear wool and cotton with cold butter, and put on the painful tooth, and place hot iron on it until the fire reaches the edge of the tooth.
The cautery with fire is such that you take a cane of iron or bronze, and it should be thick so that the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient;
after heat the cautery, of which the form will come afterward, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled;
Do this often, for the pain will be removed on that very day or the next.
And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good butter during the urgency of this cautery, and then rinse forcefully;
and this is the form of the cautery:
And make a cautery on the head as you wish, and according to what you are able to do;
and this is the form of the probe:
Of the scrofula When the scrophules are of phlegm and cold moisture, and are not responsive to digestion through medicines, then heat the cautery as described afterwards comes the form, and it should have two openings for the smoke to exit on the other side of the cautery;
and put the hot cautery on the abscess once, or twice if necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess;
and if the abscess is small then apply the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it like this for three days; and put on cotton moistened in butter until the burn is removed;
after care the area with ointments and bandages until it is healed.
When the moisture overcomes in the nasal passages, and especially when this comes from a cold temperament, then it is necessary that the patient be purged first with dissolving medications;
after you make cautery at the root of the throat, and beware that you do not go as far as the throat itself, and do not burn the heart but only a little.
after you make another cautery at the junction of the neck to the top of the spine, and let the cautery which is called "clavile" be as we have the form before;
and treat the area as we have said before until it is healed.
when all the diseases of consumption are from cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and the disease is old, then you make two cauteries on the forearm in their places; and the other cautery within the breast between two nipples;
and let the cautery which is called "clavile" be according to the form which was previously described.
And if you wish, make a cautery by piercing with the entire cautery which is called "poin" of which the form is mentioned earlier in the disease of the ears;
and let the points be up to thirty, or around there.
After treating the area according to what was previously said, let the cauterization be three inches according to this form:
And for that reason, the cauterizations are lighter, because you do three at once.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot remain in place, instead returning and dislocating again with slight movements as we have experienced, then you must first treat the dislocation repeatedly. After, place the patient on his back and on his side; then lift the kernel that is inside the titillite with the fingers of your left hand;
and if the joint is dislocated inside, then heat the cautery which has two horns thus is the form:
and cauterize the area until it penetrates to the bone, and the figure of the cautery comes together with four cauters;
and for this reason, the cautery with three prongs is used, so the figures of cauterization are six cauters;
and the nerves are according to the subtlety of a tent, and this is the form of the cautery which has three prongs:
And sometimes it is placed on this one nerve, which is why there are eight cauters.
After place on the cautery powdered willow with tar; after make rest the patient, and do not move the limbs for a long time until they are well rested.
And if it is dislocated above, which rarely happens, then make a cautery on the thick part of the collarbone, or many cauterizations at the base.
For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
When cold and much moisture come into the stomach to the point of changing its natural temperament, and catarrhs are multiplied in him, and customary treatments do not help, then it is necessary that the patient lie on his back, and extend his legs and arms. from this point onward make III cauterizations I below the nipple of the breast by the quantity of a coin, to all the cautery nail-shaped, and II cauterizations outside the two sides such that the figure of the cauterizations be at three angles, and have such space between one and the other that they are not joined together when they discharge pus;
and let the cauterizations be so perfect that they reach both parts of the tumor, and let the figure of the cauterizations be according to this form without adjustment:
And if you wish to cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form;
and he who will have fear of this cautery, cauterize by pricking and bleed upon the stomach one spot according to the quantity that you wish to remove; then cauterize with the entire cautery which is called "point".
After the care of the treatment that we have had before, until he is healed.
When the liver comes to be in pain from cold and moisture and excessive windiness, so that it is forcefully removed from its natural temperament by the excesses; and the patient is treated with what we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit him, then the patient must be bled on his arteries; and bleed from three cauteries according to this form and this figure and this quantity upon the liver, outside the hypochondria, where the ribs of the person come;
and there be space between each cautery the thickness of a thumb; and let the cauteries be along the length of the body, and do not press your hand too much over the entire cautery;
and let only half of the heart be burned, and let the patient stand straight on his feet;
and if he cannot, let him lie down, and stretch his legs, and raise his arms;
And if your will is to cauterize these cauteries of the cutellaire, if you are subtle and wise in the art, and beware that you do not burn the whole heart, for you would dry out the entire body; and it does not reach the eyelash, for the veins are very delicate there, and you know this to be true.
When it has abscessed in the liver, and you want to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: if it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain but not too severe;
and if it is in the membrane, then the patient feels intense pain.
And when this treatment is necessary, the patient must be shaved on their head;
and then apply a poultice to the place where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which resembles a ray, of which this is the form: And cauterize with the cautery until the blood is burned, and it reaches the scab, until all corruption is entirely gone;
after the treatment according to the treatment of the wounds until he is healed;
and it is not appropriate that anyone but those who have studied long in the art of medicine should use this cautery, and by whose hands these diseases have sometimes been cured.
Then he can boldly work, and yet it seems to me that it is better to leave it untouched.
of the cautery of pleurisy
The ancients said that one should make plasters from the roots of aristolochia, and in this manner: take a root of aristolochia, the longest that you can find, and let it be dry, and as thick and as long as your thumb; and the wick in oil, and apply it to fire, and cauterize the cautery between the jaw and the neck, and two small cauterizations a bit downward in the part which is below the beard;
and two cauterizations between the fifth rib and the sixth, slightly declining towards the back; and one cautery in the breast, and another on the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two on the sides of the breast outside the cautery which is between the two shoulders;
and do not press your hand, but do it openly as in smelling.
And some ancient ones say that some men use a fire cautery resembling a razor, and they heat it and place it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess; and the pain leaps out, just as we have said about the abscess of the liver.
But in this work, there is fear that the patient may die immediately, or an ulcer may come which cannot be healed.
of the mouse
When you treat the disease of the mouse in the ways we have said for the divisions of treatments, and it does not help, then there are three types of cautery that are all good.
And one method is that you make three cauteries, or four, along the length of the ulcer, according to the shape of the liver cautery that we have said before;
and do not press your hand on the entire cautery, and let the patient lie on their back;
and another method of cautery is that you heat the cautery which has two prongs, just as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder;
and lift the area where the ulcer is, or where the cut of the patient leans towards the left, and let the elevations by which you lift be according to the curvature, according to the length of the body, and the cauteries should be according to the width of the body.
After you put the two burning nerves until the heart is pierced from the other side, and then pull out the cautery, and thus there will be four.
And if you want, then cauterize the entire cautery to three nerves.
After the treatment when it has discharged pus for a long time, and this is worth more than the other treatments previously mentioned.
Cautery is not useful for dropsy, except in the method which is called "asclytes.
When you treat it according to the methods we have said in divisions, and your treatment does not help, then you must make four cauteries around the swelling, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one at the armpit. and let the cauteries be close to the surface of the heart.
After leave the cautery open to expel pus for a long time, and do not neglect the patient's treatment after the cautery; and healing would be hastened, and the two intentions will be together with the help of God.
The form of the cautery for the belly should be the key that we have shown before; and the one for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what is set forth above.
When the feet are swollen in one who is dropsical, and are full of yellow water, you must cautery on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring toe; and lift your hand with the cautery without turning.
And do not go too deep with the puncture, so as not to break through the yellow bile, and let the cauterization be according to this form:
After make on both legs two cauteries on each leg at the point of the kneecap; and let the cautery be long, one below the knee in front and the other on the outside, in the middle of the leg;
and leave the cauteries open for a long time without treating them, so that the pus may come out;
after treat it with the other treatments that we have mentioned.
When a discharge from the bowels comes from cold and moisture, such that the retentive and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by means of treatments; and you see the patient well suffering and of strong virtue, then make a great cautery on the stomach according to what has been spoken of here before about the stomach cautery, at the circular cautery; and four subtle cauteries around the buttocks to every subtle claw cautery, and two cauteries on the thighs.
And if you see the moistures abundant and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the wrist, and a cautery on each thigh, and two small cauterizations near the large one on the stomach, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good assistance.
of the treatment of hemorrhoids
When the hemorrhoids are in the anus, one or more, and are old and consist of large cold and moist corrupted humors, and are treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not help, then make cauteries: three on the spine of the back, those which are completely outward below the navel in a triangle, and one cautery below the buttocks two fingers;
and if you think that his stomach is chilled, and the meat does not cook, and swelling of the face is seen, then on the face one makes a large cautery on the stomach as was said before, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen with the entire key-shaped cautery; and leave the cautery open for a long time. After treating, heal the place until it is healed.
When you cut into the hernia, heat the cautery that resembles a razor, and then place it fully ablaze on the cut hernia; and keep your hand there until the cautery reaches the beginning of the vein, from which the skin is short;
do this once or twice, and if there is much hernia, then cauterize each one as we have said; after the treatment of beneficial ointments until they are healed;
and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the ulcer, it will have greater aid.
When the patient cannot endure surgery or incision, which we will discuss in its place, then comes such a disease that cannot be healed except by cautery.
When an ulcer comes to someone, and it is open and discharges pus and corrupted moisture, then you should probe it thoroughly with a fine instrument, and be sure to know the entire extent of its corruption.
After heat the cautery that resembles a razor, and insert it into the fistula according to the amount of tent that has entered, and repeat the cautery until the corrupt and putrid flesh is burned, once, or twice or three times, according to the quantity needed;
and beware of burning the nerves that are inside, and the large veins.
if the fistula extends to the bladder and the intestine, then beware of these areas, and do not perform this outside the fleshy part, and consider that it is not penetrable;
after care the place until it is healed, and if the wound is cauterized, and the materials are removed for a long time, then know that the wound is entirely healed;
and if the materials are not removed, know that the wound is deep, and the bone is corrupted at the root; and thus like one of those we will mention in its place.
When cold pain comes to the testicles, and from great windiness, and he shows no interest in women, then you must make a cautery on the testicles on one side and the other with the key-shaped cautery that we have mentioned before;
and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauters in a line, and they will provide greater help.
of the bladder When the bladder is weak and thin from cold and moisture, so that the patient holds back urine, then make a cautery on the outer part above the bladder, where the hairs of the groin begin, and to the right and to the left, and let each cautery be as long as the width of one thumb;
and make the cautery on the back outside, or two if you need them;
and let the cauteries be in the shape of a chisel as previously described.
When the matrix is cold and moist, and because of this does not allow conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their periods are delayed; and when they come, she feels great pain: then it is necessary that three cauteries be made around the swelling, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries outside the back;
and let the cautery be key-shaped, as we have said.
When the viscous moisture descends to the hip joint, and for this reason it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together;
and the place of the separation is found at the joint, then you should cauterize the patient on the hip joint with a cautery resembling a circle, and mark in front of the spot around the joint as it turns, so that the joint is inside the circle;
and let the cautery iron be such as that with which one has cauterized the stomach.
and if this cautery iron is not present, make three large cautery irons from olive wood, and let the cautery iron be as perfect as all the others;
and treat it until it is healed.
of the pain of the hip When pain comes to the joint of the hip, and it is due to cold and moisture, and the patient is treated with what we have said in the section on treatment and the treatment does not work, and the disease is old: then you must purge the patient of the thick humors with foul pills, or other good similar pills. After you make the cautery;
and the manner of the cautery is according to two methods: that is to know together burning medicines and fire cautery.
Fire cautery is according to many methods, of which one is as follows:
that you apply three triangular cautery marks on the thigh bone according to this form, and make them deep and large, and leave the width of a thumb between each cautery mark, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped;
sometimes one makes a cautery in the middle of the top of the thigh, which is why there are four according to this form:
And if you wish, then cauterize it with the circular cautery that we have mentioned before in the dislocation of the hip;
but do it in such a way that the circle contains the entire hip, and all the thickness of the flesh be burned.
And this is the method used for sciatica, when the pain remains in the hip, and does not reach the thigh or the leg.
And if it extends to the thigh and the leg, make two cauteries there where the patient says the pain is, and one cautery above the ankle four times, on the left side a bit;
and let the cautery be chisel-shaped, and let the thickness of the flesh be burned;
and if the patient feels that the pain extends to the toes of the foot or nearby, then cauterize where they feel the pain three or four times with the cautery called "point. And if necessary, do more to him;
And if he feels that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, apply a cautery with a knife-shaped or circular cautery, and be careful in all your cauterizations not to leave the cautery so long that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause more harm and contraction to the patient.
And I myself have seen many who made a cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they left it so long that the leg was entirely swollen, and the foot likewise, and all the foot became perforated and corrupted. After a purgative from which he received death.
And if the pains are in two parts together, make a cautery on one and on the other, according to this manner.
And the wise say about the cautery of the hip, here are the methods: make such an iron and let it be at the head as thick as a date stone or a little less, and let it be with crossbars and let there be between each crossbar the space of one inch knot;
and let the splints be covered with two parts, and also like knots, and there be one well-made iron strap;
and that is the form:
and let it be heated until it is all red and gives off sparks, and then place it on the hip joint of the sick side, and turn it towards the healthy side;
and cauterize it once with a red-hot cautery and leave it for three days; and then make a plaster of lard, and leave the wound open for a long time; after the treatment of anointing until he is healed.
Albucasis says that we use little of this cautery because of the fear of its gaze, and we see few who use it;
and nevertheless this is of the good cauteries, which he can endure, and where it is needed.
The cautery of burning medicine is such that you make the instrument to interweave where descends the margin of the door, and it should be of glass or iron on one side long, and in height have two fingers, and have between each the quantity of the thickness of a thumb; and they should be open below and above, and join together according to this form:
After place it on the hip bone of the patient lying on their healthy side, and press your hand very much on the hip bone; After throw between the two circles of the hot awl which is heated by fire one pouce, and leave it for one hour of time, and let the patient endure the heat and the aridity of it.
For he finds a biting as if from fire;
and when the biting has passed, lift your hand with the instrument and remove the awl of gentle heat, and leave it this way for three days, and apply butter so that what is blackened from the scalding be removed; and leave it for three days so that the pus may come out;
and this would be the final aid after the treatment of ointments until he is healed.
And if the pain has spread to the thigh or to the leg, make the instrument that holds it straight according to what you have done in the hip equally;
and this is the method of warm water, and I have written it in the treatise on the correction of medicine. Take alkaline and quicklime, an equal amount of each, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot. where there is a small opening to allow the tip of a razor to enter;
where there is a small opening to allow the tip of a razor to enter; and place another well-leaded pot on top of that pot, and put alkali and heat and sweet water on it, until there is enough to cover the powders when you have thoroughly mixed it in your hand;
and leave it that way until the water drips down into the leaded pot, then take all of that water and pour it over heat and alkali as before.
And then it will be very useful and is administered in many works of medicine and in cauterizations of other members.
For it performs other works like fire, and has other medicines with which one cauterizes the hip well, such as turpentine and anacardi oil and heat with soap, all these things mixed together.
And Galien tells us of a treatment where a man was cured of the pain in his hip and sciatic nerve, and he praises it greatly, and says that no other treatment was done, and that he was healed in one single time when this treatment was performed, and he bathed as he instructs hereafter.
And it says in such a manner that you take fresh and dry green litharge, and grind it well with some fat, and apply it on the hip and on the thigh and on the leg where the pain is, and leave it.
and leave it for three hours, in such quantity that the patient no longer feels the burn.
And then make him enter the bath until his body is a bit warmed, and make him enter the bed, and the pain will go away entirely and he will be healed.
And know that no one should use such cauterization or medicines, if not after the evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's fat, it helps greatly;
and the cautery should be done in such a manner. Take wool and anoint it with old oil, and place it on the indentation that is between the big toe and the other one which is called the instep.
After take dried goat's fat, and apply it to fire until it becomes charcoal, and put it on the wool, and leave it until it melts;
and do again in this way, and do not stop doing so until you think through feeling that it reaches to the hip, and that the pain is ceased;
and this manner of cautery is called "goat's cautery.
of the pain of the back
When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or by percussion or by too great an evacuation, or by similar cold matter spread out, none of these appearances is suitable for cauterization, because it comes from the infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary after the patient has been cleared of foul pills or other similar things, that one makes three lines marked with encaustic on his back where the pain holds, and in each line five cauteries or more according to the strength and quantity that the patient can endure;
and let the cautery be done according to the cautery which is called "point";
and if you wish, make three or four cauteries with the medium-sized key cautery according to this form:
Often this disease comes to small children, and the signs of the beginning are that they have tight throat when they wake up, and fear; and you find at the back of the spine and in us the appearance that comes upon the other spines.
When you see this and wish to cure it, then cauterize it with the circular cautery according to this form. So that the cautery marks each part of the spine equally.
And if you wish, then cauterize around the spine with a sharp cautery two lines or three, and let the points be close to each other.
Afterwards, treat the area until it is healed according to what we have said, and beware that you do not apply cautery to a swelling that is in spasm of a nerve.
of the pain of the joints
When joint pain is from moisture spread throughout the body's members, and when pain comes to the feet, which the physician properly calls "gout," and when it is of cold cause and cannot be cured by medical treatments, it is treated by cauterization in this manner:
make many cauterizations around the joint of the foot, and let the cauterizations be olive-shaped according to this form:
And if there is need that you press on the sole of the foot, then make a cautery over the entire area called "point". And if the pains come down to the knees and other joints, which often happens, then make three or four cauterizations on each knee, one in each part, all olive-shaped;
and if you need more, then do more, but do not hold your hand out any longer than it takes for the heat of the heart to be burned.
And if the pains descend to the knees and the back, then administer the cautery that we have mentioned in its chapter.
and if the pains are in the hands, then make points around the armpit two inches;
and if there remains any pain in the fingers, then make points on each joint and on the palm of the hand;
and if the pains come down to the ribs or up to the shoulders, then cauterize each part, and give good care to the patient and apply medicines.
For if you give him good care and you purge phlegm, he will be healed by the grace of God.
When rupture comes in the groin, and the bowels descend to the testicles and this is new, then it is necessary that when you wish to treat it, he should not eat on that day; and he uses things that loosen the stomach, so that the bile descends from his stomach;
after make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to stretch his armpits until the shoulders are aligned, and repeatedly move them with your hands, and stretch from beneath the joint above the wrist bone, and make a sign that resembles half of a circle above the body;
then heat the cautery of which this is the form:
until it is white and it gives off sparks. then repeatedly move the joints to their place; and the minister stretches his hand so they do not return backward;
and work well the thighs of the patient, and put under him a cushion and another on the thighs, and another on the part that holds the hands;
then put the cautery on the spot with your whole hand, and hold it straight and keep it there until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, then repeat again until you come to the bone; and beware carefully that the blister does not burst when you make the cautery; that you do not burn it too much; and that by this the patient does not die, or suffer other evils.
And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
And it is necessary that the cauterizations for children be subtle according to the measure of eggs, and for large people also large according to their measure;
after three days, treat the site of the butter cautery until the scald is removed;
after the treatment with other ointments until it is healed, and the patient lies forty days on his back until the wound is well sealed;
and it is necessary that his nourishments be reduced for a long time, so that the scabs do not rise when he begins to walk around in rooms.
And after forty days, when he wishes to rise, have an attendant provide a well-made bandage, and wear it for another forty days;
and let him have good rest, that he labors little and guards against too great a fullness of drink and food, and of raising his arms too high;
and when he follows this instruction, he is entirely healed.
And I will say hereafter the treatment of cutting in his chapter.
When ruptures occur in other parts of the body and are noticeable, and you see that they do not grow larger, then apply fire cautery according to its size, and let a third of the area be burned; afterwards, treat according to what we have said;
and some of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized with a three-cornered cautery in this form:
but first mark the place to be treated and make a line across the width above the rupture, and another outside, and hold your hand in the middle of the whole key-shaped cautery.
But the first cauterization is lighter and gentler.
of old pain in any limb When pain comes in any limb, whether from falling or striking, and that pain lasts a long time, and the cure of medicine does not work, then it is necessary to cauterize it with the cautery which is called «point», and let the cauterization be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and its weakness and its virtue and its location for twisting and its pain.
If he is healed from the first cautery, it is well;
if that name, restart another cautery on that spot, for such is the custom that it must change to the nearest member, therefore you must make the cauteries until the patient is healed.
The mixed ailments are sometimes cured by cautery with great help, and especially the diseases that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
When you see to cauterize, beware if the disease is in its beginning, and if it is treated according to what we have said in the division, and does not cease nor remain, and you fear that the corruption may spread throughout the patient, then make five cauteries on the head: Place one on the ninth part of the head, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hair; and two on the two horns, and one behind on the haunch.
and keep your hand there until the cauterization reaches the bone, and until the scabs come out so that the vapor of the thick humors can escape;
and cauterize on the thigh according to what is stated before.
And if the infection is spread everywhere; and if it is clearly lost, then you must cauterize it with these cauters that we have mentioned at the head, and one cautery on the neck, and two cauters on the spine of the neck, and six cauters on the spine of the back, and one large one on the rump and another nearby, and two on the two shoulders; and two on the nails, and two on the tendons of the breast, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands;
and be careful of the nerves that are on the heel, that you do not burn them;
and sometimes one makes a cautery on the bone of the wrist, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that when I do more cautery, I provide more help, and it benefits the patient;
and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as much as a healthy person would, because the body is already entirely corrupted.
And it is necessary that the cauteries be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in methods of irons.
After treatment, apply the place with flour of violets and honey and other treatments until it is healed.
When swelling comes to any limb and is treated with medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healed, then make cauterizations on the limb according to the size and smallness of the limb;
and let the cauterization be slightly penetrating into the thickness of the skin; then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
And sometimes a cauterization is made to the hand and foot and back, at the nerve that moves the limb, and thus the swelling is removed;
and in any case, no one should intervene if they are not knowledgeable about the limbs and the pathways of the moving nerves of the body.
When the disease which is called "albaras" is awakened, and medical remedies are of no use, then cauterize it with a cautery point perfectly, according to the quantity of the thickness of the tumor, until the whitening is removed, and its color changed;
then treat with flour of vetches and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of pigeon and blood of lark, of each one part; and mix everything together, and bind it with a cloth, and apply it to the place until it is healed.
the treatment of chancre by cautery
When chancre comes at the beginning, and you want to stop it, then cauterize it with an iron that resembles a circle, all around the edge of the chancre.
And furthermore, the wise say that one should also make a cautery in the middle of the ulcer;
and all the same this does not seem good to me, for I fear that it may become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already seen it happen sometimes;
and a more direct thing is that it be cauterized around, with the cautery which is called "circle," as we have said much about cauters.
When someone has a disease which is called "adubelati," and it delays in healing either due to the excess it causes or due to the age of the patient when they are decrepit (that is, too old) and have little blood, or due to the time; and you wish to hasten its healing: then cauterize around with many small cauteries while pricking; after leave it thus. For she will hasten to heal.
And if you wish to pierce it with the entire cautery, then heat the cautery in this manner which is its form:
And place your hand in the middle of that disease which is called "adubelati" until the cautery has pierced the heart, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels it externally in such a manner that the course of the putrefaction is alleviated.
After the treatment until he is perfectly healed.
Another kind of disease there is which is called "corrodens," and it is nothing other than a consumption of the limb, for it consumes the limbs as fire consumes dry wood.
If you see this disease in a place that can withstand fire together with cautery, then heat the key-shaped cauteries very small and large, according to what is appropriate for the place where the disease is;
after cauterize all around until you reach all the corruption, and none of it remains, so that everything which is corrupted be removed.
And then leave it for three days, and put on the cauterized areas burnt plaster mixed with oil until the burns from the fire are removed, and all the corruption.
Afterwards apply ointments that promote flesh growth.
And if you see after three days that healthy flesh does not grow, it is good;
and if not, then repeat the cautery on what remains of the corrupted flesh.
And this mangement has sometimes been a medical treatment used instead of fire cautery;
And yet fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already spoken of the medical treatment in the section: take it when you need it.
of the hemorrhoids that come to the feet Often it happens that on the feet outwardly grows a disease which is called "clos" according to our intention, and it is a large swollen thing that hurts the foot.
And the cauterization of this disease is according to two methods. That is to say, fire cauterization, and hot water cauterization.
Fire cautery is such that you heat the cautery to the length of a goose feather, and it should be made of good iron in a size that can surround the nail on all sides, and have fine edges;
then place it completely hot on the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until you reach the base of the nail; and leave it thus for three days until it begins to expel pus; then make a poultice of crushed wild mallows with tar, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail will fall out and be uprooted from its roots.
Then clean the ointment site scraping flesh until it is healed.
And if they are turned outward on the body, and this often happens in hands and feet, then you must apply a cautery of hot water; and it is done in such a manner: take a tube of reed or iron, or a goose quill, and place it on the nail and the growth, that is to say, warts; and put the cane on so that it wraps entirely around, then place a pot of warm water, and hold your hand well, and press your hand by turning so that the edge of the cane comes to the root of the nail, and can find the warm water way deep down to the root;
and let the patient suffer the bite of the warm water for an hour; then leave it thus, and it will be uprooted entirely from its roots.
Thus do one after another until you strengthen all those that are of the body, then treat them with ointments that generate flesh.
When someone shakes from cold or nerves, or from quartan fever or another, then you must make four cauterizations on the spine of the back, one cautery between each vertebra; And for the cautery on the breast, and on the stomach with the olive-shaped cautery;
and let it tremble, and the health hastens from the cold disease.
Sometimes there appear on the surface of the body blisters or smelly pus-filled boils that come from corrupted large materials.
and it is necessary at first when they appear to make a cautery on each head of the pustule: a fine cautery of myrtle wood, with which the tip is held in the fire, or of long birthwort root, or a lentil-shaped cautery.
And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear, in this manner, and they cannot grow deeper inside, but the excess from which they come is broken, and they are healed;
but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
many times there are great flows of blood from the artery that is cut in the wound that comes to the surface, or in the incision of the abscess, or in the cautery of the limb, and similar things; and it is a very difficult thing to stop.
And nevertheless, when this happens to anyone, you must quickly place your index finger on the wound of the vein and press very hard until the blood is calmed beneath your finger, and no drop comes out;
then put the olive-shaped cauteries of various sizes into the fire until they are all red;
Then take hold with your finger, large or small according to the wound and the place where the artery is cut, and put the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cautery so long that the blood is stopped.
And if it jumps out when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then take hastily another of the cauters that are in the fire.
And do not stop doing this one after the other until the blood is extinguished;
and be careful not to burn the nerve that is nearby, and that no other harm comes to the patient;
and know that when blood flows from an artery, it cannot be easily stopped unless by one of the four methods we have mentioned: either by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by tight binding with thread, or by applying medicines that have the power to stop blood; and let it be tied and held firmly.
Who administers the treatment of tightly binding with cloths or placing burning things upon it, or other similar things, does not profit if the pus is not present.
And if this happens to anyone and there is no physician or medicine present, then he should place his index finger on the vein wound as we have said, and stretch well until it remains above the wound and above the vein; and he should not move it, but moisten it with very cold water often until the blood is frozen and thickened and coagulated;
and make preparations in advance for what he may need of cauterizations and medicines.
We have told you in the first chapter all diseases in which fire cauterization or burning medicines are required, and the indications and causes and substances and forms of the cauterizations;
and I have placed this chapter from head to foot, and I will go in this chapter by the same way so that one finds more easily what one wants.
And before I begin this, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of cauterizations, and for that reason greater caution is needed.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I admonish you that you do not undertake folly. For many kinds of people come for treatment. such cases come from those who hate their illness so much that they change easily due to the madness they find in their disease, and the greatness of its malice; and of these one must have fear.
And there are some who give their sense and say: wait, I am a surgeon"; and the patient is despised.
It is not fitting that you consent to those who come to you with this manner, but place greater trust in your honor than in your desire, and do not open foolishly but wisely what you are certain of, and from which you can gain praise;
and use prognosis and indication in the treatment of your patients to whom health is restored;
and this will help you to acquire good reputation, and glory, and memory of praise.
Very dear son, May our Lord grant you good understanding and righteousness, and if he wishes to inspire you with the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Or I have ordered this chapter by dividing it into sections, according to what is before in the chapter of cauterizations, that I have divided from head to foot, so that you find more easily what you will need.
and you know that this disease comes often to children at birth, and when it gives too strong a pull on the child's head;
and sometimes this comes from a hidden cause that one does not know.
And I have never seen this disease except in children, and in all those I have seen, death was swift; and for that reason, it seems to me that I should not tire myself with such cases.
And I saw a child whose head was filled with water, and the head swelled each day until it could no longer support it;
and so moistened was it that it became dead, and this moisture is gathered under the bone above the spleen, between the heart and the bone;
and the work is such that if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscess is small, you split the head in the middle with a wide cut;
and let it be as long as two fingers, until the moisture flows;
and here is the form of the spatula:
If the moisture is thicker, and the abscess is larger, make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
and if the moisture is under the bone, and the signs that you see are the seams of the head open on each side, and the fluid jumps out forcefully when you press it with your hand from inside, and this does not return to you: so you must split the head into three splits according to this manner:
And after the incision, extract all the moisture out. after extracting the splits with cloths and powders, and put wine and oil in them, and leave it this way until the fifth day;
then untie it, and treat the wound with tents and ointments, and continue to extract the head equally, and give the patient dry meat of little moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed.
and another method of incision is that you look where the swelling of the abscess is greatest, and where the fluid has gathered;
for sometimes it is in front; sometimes behind; sometimes on the right; and sometimes on the left.
Cut then the abscess when it is open, and the filling of the pus, and cut it according to what you are able;
and beware that you do not cut the artery; and if blood flows, the patient may die from blood loss and the evacuation of moisture.
When it happens that someone has a disease called "catarrh" in the eyes or nose, and the illness is old, and the medical treatment does not help, then the final remedy is cauterization along with cutting the two arteries.
It is then necessary, when you cut the veins, that the patient tilt their head back; after he rubs the area with a coarse cloth until the arteries appear, then the patient tightens his neck around the entire cloth; then look where the vein is located, and the areas from one to the other are behind the ears, and they are placed there;
then mark the areas to incise, then cut one and the other with a sharp spatula of two parts, until the cut reaches the bone, and this should be done across the width of the head.
And if you want, place the scalpel below the artery and cut above it, slicing also as two times across.
And when the vein is cut, the blood jumps up continuously outward.
and if the artery does not appear upon feeling, then you must measure the space of three fingers, then mark to incise and cut until the bone;
and the amount of blood that should be let out is six ounces, and perhaps a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the replenishment of the artery;
then look at the wound: if any piece of the scab remains on the bone, cut it off so that no warm abscess comes, then dress the wound and bind it, and continue the treatment with ointment until it is healed.
The term "emigrainne" does not appear to be standard in any known medieval medical text or in modern medical terminology. It seems possible that this could be a misspelling or an archaic form of a word related to migraines, which are severe headaches. If we assume it is meant to refer to migraines, then "de emigrainne" might loosely translate to something like "about migraines" or "concerning migraines." However, without more context, providing an exact translation or meaning is challenging. When old emigrainne and acute catarrh come from the moisture of tears and heat in the temples and old sode forsenee and similar things, and it is treated by methods of medical cures and all that does not help him, then we extract the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have recounted.
And the method of their extraction is that the patient should feel behind the hairs of his temples and pay attention to the artery that opens in the temple, for it can be well felt by its pulsation, and it is a little further out than in some men who are too cold;
and if it is replaced, then the patient tightens its neck with some cloths, then rubs the area with a rough cloth, and washes the area with hot water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatule from which this is the form: then gently cut the skin until you reach the artery, then pull it up with tweezers, and carefully separate the tissues that are beneath it on each side;
and if the artery is thin, then turn it with the tip of the hook, then cut it from that part according to the quantity of two fingers. For if it is not cut, then the sinew does not jump completely altogether.
and draw blood from six ounces down to three;
and if the artery is large, then it is necessary that you tie it in two places with a strong double thread of silk, so that putrefaction does not come before the healing of the wound, and there be bleeding of blood;
then cut the excess that is between the two ties at the same hour, and then, if you wish, cauterize it with a knife cautery until the head is cut to the bone;
and this is the most difficult work, if the patient does not have fever and is of a hot temperament. For cauterization is a help to finish the moistures: for this reason it is of greater help to the moistures.
For the extraction of arteries, it is necessary to fill the place with old cotton and put well-made bandages on top;
and when they are untied, be sure to use dry medicinal treatments that promote flesh growth and bandages until it is healed;
and if the artery bleeds as much as it does while you are working on it, hasten to cut by cautery, or use vitriol in its place and apply it to your hand so that the bleeding may be stopped; and if you do not have that available, place your thumb on the area until the bleeding is congealed, and wash the area with cold water until the bleeding stops, and apply a binding as appropriate;
and there must be one inch of thick space between the two knives, and then when you have marked the two places to join, and you put the burning iron on until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in two places; and they should be separated between the two shoulders because it is not fully soldered with this cautery everywhere;
and this is the form of the cautery:
and that which is better and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this sharp cautery of two parts, but let the cutting edges be well thick to retain their heat longer. For when the instruments are too weak, they hold less of their heat.
tears and when the tears of the eyes descend from the veins that are on top of the head due to fire, and medical treatment does not help at all, and you see the face of the patient redden, and feel a trembling on the forehead as if shivering; and when the eyes are inflamed and moist so that the hairs of the eyelids fall out, and the eyelids are heated, and scorched by the heat of tears, then this treatment is needed. And the ancients called it "treatment for contusion," and it is that you make behind the patient who has this disease the hairs on his forehead fall out, then make III cuts on the forehead equally according to the length of the forehead;
And the ancients called it "treatment for contusion," and it is that you make behind the patient who has this disease the hairs on his forehead fall out, then make III cuts on the forehead equally according to the length of the forehead; and let one of the cuts be like two fingers right in the middle of the forehead going down to the nose, and the other two on the sides above the eyelids, and beware of the arteries that are on the two sides above the eyelids;
and remove your hand from the connection of the two jawbones, and let each wound be the quantity of three fingers across.
and have prepared a piece of sponge and much cloth to wipe the blood, then apply the sharp spatula from both sides in this form:
from the incision that is next to the temple up to the second incision; and peel all the heart that is between the two cuts to the entire surface that is on the bone, then make another cut from the middle incision to the other second one, and then extract with this spatula. so place in the first cut the instrument which is called "cultellar", and it is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is smooth, not sharp, and this is its form:
And place the sharp side towards the diseased flesh of the heart, and the smooth side towards the bone, and insert it until it reaches the middle cut.
And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes so that the incision is continuous up to the one that opens from the heart, and then make another one in the middle cut up to the other side;
and then draw the blood evenly, and press the area for the blood taken;
then put in each fissure a wad of old cotton, and place on top cloths moistened with wine and oil and goose grease, and ensure that hot abscesses do not come near;
and on the third day loosen the bandage, and apply a large amount of warm water, then clean it with basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other treatments used to treat wounds until it is healed.
When acute catarrh often comes to someone, and you see the eyes dull and small, and vision weakened, and the eyelids burned; and the hair falls out, and on the head it causes sharp pain, and the patient sneezes; then you know by these symptoms that those materials and the catarrh do not come from anywhere else but from many veins, and the cause that is there, is this.
And you instruct the patient to sit behind his forehead, then make a large incision in the middle of the forehead, and another on the wide side. And begin from the temple on the left side to the temple on the right side, and let the incision go as far as the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move in eating;
and when the bone is exposed, wipe all the blood with a sponge, and then separate the two edges of the wound and put old cotton and linen threads in it; then bind above with cloths moistened in wine and in oil, and guard against a hot abscess;
when it is removed, then you must rub the bone until cartilage begins to grow, then treat it with drying substances, which promote the hardening of the cartilage.
In such manner: take two parts of flour of wheat, and four parts of colofonia, and make a plaster; and administer it to these wounds to promote the hardening of cartilage throughout.
of the swelling of the ears
Everything that falls into the ears is one of the four things: or grains, or beasts, or stone from mines, or similar things such as iron; or seeds, such as lentils, beans, peas; or flowing things such as water and oils and similar things.
When a stone or any other kind of thing that does not fit in the ear and does not grow in the ear falls into it, place the ear in the sun.
If you see the stone, then distill a little violet oil or flaxseed oil, then apply extraction; and make him sneeze with condysium, and plug his nostrils when the sneezing comes, and place around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and pull the ear upwards.
Much of the force comes from this treatment;
and if the force does not come, then the administrator should perform extraction with subtle tweezers, of which the form is here:
If the force comes with the tweezers, it is good;
if not, then perform the extraction with a subtle needle of small double thread;
and if it does not come out by this means, then make a tube of tin and put the end of the tube into the opening of the ear tightly, and plug what is around the tube with soft wax so that air cannot enter with the tube; then strongly pull the thread, for often it comes out as we have said;
and if it does not come out in such manner, then take glue from the egg and take the tweezers, and put on some instrument that is sharp for this purpose, and put a piece of cotton around; then press the glue on the stone or whatever it may be, and pull out.
and if it does not come out by all the methods we have mentioned, then hasten to cut the ear before a hot abscess or spasm comes.
and the method of the incision is that you first bleed the patient from the cephalic vein, and draw blood according to the measure of his strength, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear in the fat where it hangs. and let the cut be like a moon, until you come to the stone, then remove it according to your ability, and suck it quickly with your mouth;
and treat until it is healed.
And if it is grains that are inside and it swells, then administer extraction;
and if it cannot come out, then administer the spatulum gently according to this form: and administer an incision of that grain.
But do not do this when you think the grains are moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces;
then extract with fine tweezers and the sucker, as we have said, so that the extraction is eased.
In the case of fluid that flows into the ear, it is necessary for the patient to use sneezing first, and plug the ear with old cotton. And lie down on that same ear where the fluid is. If it jumps out through that, it is good.
If not, then take many stones according to the length of your thumb, thin and light, and warm them a bit in the fire; and place them in the patient's ear canal, and strike on one of his feet from the other side, and hit with another stone on the stone that is in the ear; and do not stop striking stone upon stone until all the pus comes out completely, and thus it will all come out;
and if you wish, take a reed, and put one end in the ear, and the other end into the fire until the softer part of the reed is burned;
then make another cut with other knives until all the pus comes out, just as we have said about the stone.
In the extraction of the creature, if it is of small body, such as a flea and similar things, treat it as we have said in the division;
but if it is of large body that one can feel, then apply the extraction with tweezers; and it is the lightest thing to remove that is in the ear.
In the extraction of earworms, when you treat them as we have said in the division and in the treatment of distillations, and the treatment does not help, then you must look into the ear towards the sun: If there are any worms present, draw them out with subtle tweezers, and if they do not appear, take the cane of this kind which is in the form:
And let it be narrow below and wide above. And insert the finest end into the ear according to the extent of the patient's suffering, then suck forcefully on the entire cane; Do this often until all the worms come out.
And if they do not obey to come out, wrap cotton around the cane as I have said in the stone;
and if they do not come out as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have tested for expelling worms, and you will find them in the treatise on distillations;
and thus distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all this instrument, of which here is the form as you see: and whether it is made of silver or bronze, there should be a narrow passage below the small openings, and above for the purpose of distilling;
and to press inside for the distillation, there is an instrument of bronze well made for this purpose, and if you take the scraper and wrap around the tip appropriately with cotton; then pour your oil or juice, and what you want of your medicines into the tube, and the tube should be in the ear;
then push the scraper into the cotton entirely, and press your hand moderately until the oil is distilled into the eardrum; and the patient feels it inside, and let the distillations be slightly heated over fire before you distill them into the ear; and take care that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
of the swelling of the ears
Some children are born who have no openings in their ears;
and the same thing happens to adults due to obstruction from a wound, or flesh grown inside the ear, and these obstructions sometimes occur deep within the ear so that one cannot see them;
and sometimes the opening is slightly clogged, and one can see it clearly.
When it comes to a perfect one that cannot be seen, it is of grievous healing in many conditions, and in the one that can be seen you must place the patient's ear in the sun; and look inside: if you see the obstruction visible, then the work has all this space where the form is:
And let it be sharp and cutting on both the front and back entirely smooth, so that it does not hurt the ear;
if the obstruction is of flesh or body of the ear, then hold it with fine tweezers and cut lightly until all the flesh is removed.
And if the obstructions are deeply in the ear, then take a fine and light rasp and warm it slightly over fire, then place it in the body of the ear.
If you feel the irritation which causes the patient pain in the ear, pierce lightly, and be careful not to harm the nerves of the ear;
then place in the ear a plug according to the width of the opening, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment. Do this for some days until the wound is sealed, or you take a plug and moisten it with rose water, and sprinkle powdered vitriol on it;
and if you see the ear swollen, then you must remove the plug and insert another plug moistened with an ointment made of rose oil and wax until the swelling is removed; then treat until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs, soak a sponge and cloths in cold water, and place them on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the bleeding which are in the treatment of hemorrhages.
This eyelid that comes over the eyes when they are moist and dry, you should stretch it with forceps and tweezers, and cut it from its roots with a spatula; then place ground vitriol on the area.
And if it does not heal, then cauterize it with a subtle lens-shaped cautery, and the cauterizer after the incision is very good;
and they often recur if any part of their roots remains; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
of the hail Many times come in the whites of the eyes things that resemble hail in their form and hardness, and for this reason is this disease called "hail", and it is an assembly of moisture thickened above and below; the work is such:
the work is such: take note if the hail moves from one side to another, and it is easy to know;
then make an incision widely, then gently scrape each part, then take it with tweezers, and cut it.
if you cannot cut it without piercing a little the white, it does no harm to the patient;
and if the wound is large, then it is sewn with a stitch, and treat until it is healed;
and if it is small, then do not use any force, for the ointments restore it quickly and promote flesh growth.
And if the earwax is descending inside the ear towards the upper part, then invert the paper, and extend the earwax with tweezers, and cut and press from both sides;
and if the paper is moved away by the incision, it does not matter;
and when the earwax is cut, then lift with salt water, and treat the area that promotes flesh growth until the patient is healed.
of the fat of the eyes Exinach is a fat that is intertwined in the webs of the eyelids above, and this happens more to children than to any people, and greatly troubles their eyes, and they get catarrh in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because tears rush to their eyes;
and because of this they lie on their faces immediately, and sleep thereon, and their eyelids under their eyebrows are wet which swell and the appearance is covered by the exinach that appears in the eye. And when you press the area with your fingers and feel the exinach between them.
And the method of the work is that the patient puts their head on your shoulder;
and then take a linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity of exinach contained in each part, then place it on top; and press with your hands on one side and the other, so that the excrescence be gathered within the circle;
then make in the middle of the moisture with a sharp spatula a wide cut, and let it not be larger than the wound one makes at the vein's incision;
and cut the skin thoroughly until you reach the excrescence; and in many cases, the excrescence comes from the cut, according to the form of a piece of white fatty tissue.
Then extract it with a piece of coarse cloth held between your hands at the opening, and turn your hand right and left until it is spread out;
and take care not to insert into the split, that you do not reach all the way to the spleen until the eye, that you do not injure it.
and if the abscess does not open at the beginning of the split, then slightly enlarge the split gently until it opens;
then extract it as we have said, then moisten cloths with oil and water, and place them on the area, and bind with bandages.
And there are such people who grind ashes and put them on to corrupt the moisture that remains.
Then treat until he is healed.
And if an abscess comes to the place hot, then treat it with poultices until it is healed.
the hairs of the eyelids When in the eyelids hairs grow in a manner not natural and are irritated, they harm the eyes and cause various diseases such as habitual tears and softening of the eyelids and opacification, to the point that it can lead to the destruction of the eyes;
and the treatment follows according to four methods: or by cautery with fire together, or by medicine as mentioned before in the chapter of cautery, and it is done either by incision and suturing or by splints, according to what I will say.
You must place the head of the patient in your lap, then turn the paper of the eye to your left hand;
if it is turned, that is good; if not, then put a needle with the entire thread on top; and let it be near the margin of the paper where the hair grows next to these hairs, and pull the thread over the entire paper, and turn it with the shaver;
then cut into the part below the scrotum, beneath the attached hairs, all along the spermatic cord cutting, from the large groin to the small;
then draw out the thread, and place beneath the scrotum a small tent of cotton and cloth, then sew onto the scrotum a figure of herringbone, like the leaf of myrtle, and always it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity by which you wish to lift the scrotum which is divided for all.
And there are cases where it is necessary to cut a large quantity of the scrotum according to how softened the scrotum is;
then cut along the entire spermatic cord on the two lines that you have marked, and begin from the large groin to the small; and let one of the cuts be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then insert the lancet into one of the two corners of the heart, then peel it all;
then bring the two lips together with a stitch of one needle and all one thread of fine wool, and wipe the blood, and make dry the excess threads on both eyebrows with some sticky things, if you wish to do this;
and if not, then do not bother, then leave the stitch and the threads for three or four days;
then treat the wound without stitching with drying and binding substances, for the lint revives at the closing of the wound and its joining, but the stitch is weak (as the ancients say), and this is work without fear; and there is another method:
and there is another method: and it is that you mark the paper with a figure which should be like the leaf of myrtle, as we have described, at three inches apart according to the form which is here:
Then cut what protrudes over the small forces equally according to the form which is here:
and if you are unable to hold the tweezers, and the thing is not equal, then take a needle with a thread, and pierce it through the figure; and place one thread next to the large eyelid, and the second thread next to the small one, and gather the threads equally between your fingers;
then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin where you have marked, as we have described, then bring together the two edges of the wound by stitching, and care for it until it is healed;
and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with poultice and similar soothing ointments;
and sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyelid are inverted:
then you must use what we have said about the incision;
but the suturing in one and the other is more intricate.
The treatment of veins is according to this method: and it is that you turn the eyelid inside and make an incision as I have said, and then make two veins by art, and two subtle threads as long as the width of the spatula and the breadth of the eyelid are; and cut at the two shoulders of two parts where you hold the threads;
then carefully join one and the other on top of what protrudes from the paper of the eye, and extract the two canes from both parts completely; and leave it this way for some days, and the skin that was constrained will die, dry out, and wither until it falls off by itself.
If it takes too long, cut it with force, then treat it until it is healed;
and when the wound is sealed, and the paper is lifted, the hairs will no longer prick;
and this is the form of the two canes that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:
the work is such that you take a fine needle, and put through it a thread of silk smooth and fine; then bring together the shoulders and stitch one to the other finely, and let the length of the threads be a palm long;
then arrange in the case another fine thread of silk briefly, and stitch the ends of the thread;
then have the patient place their head on your knee;
and be near the sun so that the work is illuminated, for this is subtle and fine work, then insert the needle all the way into the case at the root of the hair attached, and pierce it quickly into the parchment until you draw it over the natural hair;
then pull out the hair up to the socket, and place that hair into the socket, if there is one or two or three or more;
then withdraw your hand until the hairs come out completely from the socket into the paper with the natural hair.
And if the socket is pulled and the hair does not come out with it, then pull the socket from below along the entire thread that you have arranged, until the socket comes out of the upper hole and you see it with your eye;
then pull the socket and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hair burns in its place and flesh grows over;
and if the hair is small, then accompany the long hair with natural curly hair, and lift it up with that which you leave, until it is extended and then lift it.
of the pus from the eye When this disease which is called "aleacrati" or the corruption comes to the eye, there are two ways of it:
one natural, and the other unnatural.
And it happens by a sudden wound, or by cutting or by cautery, and by similar things.
And the method of treatment is to split that wound, separate its lips, and put linen cloths inside, and keep it tied until it is healed;
and it is not suitable that you use in the treatment of it things that dry and constrict. For if you do this, then the illness returns worse than before;
but use softening things, such as fenugreek; and the artemisia, alcohol, and flaxseed should be cooked, and unguents of collyrium melted in any of the oils, and it is wrapped in a cloth, and it is treated thus.
And the treasure of your treatment is that you take care that it does not heal in the same form as before;
and these works that we have mentioned are only precautions for this illness, so it does not return in the same form as before.
This disease that is beneath is truly called "axacrati," and it is natural and accidental.
The accident comes from wound and cut and fire cautery and similar things;
and the method of the work in it is that you take a needle, in which there is double thread, and stick it in the flesh, and make it pierce from the left eyelid to the right, so that the thread comes out two fingers from the flesh;
then stretch the flesh above all the needle, and cut it with a spatula wide. And if the shape of the paper returns according to what is proper, it is good;
if not, then take a scraper and put it in the cut, and turn the paper, and make two cuts on the sides inside the paper;
and let the heads of the two flaps from the two corners of the incision that you have made be such that when they are brought together, the shape is like that of a letter called “I griesche”;
then remove that flesh according to the amount its sides are sharp below, from what lies under the skin, then join the two separated parts, and sew them with a thread of wool;
then treat it with what we have said about mollifying medicines and bandages until it is healed.
And if the illness comes from a cut or suture or cautery, then you must make a clean incision below the hairs of the skin, according to what is stated above; then separate between the two lips of a tent, as I have said;
then separate between the two lips of a tent, as I have said; and one must perform the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters devise by all their skill how they may restore the figure to its natural form;
and the patient himself, according to what is required of work and instruments in various arrangements.
When this welding happens to men in such a way that the membrane above is welded with the white of the eye, and cannot move nor perform its natural functions, then you must place the tip of a razor underneath the membrane and lift it up;
and you stretch with tweezers, until you cut what is hard at the spatumile subtle, which should not be too sharp nor too cutting, so that the patient cannot endure the spatumile too sharp does not wound the eye;
and let your incision, with which you peel that assembly, be slight, so that the paper returns to its natural form;
and that assembly is healed, and they sometimes use salty water in the sharp eye, and wash with sweet water, and with collyria;
then place between the paper and the eye a linen tent, and put on the eye wool moistened in egg white; and after the third day use the collar and the poultices until he is healed.
Know that the nail grows in two ways: it is nervous and similar to hard skin, and another that is not nervous, but resembles white frozen moisture, which when touched with iron and thought to be treated with tweezers, one cannot.
and both appearances begin near the large eyelid, and grow little by little until they cover the entire sight and all the light and movement of the eye.
And the method of the incision is that the patient place his head in your hand, then operate on the eyes; and lift the paper to your hand, then curl the nail with tweezers of small padding, and stretch it above; then take a needle, and put in it a horsehair, or ox hair, or cow hair, and strong thread; and double the point of the needle a bit and insert it into the nail, and pierce all the way through with the needle, and tie the nail with thread and stretch it above, and scrape all the hair along the side of the nail that is next to the cuticle and attach the silk to the hair until the top, then cut the remainder at the root of the tear duct very finely and with small forces, and leave the natural flesh of the tear duct so that tears do not come out from the incision as usual;
and sometimes the nail extends only to the inch, and to the thread, as we have said; then one peels off all the spathulumile, from which this form is;
and be careful that the spathulumile does not touch the flesh membrane and break it, and that the prunele is not pierced;
and after the incision, put a little bit of ground seal into the eye, and make a collyrium with litharge, and leave it until the next day; then cleanse it with what is necessary until it is healed.
and if the nail is not firm, and you cannot insert the needle, and the forceps cannot enter, this kind of nail is often treated with medicines;
and they grow as I have described in the section, and if you wish to cut them, then operate on the patient’s eye, and take the spatula light point sharp according to this form: And gently scrape the nail above, and if you see that it does not thin out and the corrosion presses in, then drip from your mouth into the eye a mixture made of litharge and red collyrium and well ground, and plug the eye until the next day;
If anything does not bother you in the eye, such as a warm abscess, then leave it alone and first treat the warm abscess until it is healed, then continue the work as before, until it is healed.
then begin the other work according to this same method, until it is all removed.
And if the appearance of the flesh of the lacrimal apparatus harms the eye by great damage, then suspend it with a lancet, and cut away part of it but not all, so that tears may still come;
then distill into the eye red choler which is made from litharge.
In the eyes of some men sometimes red flesh grows, and covers the pupil and extends over the eyelids and turns them inward, and resembles a pomegranate flower;
and the procedure is that the patient places his head in your hand, then you work on the eyes, and remove all that flesh with appropriate forceps, and hold it firmly;
then cut the first layer of flesh, and continue cutting carefully until the end, and be careful not to injure the eye during the procedure;
and let the incision of the spatumile, which we have described in the incision of the nail and the small forceps with which the sebel is removed, be as the form after this chapter demonstrates;
and when the incision is completed and all the flesh is removed, then apply ground sea salt oil to which you add red collyrium and similar corrosive medicines, and place fire-dried cotton on it with egg white so that it is secured from hot abscess;
and if anything remains, and the wound overflows with blood, and you fear a hot abscess, then leave the oil and treat the abscess with things that calm a hot abscess;
then return to your work until it is healed, and thus do when flesh is set in the oil by this method.
but nevertheless, you must lighten the treatment of each weak oil with the natural method; and of the accidental way, in iron work;
and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this limb can endure the work.
Bloodshot veins cover the eye, and hinder the sight's work and weaken the eye all day.
It is then necessary first that you look if the eye, in which the sty is, is protruding, and there is no other disease except for the sty; then treat it in this manner:
instruct the patient to place his head in your hand, then suspend those veins for the entire anointment according to your wisdom, and let the ointments be doubled as per this form:
And let there be two incisions by degrees on the body according to this form:
then anoint those veins subtly with force, and wipe the blood hour after another, until you see those veins move away from the eye;
and take care that you do not injure the eye with the tips of the spatulae, and perform this work at midday in front of the sun, and be very diligent in your work so that you do not cut more than those veins;
and when you have done this, then distill green and red collyrium into the eye to corrupt what remains of the sebel.
And if you are not able to remove all of this in that hour, then apply a plaster on the eye made of things that alleviate eye pain, and leave it for some days until the pain is eased and there is assurance of a hot abscess, then restart according to this method that was mentioned until it is healed;
and this is the form of the forces:
The physician calls a fistula "arissati":
when you treat it with cautery and hot medicinal applications according to what I have said before, and if it is not healed, then you must incise over the abscess where it is about to burst, and draw out all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and the blackness, then remove it all with the instrument of which this is the form;
and it is called "aspre chief," and it should be made of iron to the length of a finger's width, and pointed like a file as shown in the present form:
And place on the site of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand a bit until you know that this corruption is removed;
and do this several times, then restore the area with drying medicines.
if the wound is sealed, and flesh grows, and the body of the bone is sealed, and remains thus for forty days, and it does not renew and is not abscessed, and no harmful accidents occur, know that it is healed;
if not, then there is another method to bring the fistula to the opening of the nose in this manner: and it is that you uncover the bone a second time by iron and with watery medicines, and when it is uncovered then take the rasp in this manner, and let the head of the iron be three-angled, and the handle be tapered to the tip as you see here:
then place it on the bone near the eyelid, and move your hand away from the eye by a little, then turn the entire drill until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it because air comes out if he holds his hand over his nose;
and then restore the eye with dry medicines, as I have taught you, and when the flesh grows and the eye hardens, the matter goes to the nose; it is a lighter thing for the patient.
When the eye is fully open in all aspects, and there is no disturbance to the nose, nor any reduction, then you must bind the patient;
then heal it, then apply cupping or leeches without pricking to draw out, then put on the eye a dressing of acacia and aloe and incense and collyrium, and then extract the eye, and cover it with bandages and cloths;
and the method of the cloths is that you take cloths quite soft, and fold each in four, and then place one on top of another according to the amount that the eye needs;
then bind it tightly with a hard bandage on top, and reapply the cupping to draw out without pricking;
then remove the cupping and leave the eye tightly bound day and night, and if the dressing softens, you must bind it very tightly;
then remove the bandage after the day and night, and if you see the eye healing, it is good;
if not; then restart the plaster and the bandages and the binding and the cupping until it is healed.
Of the breaking of a wine cloth When ruptures occur in the vitreous membrane, then it becomes visible, and particles come forth like grains of resin, and it is astonishing to see;
then if you see it cut, the procedure is such that you insert a needle at the root from the lower part up to the upper part, then insert another needle where there is a double thread from the tear area; and have it pierced, and leave the first needle according to the arrangement;
then cut the place of the doubled thread and tie one part of the grape around, and hold it tight, then remove the needle and put on the eye wool moistened with egg white;
and leave it until the thread falls off with the grape, then treat the eye with soothing substances until the wound is healed;
and sometimes the wound is held together by the grape on each side of a circle of cloth until it is healed.
and if the eye shows great opacity, then pierce it with a fine spatula that comes from the center of the eye, and draw out the white moisture and lower the eye, and enter in soon;
then extract until it is clean.
This disease which is called "alcunnati" is nothing more than mucus that gathers in the eye, resembling flowing water, but it is not water;
and the manner of its appearance in the work is that you make the patient sit on the prepared and straight seat, then take his head between your two hands, and move it until you see the mucus come up to your eyes; then it is fixed, and does not flow down, and the light is no longer obstructed, and the patient sees things as usual;
and if it does not flow down, know that it is water, and if the discharge of the mucus is not as we have said, it is not properly treated.
seat the patient between your hands, then take the fine spatula and cut on the corneal membrane a spot by the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corneal membrane and the corona until the pus comes out;
and when it has come out, then drip into the eye hot water mixed with honey, or water in which fenugreek has been boiled and mixed with honey, then clean it with other treatments until it is healed.
eye fluids We have seen the similarities of waters in the division, and what is necessary for piercing; then work according to the health.
It is necessary that you seat the patient between your crossed hands, away from the sunlight, and bind the healthy eye tightly and hold it very firmly;
then place the paper of the eye to your left hand if the eye is left, or to your right hand if the eye is right;
then take in your right hand, if the eye is left, the instrument which is called "almagda", or to your left hand, if the eye is right;
then place the tip of the instrument near the crown by the thickness of a nail at that part of the eyelid where the lower eyelash is, then insert the instrument which is called "almagda" vertically, and turn your hand until it pierces through the eyelid, and feel that almagda comes to the empty space;
and it is necessary that the measurement of the Almagdah artery be in perfect accordance with the measurement of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the iris; and it is the cornea of the eye;
you will see the bone on that paper because of the clarity of the corneal membrane, and then place the instrument until it reaches where the liquid is, then press under one artery after another.
If the water flows out now, the patient sees it in front of him and the instrument in his eye.
After rest a little, and if the liquid rises to the second artery, apply force with the instrument, and when it is fixed in and does not rise, then extract Almagdah by turning your hand little by little;
and then put in water a pot of seil gemme, and wash from this the eye inside. Then apply to the eye tufts or wool soaked in rose oil and egg white, and bind with a healthy eye.
We, and those of our time, apply ground cumin mixed with egg white.
And if almagda cannot enter into the eye because of its hardness, for there are such men who have very hard eyes, then you must take the instrument which is called "alberit", of which here is the form:
and pierce then the conjunctive only, and do not go too deep, but make the place subtle, then put in the almond, as we have said;
and at the completion of the work prepare for the patient a comfortable place to sleep, in which he sleeps on his back in a dark place;
and be deprived of all movements, and take light foods, and do not move his head to the right or left, and be tied according to his condition until the third day;
then untie him in that same dark house, and test his sight, and make him see some things, and then tie him again until the seventh day;
and it is not right that you do this during the time of the treatment or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you lighten this, because the heat rises quickly.
if hot abscesses come, that you loosen the eye before the seventh day, and the treatment to alleviate the abscess;
and when it is calmed, then loosen the vision and put on his face a bandage to cover for some days, and let him be immediately in that dark room.
And then let him leave the house little by little, and return to his usual habits;
and know that no student should interfere in this case. And one came to us who was from Yemen, who told us that in his country they make a container pierced, which is used to suck out water, but nevertheless I have never seen any such thing in our land, nor have I ever read about it in the books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the likenesses of the forms of the container, so that those who do not understand them may see them;
and they should be made of clean tin: And let the head of the axe of this same fineness, and the back in three acute angles.
Sometimes various strange shapes are born, some of which resemble scorpions with many legs;
and if there is such where flesh is embedded of fox color, and has dry flesh of good color. In that then of these dry flesh, and not embedded, you must make the patient sit between your hands against the sun;
In that then of these dry flesh, and not embedded, you must make the patient sit between your hands against the sun; and work his nostrils, and throw the medicine to that flesh, and pull it out strongly; then cut what you can sustain with a fine sharp spatula on one side, until you know that the flesh is entirely removed.
And if anything remains that cannot be cut, then open it with all the subtle light medicines so that nothing remains; and if it overcomes you, when the abscess is hot, then treat it as appropriate;
and if it is malignant abscesses, then hurry and cauterize it until the blood is stanched and all the pus is removed, then apply a light and acid or wine. If the salve works and moisture comes up to the surface, know that it is healing;
and if the moisture does not rise as it should, know that there is pus formed in the bone above, to which the instruments do not reach to cut:
then it is necessary that you insert a thread of linen somewhat thick, and it should be knotted by skilled hands, and have between each knot a space of one thumb or less; and place the patient's finger tip in his nose with some force, and pull it through the nostril into the mouth;
and often children do this at school, and it is an easy thing for whoever wants to do it;
then hold the end that comes through the nostril with one hand, and the other end that comes through the mouth with the other hand, and pull one after the other along the thread that is in the finger.
Do this until you know that the knots have corrupted the flesh, then pull out the thread, wipe the blood, and moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back in the nose as before;
do this for three days or more until the ointment corrodes everything that remains of flesh;
and then place a bandage of some days on the wound until it is healed, and if it needs drying medications, use them;
and this is the form of the instrument for purging the head, to which oils and medications are distilled into the wound:
And it should be made of silver or bronze, resembling an open lamp, like a tube, and the conduit is similar;
and if you wish, make a closed tube, and let the instrument be full to purge the head;
and hold the cloth to the head when heating the oil or any liquid.
of the flesh on the nose
Many times, a disease called "telul" arises on the head of a child and grows rapidly until it becomes quite noticeable to look at;
and for this reason, you should cut it at the beginning and remove it entirely, then apply a cautery or burning medicine to the area;
and if you delay cutting it until it is large, beware if it is hard, of a scaly color, or lacking sensation:
do not touch it with iron for it is a stubborn abscess, for when it is cut sometimes great harm comes to the patient;
and if the abscess is of a white touch, not of a red color, and you see that it can be completely cut out, then empty the patient and cut it without fear, and treat the area with drying and binding substances.
Know that when solutions of continuation come into one of these cartilaginous works, it profits little, for in some men.
Then when this happens to anyone, one should look if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then join the two edges with a stitch, then treat it until it is healed;
and if the edges are already separated on both sides, then you must scrape all the parts of their skin until they heal, then join the two edges with a stitch, and bind it tightly, and sprinkle powdered dragon's blood and ground incense on it; and put the powders under a piece of plaster of Paris or another adhesive plaster, and leave it until it falls off by itself, then treat with ointment until it heals.
The method of the suture is that you bring together the solution: or with needles, as we have said in the suturing of the abdomen; or with thread, as I have made known to you.
of abscesses of the lips
Some men have within their lips an abscess that is hard, resembling grains of vetches, and smaller and larger;
then you must turn the lips inside out, and cut into each knot, and take them with forceps and cut in each part;
then apply to the area after the incision of ground vitriol until the blood is stilled;
and then wash with ashes, and clean the area of dry matter until it is healed.
Often flesh grows on the gums, which the ancients called "albulus";
so you must hold it with tweezers, and cut it at its root, and let the pus or blood flow;
then apply ground vitriol to the area, or other powders that restrain and dry;
and if that flesh returns after the incision, which often happens, then cut it a second time and cauterize it: and does not return after the cautery;
Sometimes there are gathered at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, rough and ugly husks; and sometimes the teeth are black and yellow and decayed, until the corruption reaches the gum, and the teeth are stinking;
so it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands, and his shoulders be in your sight, and remove the teeth or the husks that appear, until nothing remains; and thus do with the blackness and the greenness, and the yellowness and other stains, until they are cleaned;
and if one removes what is there at the first reason, it is good; if not, then start over the next day and the third, until you have it all removed;
and know that teeth require various forms of instruments for cleaning, according to what the work demonstrates, because the scrapers used to clean between the teeth have different shapes than those used on the surface of the teeth; and these forms and others should be prepared with you.
It is necessary when you treat the tooth for its pain that you delay extracting it as long as you can, for no one should do so; for this is a very high quality substance until such that one has no excuse for error.
Then when the patient is forced to extract, you must be certain of the painful tooth. Many times the pain troubles the patient, and they think it is from a tooth ache, and have the good tooth pulled; and nevertheless the pain does not leave because of this, until the bad one is extracted, for we have already wanted to do this to these sufferers;
and when you are certain of the painful tooth, then you must peel around the tooth for about one finger's breadth strongly to protect the gum on all sides;
then move it with your hands or with fine tweezers bit by bit until it is well loosened, then firmly grasp the tweezers; and let the head of the patient be in your lap between your knees, and hold it well so that it does not move.
After pull the tooth straight without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, take one of these instruments and push inside on each side gently, and move it as you did first.
and if the tooth is perforated and damaged, then you should fill it with cloths where the holes are; and then grasp it carefully with tweezers so that it does not break when grasping;
and you must work very carefully around the gum to loosen the tooth.
And be careful not to break it and leave a part behind, which may cause the patient, by the maliciousness of the root, greater pains than before.
and beware that you do not act as the ignorant surgeons do, who by their haste and boldness sometimes break the socket, and do not administer what we have recounted;
but sometimes they bring about great illness by their growth due to the roots that remain, or because of the damage they cause, as we have often seen;
and when the tooth is pulled, wash the area with wine or oil and salt;
and if bleeding occurs, which often happens, then apply powdered vitriol to the area;
and if that does not work, then cauterize it.
The forms of the instruments, with which one first extracts the teeth, should have long points and thick handles, so they do not bend when you pull the tooth;
and these are the forms: And they should have thick parts so that they do not bend when pulling, and they should be made of good iron, and they should be toothed to hold the teeth firmly.
of the root of the teeth When the root remains outside, you must put cotton moistened with butter on the place for one or two days until the area is softened, then use the forceps called "algefri", with which the head looks like a bird's beak;
and let them be made inside like a file and this is the form:
And if the roots do not want to come out entirely with these forceps, then you must uncover all the flesh around the root, and put in the instrument which is called "althali", that is to say a spatula, of which this is the form:
and let it be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root comes out by this means, it is good;
if not, then use all the instruments, whose forms come after here:
And one makes use of this instrument which has two prongs, of which the form is here: and other tools which are mentioned earlier in the discussion of teeth, and of this instrument which resembles large forceps, of which the form is here:
And let this instrument be strong so it cannot break, and know that many dental instruments are; and also of other instruments, which are not counted;
and the wise and subtle masters find their instrument by themselves according to what their work and the diseases show them, for there are such diseases where the ancients did not teach any instrument due to the diversity; and if one breaks a bit of the cartilage or other bones where it might, then seek out the instruments that are appropriate, which I have told you about, and help yourself with gestures, of which this is the form:
And let them be thick and well grasping to hold the bone so it does not slip away, but can hold and remove it;
and then restore the place with appropriate medicine, and if there is putrefaction in the bone, and it is small, remove it with all this instrument:
When the teeth appear not according to the natural body, and the form is ugly, especially in virgin women, then you should know if the tooth has come after the other teeth, and it is not in the right place, and cannot be smoothed or filed:
then pull it out; and if it is loose with the tooth, then take this instrument whose form is shown here, which resembles a small beak, and let it be of iron and sharp at the tip:
And the cutting little by little over several days because of the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others, and if it is visible that it can be filed, then file it with a file like the form here:
and it is also like the file with which one makes needles;
and file the tooth little by little over several days lightly, so that it does not move until it falls out;
then flatten it at the end for any razor, and if the tooth is too sharp and it wounds the tongue, then file down the roughness until it is even, so that it does not wound the tongue nor corrupt the speech.
When the front teeth loosen, either by impact or by falling, and the patient cannot chew without them falling out, and you have treated them with constricting medications, and it does not work;
so they must be restrained with a gold thread, for the silver thread turns green and rots, but the gold never changes;
and let the thread be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of space between the teeth;
and if you wish to align the teeth, then take the thread and put it double between the two healthy teeth, then place the heads between the loose teeth, if there is one or more, until you come carefully up to the healthy tooth on the other side; then begin the covering until the part where you started, and withdraw your hand subtly and carefully, so that it does not move at all;
and let your ligature be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Then cut the head of the thread with tweezers, and join them, and place them between the healthy tooth, and position it so that it does not hurt the tongue;
and then leave it so tight as long as it can stay, and if it loosens or the thread breaks, tighten it with another thread;
it will remain and serve in this way for all his life, and this is the form of the teeth and the alignment of the two healthy teeth, and the two misaligned ones, as you see:
And when the tooth falls out, it is reset in its place, fresh to fresh, as we have said;
and no one should intervene who is not wise and patient, and sometimes they make the shape of a tooth from a cow's bone, and put it in the place where the defect is, and hold it tight as we have said, and it remains and serves for so long.
Sometimes this ligament comes under the tongue naturally, which one is born with; or by accident of a sutured wound;
and the work is such that you operate the patient's mouth, and have his head in your hand, and lift his tongue;
then cut the nervous ligament widely so that the tongue is detached from its place, and if there is hardness or knot, which is from a sutured wound, then insert the uncinus and cut the ligament widely;
and take care that the incision is not too deep, for the artery which lies beneath;
and when you have done so, raise the area with rose water and salt, or cold water, then place under the tongue a linen cloth;
and the patient should comb every night so that the area does not become sealed.
And if bleeding occurs, then put ground vitriol on the area; and if the sinew swells, then cauterize it with a lentigo cautery, which is good for this; then treat it with other treatments until it is healed,
and if you see it of a purple color or black or hard, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it at all, for it is a cancer;
and if it is declining into the throat, and there is moisture, then apply an ointment, and cut it with a fine spatula, and release it on one side and the other; and if the sweat hinders your work, then apply ground vitriol until it is dried out, then return to your work until you draw out all the moisture;
then remove the area of ash and scale, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
of the abscesses of the throat Sometimes there come into the throat nodes which are called "godath", and they are properly called the two almonds, and when you treat them, as we have said in the section, and they are not healed, take care:
if it is a hard abscess with little sensitivity and of flesh color, then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is red and the root is large, then do not touch it with iron, also for the flow of blood; but leave it until it is ripe, and then you will remove it, or it will break open by itself;
and if it is of white color and the root is delicate, then have the instrument ready to cut, but first check if the abscess has cooled down and is calm.
Then have the patient sit before the sun, and his shoulders should be in your care, and work his mouth and let the servant take hold of him between his hands, and press the tongue below with all the instrument, which is its form;
and it should be of silver or subtle brass like knives:
When you press the tongue with all this instrument, and you see the abscess, then take the lancet and insert it into the gland, and pull it out above as much as you can;
and pull something from the tissues with it, then cut it with the instrument, which is its form, resembling forceps; and all the same the heads are curved, and one part to another, and they are very sharp, and it is made of iron or steel:
And if you do not have this instrument present, then cut it with pliers, of which here is the form: and be sharp on one side, and the other side not;
and when you have cut one of the almonds, then cut the other in the same manner, and after the incision, gargle the patient with warm water, and water mixed with salt, and if bleeding occurs, then gargle the patient with water in which pomegranate rinds are boiled or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the blood is stopped; then cure it until it is healed;
And sometimes other abscesses grow in the throat besides the two almonds, so cut them down just as you would the two almonds equally.
And I treated a woman for an abscess that had grown inside her throat, that is to say one abscess of small sense;
and it had nearly closed her entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe because the passage was blocked, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she had remained thus for one or two days.
And the abscess had grown so much that it had forced open two veins through the two passages of the nose.
I then hurried and inserted a lancet into it once, then drew it out, and brought out a large portion of pus;
then mend another part at the other nostril opening, and work the mouth and press the tongue;
then I inserted the lancet into these abscesses, and cut out a part, and no more than a little blood came out; and thus the conduit of the woman's throat was cleared, and she began to drink water and then wine, and I did not stop cutting into this abscess for a long time;
and the abscess would grow back immediately, filling the place that I had emptied, until it became very large again;
then I manipulated it and cauterized it inside the throat: thus remains without growing;
and I departed from those places, and do not know what God did to him after me.
of the grape
When the vein descends to the grape, and it is swollen and elongated, it is called "perpendicular";
and if it is beneath, large and round, it is called "grape".
When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, and you see that the hot abscesses are calmed, and they are delicate, then you must cut it;
and that which is round and compact and is not elongated; And it is bloody or of pus color or black, so you must avoid the incision of it. For there is great danger to the patient.
Then it is necessary, when you see it according to the manner I have said, of its blueness and its length, that you make the patient sit before the sun, and press his tongue with the instrument we mentioned earlier; then insert the needle into the grape, and pull it down, and cut it with one of the two instruments I mentioned for the incision of the two almonds.
And you must not cut more than the excess which is beyond the natural limit;
for if you cut more, you will harm the voice and speech;
And after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two almonds, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the patient fears the cutting, then you must use ingenuity in the cautery of such fear.
And the manner of the cautery is sharp. And it is that the patient puts his head in your hand, and then you press his tongue with the instrument we have mentioned in the chapter on cautery, and mix with hot aqua fortis so that it is not too thick nor too thin; and use the manipulation of this instrument, of which here is the form:
And it should have on the head a handle where one puts the medicine, like the handle of a spoon, and place the instrument with all the medicine on the eye;
and the patient should lie on his side, so that the saliva and mucus run from his mouth due to the medicine inside, so that it does not go down into the throat, and he is bled;
then hold your hand on all the medicine and press it against the eye, for a duration of half an hour, until you see it swollen and the irritation from the medicine be calmed;
and if you wish, take cotton and wrap it around some instrument, and moisten the cotton with the medicine, and put the instrument with all the cotton into the canal above, until the cotton burns on the eye;
and do this often until the cauterization is complete, then leave it to dry, and it will fall off after four or five days.
And if you need to restart the fire of the medicine, then restart it, and after the cautery wipe around the eye with cotton dipped in butter, and clean what is around the medicine;
and let it be soaked with cold water, and treat it with gargles until it is healed.
This treatment is better than the incision, or than the cautery;
if it is treated by fumigation according to this method, take calamus and hyssop and oregano and rue and chamomile and avernia and similar herbs, and gather all of them or some of them in a pot, and put oil in it, and make it boil;
and the pot be well glued with strong clay, and in the middle of the pot have the instrument placed according to this manner: And it be of silver or bronze, and one of the ends placed in the patient’s mouth so that the vapor rises to the eye through the tube until the eye is mortified;
after it restarts often, until the eye dries, and be careful not to do this at the beginning of the emergence of a hot abscess, for many things happen; and do not do this except when the hot abscess is declining.
and if this instrument is not present, then take a tube and put at the end a chicken egg so that the patient’s mouth does not have too much heat; for the eggshell does not let the steam make the mouth heavy, and it is a good treatment altogether healthful.
Many times, a bone or spine of fish, or some thing, sticks in the throat;
so you must pull out what you can see, and press his tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you can see the thing move;
and what is not visible and is lodged in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the food is cooked in the stomach; perchance the thing stuck may come out through vomiting;
For the patient to swallow a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or a morsel of dry bread; and tie a string to the sponge, and then swallow it; and when it reaches the place, it will catch fire, and then you will pull out forcefully;
and if it does not come out by what we have said, then take the puncturing instrument according to this form:
And let the instrument be curved at the head so that it may enter the throat more easily, and have the head lifted upwards; and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, lest it cause choking, nor push the bone inward;
and it is better that the patient applies the instrument, so that it moves where the matter is burnt; and she pours it down, where she pulls it firmly with the entire instrument equally, until it is firm.
of the phlegm from the throat
Sometimes the blood is medicated, as I have said in the division, through the treatment of medicines; and when this does not help, then look into the patient's throat in the sunlight, after which you press their tongue with the instrument that I have told you about.
And if you see the pus, then draw it all with a small hook or with subtle tweezers that are suitable for this.
And if this does not work, then take a hairy cord, and put it in the patient's throat, then place a heated iron on the movement of the cord, and do this often. And if the patient is plagued by water all day.
then take a full glass of cold water, and work it in the mouth, and throw it inside to swallow, and move it with his hand often; and as soon as the blood feels the water, it falls.
and if it does not fall as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asafoetida, with the instrument I have mentioned in the fumigation of the grape.
do this many times, for it will fall without delay.
And the method of the fumigation is that you take a pot with live coals, and have the pot covered with a cover pierced in the middle, and in that hole be the head of the instrument;
then throw your fumigation in there, and the patient puts the head of the cane in their mouth and closes it tightly so that no smoke escapes but goes directly to the blood;
and the blood will fall now, and if it does not fall, then restart the fumigation many times;
and let the patient endure thirst, and eat salty and sour things, and drink no water;
and then it will be necessary for it to come out through this treatment.
And the form of the instrument with which one draws blood is, when it can be seen, similar to curved pliers for easily entering the throat; and it resembles the beak of a bird, and has the roughness of a file, so that what it grasps, it cannot leave;
Many kinds of abscesses exist, according to what the memory comes after one and another in this book, and they differ in puncture and size;
and it is in two ways, one of which is in its own appearance and from what it holds moisture.
And the second way is for the places where they are on the body.
for the abscess of the head is different from that of the fundament, and the abscess of the fleshy part is different from that which comes in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
And there are abscesses that one should not pierce until the pus is dead according to its completion;
and there are such that it is necessary to pierce when they are ripe, and do not die according to their completion, like abscesses that are near joints.
For when abscesses come near joints, and it is left until it swells around, by chance the ligaments and nerves of the joint are corrupted, which causes contraction in that limb.
For when the abscess is near the main limb, and if you delay the puncturing until it is dead, it will harm the principal limb;
when it is near the anus, pierce it before it becomes dead;
and it is not right to puncture a hard abscess without complete digestion, except for the one near the anus, so that it does not penetrate perfectly and extend inside, and result in a fistula; and cannot heal over a long period.
And you should know the time for puncturing an abscess that has matured according to its completion, and this is when the pain is calmed, and the departure of fever, and the lessening of the pain and redness, and of the softening and sharpening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs;
and you must make the opening at the lowest point of the abscess, where it breaks open;
and let the opening be along the length of the body, and if the abscess is on the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all similar places where there is no pus. In those that bend, according to that limb.
And when abscesses are in a soft place, it is better that you leave the perforation until it is confirmed after complete digestion, as we have said.
For if you pierce it before that, the poison from it will spread along the body, and it is full of much filth; and perchance harden the lips and the depths of it.
And there are some abscesses that should be pierced according to the size of the body, according to what the limb requires.
and you must treat small abscesses with small openings; and in large abscesses, large openings, and many splits according to the resemblance of the size of the abscess;
and if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to shave the hair and cut; when it has become as yellow as a rag, and is softened, then it should be treated as one treats buboes:
and there are some that are split into three parts, and there are those which are cut like the leaf of myrtle, as in abscesses of the armpits;
and there are some where a round incision is made, and other cuts and similar incisions.
Those who have no head, such as a superficial abscess, you must pierce it completely;
and it is necessary when the abscess is large, and it has collected much pus, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus at that hour, but draw out a part; then plug the abscess until the next day, then draw out something again; do this several times little by little until all the pus comes out;
especially if the patient is of weak strength, or pregnant women, or small children, or old frail men. For the spasm sometimes occurs with the discharge of the pus, which may cause the patient to die, and you do not perceive it.
Avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, wipe the wound, and look if the abscess wound is small; and if it is a flat stitch, then apply pieces of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many openings, then you must insert a tent into each one so that they come against each other;
and if you have cut into the abscess a part of the skin and you have shaved around it, then you must fill it with old cotton or linen cloth shavings without moisture, and bind it until the third day;
then the bone, and treat with ointment until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs in your work, then administer cold water and ash, and wet the cloth, and place it on the bleeding area multiple times.
And if the flow of blood persists, apply treatment and care, and the powders that I have mentioned in this book, and if it is during winter time, and the area or the abscess is very swollen, then you must place cloths and towels soaked in hot wine and oil on it.
and if it is in summer, and the area is fleshy, then you must place cloths soaked in water and oil, or in wine and cold oil, until the third day, as we have said;
and then open the abscess and wipe it and treat it as appropriate until it is healed.
And this must be universally known in the treatment of abscesses:
And as I have told you how one should proceed in the treatment of abscesses, see here the chapter.
When small abscesses come from the head, and they are kinds of growths that are in layers, like the comb of a hen, and there are many similarities.
There are some that are fatty and of such kind that they have moisture like pus;
and there are some that are hard and stony to cut, and there is no doubt if the artery does not oppose it.
And the work of the waist is that you test with all the instrument which is called "introducer," of which the form comes after, what it contains.
For if it contains moisture, then cut it open on top of the length.
And when the moisture is drained, then scrape without leaving anything the skin that contains that moisture, for it returns immediately if something is left;
then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; if not, in water and in sun, and apply to the wound, and leave until the next day; and those will run that remained from the night.
And then restart the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that nothing remains from the night;
then treat the wound with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
and if the abscess holds hard matter, then cut it according to this form, lengthwise; and throw in your medicines, and scrape it from all sides, and put all your effort into drawing out the material where it lies;
and if the artery acts against you, then do what I have told you after.
And do the same for the abscess if it is stony, and in cutting and cleaning as I have told you.
And cut into the stony and moist abscess, it is lighter, for they are full of blood. And some of these abscesses on the head have no moisture, and there were such dry abscesses that I cut from the head of an old woman;
and I found the abscess like a hard, rough, and white stone, and it could not be broken; and if one had struck it, it would have made as much of an impact as striking stone.
In other abscesses coming on the head, like those that come at the top of children's heads and near the roots of the ears, the opening should always be in the lowest place, so that the pus may flow out;
and treat them as appropriate.
Often this abscess occurs at the neck, and beneath the jawbones, and in the armpits, and sometimes they appear elsewhere on the body, and they are large, and they cluster together.
And each scrophula is properly within its coat, like the knot and the abscess of the head, as we have said; and the similarities of these scrophulas are many.
and the similarities of these scrophulas are many. There are such that contain moisture, and there are malignant ones that do not wish to obey health.
in that one then which you see of good disposition to the touch, and is similar in color to the skin, and moves on both sides and is not adhered to the nerves of the neck nor to the artery nor to the windpipe, and is not deep;
then you should cut it from above, and peel it on each side, and stretch the two lips of the wound with hooks, if you need to, as we have said in abscesses of the head;
and pull the thread little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, and let not the scalpel be too sharp or cutting, so your hand does not slip, and do not go too deep, lest you cut what you should not.
and if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not allow you to work, then put in the wound vitriol powder, or some powders that stop blood, and compress the wound; and leave it until the abscess is calmed, and the wound is softened, and begins to pus.
and when the blood is stanched, return to your work until you complete it;
then check your index finger if any small scrofulae remain there, cut them off and clean them.
And if there is a large vein at the root of the scrofula, you should not cut that scrofula at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it hang down without harm;
then dress the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then treat it.
And if you cut all the scrofula, then you must bring together the two lips of the wound, and sew them now, since there is no remaining excess due to the size of the scrofula. and you must pay attention to cut the root of it, and pull hard, and sew it as we have said.
and you must pay attention to cut the root of it, and pull hard, and sew it as we have said. For those scrofulae that hold excess, pierce them where it appears to worsen;
and pierce it as was described before, hanging down, then apply tents with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, then treat it with healing ointment until it is healed.
The ancients spoke and talked about the structure of the throat; but I have never seen it done in our land, and this is the writing of their words.
For those who have difficulty swallowing, it is necessary that the part of the throat which is called "epiglottis" be cleared; and if help is not provided through this, it is because all the veins and the phlegm of the patient are heated by the abscess in the mouth, or in the throat, or in the tonsils.
When the disease is in the channel of the breath, it is necessary to cut the epiglote to avoid the loss that comes from strangulation.
Then it is necessary, when we wish to split the epiglottis, that we split below three circles or four a small cut across, between the two circles or by the quantity of the cut from the surface, not in the cartilage;
and that place is suitable for the section of the epiglottis where there is no flesh, and the vessels are long to reach.
And if the master is fearful, then it is necessary that he stretches the skin of the throat to the full inch, then cuts until he comes to the windpipe; and avoid the blood vessels if you see any, and then cut the surface as we have said;
and it is demonstrated by the cutting of the phlegm from the throat which flows out through the place that is broken, and by the loss of voice;
and leave the wound open for a while.
And when the hour has passed in which one fears choking, bring together the two lips of the wound of the throat, and sew it all alone without the cartilage;
then administer medicines that promote flesh growth until it is healed.
Albucasis says that one should not do this until the throat is entirely compressed, and the patient is judged to be dying, and the defect increases. Then cut the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe, and they breathe through the wound, and thus are saved from death;
and for this reason the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease has passed, and it passes in three days or four. And then they commanded to suture the wound and clean it, until it was cleansed;
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw that a maiden took a knife and stuck it in her throat and cut part of the glands of the pharynx;
and I was called to treat her, and I found her as if dead.
I uncovered the wound and found the blood that had come out of it, and I knew she had not cut any vein or artery in her throat, and the air was escaping through the wound.
I hurried, sewed up the wound, and treated it until it was healed;
and it did not happen to the young lady that she became hoarse of voice, and returned afterwards to her condition;
for that is why I say that in the area of the epiglottis there should be no fear.
This abscess is called "throat hernia," and it is a large abscess of the color of jaiss, and it often occurs in women;
and it is according to two manners: nature, and accident;
the natural one does not have any pain.
And the accidental one is according to two manners, of which one is similar to fatty pus, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from arterial pus; and he has fear, and it is not appropriate to work with great fire except in the one who is small, and it proves and examines throughout the insertion: if you find it as thick as fatty flesh, and it cannot enter any vein, then cut it, as one cuts the fat, and pull it out completely with its covering, if there is any; and examine it thoroughly, and treat it as appropriate, until it is perfectly healed.
There are many kinds of tumors, of which I will describe all the similarities;
and now it is appropriate that I explain the difference between tumor and discharge.
I say that heat and fever persist until the ebullition has passed, and putrefaction is complete; then the fever and heat subside.
With the new one, there is no heat, no fever, and no pain, and it contains a cyst, which is its own sack and is according to the color of the body, and begins like a blister, and becomes large;
and they appear in two forms, either dry or moist, and their colors are much like what I have described in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the wound, that you test and inquire first about all the instrument which is called “introducer”, according to what its form will come in the chapter which follows.
And the method of investigating abscesses of the nose is that you take the moistest place you find in the abscess and turn your fingers little by little until you know that the instrument has pierced the center, according to the size of the abscess;
then extract the foreign object, and take care to ensure it does not escape.
if moisture flows out, whatever color it has, cut it open as I have said for other abscesses;
and if after extracting the foreign object no moisture comes out, know that it is fatty, so then cut it in a cross shape, take it with tweezers, and peel it lightly from each side and watch the area where it lies so you draw it out clean with the root;
and if you cannot draw it out clean, then pull it out in pieces so that nothing remains.
for if anything remains, the pain will return many times;
and if some remains and the sinew troubles you, then apply to the wound some corrosive powders, bind up the wound, and put on things that soothe a hot abscess, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed;
and if the wound is large, then sew the two lips of the wound together, and treat it with what promotes flesh growth.
and if the pulsating vein is against you or otherwise troubles you, then hurry and use ground vitriol, and leave it for two or three days until the wound becomes pus-filled, and stop the boiling of the blood; then return to cauterize what remains of the knot.
See here the forms of the introducing instruments, and they are of three kinds: large and medium and small;
and there are three squares which are called "albaret," and one which is called "breb," and there are of three kinds: large, medium, and small, to treat abscesses of fistulas;
and they are also like the needles used to sew sorcerers, and they are of amber citrin, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are more valuable, and those proven from black lead are better for treating fistula corruptions;
and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the openings.
The forms of tumors are very diverse, as you see here:
and there are tumors that have two curves in three ways as well;
and there are tumors that have three curves, and they are also of three kinds;
and there are tumors that have two curves, and tumors with only one curve, and they are of three kinds;
and all these are necessary in their place.
The heads of these knives are sharp, and there are some that do not cut strongly on one side, which is why we scrape the skin, so that we do not cut the vein or the nerve;
and of these introducers, the needles are placed in sleeves so that the patient does not notice them during the opening of abscesses;
and they come in three ways: large, small, and medium, just as you see;
and they are not used strongly except in fleshy areas, such as legs, and arms, and breasts, and armpits, and similar places;
and sometimes one makes another small instrument resembling bark of reeds, according to this form, with which blood is stopped: and it is placed sometimes at the place that heals with cutting of veins, and arteries, and sometimes according to this large form:
sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to be corrupted, so that they resemble a woman's breasts;
and they remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wants to treat them must sew according to this form from this line 2 up to 8: then peel off the fat, and apply medicine to anoint flesh to the wound, then sew together the two edges of the wound, and treat it until it is healed;
and if the breast droops down and is softened due to its size like it happens with women, then cut it open in two places on top, with two similar incisions; from which one is held to the other at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line 2 up to the line g; then peel the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitching and powders, and what is necessary for the treatment until it is healed;
and if it is not healed, or the incision is not fully made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to bleeding, then you must fill the wound with moist cotton in a corrosive ointment; and leave it until it consumes the remaining tissue and fat, then clean it until it is healed.
These abscesses that come under the armpits are kinds of hard scrofula with edges, and some contain moisture.
Those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line .b. up to line .g.: And when all the pus that is in the abscess is emptied, apply the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess is of the appearance of scrofula, then cut it as we have said in the incisions for scrofula, and if the wound emits pus, then apply cauterization as we have said before.
When the artery is ruptured, and the skin above is sewn together, often abscesses form; and it happens in the same way with a swollen vein and an abscess.
and one knows it thus for the artery, the abscess is long in appearance; and when you feel it with your hands, you sense the constriction;
and when it is for the vein, it appears more swollen outwardly;
and it is foolish to cut this abscess, especially when it is under the ribs and in the angles and at the neck and in many other places, and when it is very large. It is then necessary to avoid the iron treatment, and that which is at the head should also be avoided, and in that which is of artery swelling, cut above the long skin;
then work the size of the awls, and carefully separate the artery from the tissues until it is uncovered;
then place a needle underneath it and make it pierce to the other side, and tie the artery with a double thread in two places, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples;
then puncture the area between the two ties with an introducer until the pus that is inside comes out, and let the abscess be released;
then administer the treatment that warms up, until the limb sweats; then treat it with an ointment similar to this, until it is healed;
and if the abscess is as large as a vein, then you should mark with your hand what you can reach of the abscess to all the skin, then insert the needle beneath the spot that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce, and let there be double thread, so that you pull it from the other side; then tie the abscess, as I have said, with the thread of one of the two ends of the double thread;
and if you fear that the thread will not come out, then insert another needle all along the thread under the entire abscess at the incision of the first needle, and hold the threads in four places;
then cut the abscess until the excess flows out, then cut the excess from the heart and leave what is attached;
then place a moist cloth in wine and oil, then administer treatments of bandages and ointments until he is healed.
Just as abscesses come in the artery and vein, abscesses come to the nerves when they are wounded, or by too great labor, and similar things.
And this happens more often in the shoulders and hands and all joints, and it is a severe abscess, and its color resembles the color of the flesh, and it is in various conditions without pain;
and when it is squeezed strongly, the patient feels pain, and it is not throughout the body, but under the heart;
and moves well from all sides, and does not go forward or backward, nor down or up, and that which is in the joints should not be cut with iron: perchance there might be contraction; and for that which is on the head or forehead, cut the skin with a scalpel.
and for that which is on the head or forehead, cut the skin with a scalpel. If the abscess is small, hold it with tweezers, and cut it at its root;
and if it is large, suspend it with a lancet, and scrape it, then remove it and suture the wound, and treat it until it is healed.
Sometimes it happens in bellies and not elsewhere, which is a disease called "fungus" by the resemblance to mushrooms, and its roots are subtle, and the fruit large;
and in it there are small and very large ones;
and I saw a man who had two in his belly that were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had a fine root, and were deeply split, and moisture flowed from them immediately.
I cut them and found one weighed eighteen ounces, and the other six and a half, and in the work of the incision you must look to see if the patient is moist, and the color of the artery is white and moist and has a subtle root; if you cut with a wide spatula, and let the cautery with fire be present before you.
if you cut with a wide spatula, and let the cautery with fire be present before you. For when cutting, there often comes too great an outflow of blood, and if the blood overcomes you, then hasten to cauterize;
and if you see the patient is fainting and fearful of the iron incision, then take a well-made thread of linen, and tie the joint as we have said, and leave it for two days;
and then restrain it, and do not stop tightening the linen thread until you cut the joint, and it falls off without any effort;
and if the roots are large, there is fear in cutting, especially for the abdomen, but you can cut off half of it, then cauterize so that it does not return;
Then treat the wound, and take care not to cut the tissue which is of a red color and has little sensation and closely adheres.
For this is an abscess with a sore, and I will come to the treatment of sores later.
When the boil is ready to burst. If the appearance of the swelling comes from a cautery wound or a tear in the surface, and it is on the belly where some of the swellings occur as they do in other ruptures, or from blood flowing from veins or arteries as mentioned before, or from flatulence;
and if it is due to the rupture of the surface and the discharge of the swelling, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the flesh, and it is a light matter without pain, and discharges through various outlets. And if it is due to the opening of the intestine, then it is more varied, and when you press it with your fingers, it sinks in and then returns, and sometimes it becomes hard, and greatly expands at the entrance of the bath and from strenuous work.
And if it is due to moisture, it is a light matter, and discharges well when you press it with your hand, and does not resist;
and if it is for blood, then the abscess is large and hard, and is fixed according to a quantity; and if it is for wind, then it is soft to the touch, and the work is such that you observe whether the appearance is due to arterial blood, or vein blood, or wind.
and if it is for wind, then it is soft to the touch, and the work is such that you observe whether the appearance is due to arterial blood, or vein blood, or wind. So you must leave the treatment. For there is doubt and fear, as I have said in the chapter about abscesses, concerning the artery and the vein.
and if the appearance is due to the intestine or the belly, then you must instruct the patient to lie on their back, and be stretched out straight, then anoint all around the swelling; then command them to lie between your hands, then go all around the area you have anointed with spiderweb, then stretch half of the abscess upwards with the entire large needle; then bind it around with a strong thread, or with a rope of strong silk firmly, and let the knot of the binding be secure;
then apply half of the abscess extended over the binding, and put your index finger in it, and squeeze the inside; if you find it caught in the binding, then untie it, and push the inside outward from the belly;
and if you find the boil, then take it with the lancet, and cut off the excess;
and if the artery or vein resists you, go around gently, then return to your work and take two needles, and insert two strong threads, and place the two needles around what you have done in a cross so that you pierce it;
then extract the abscess in four places above the needles, and if you see them, remove the needles, and leave the place until it becomes pus-filled, and the dead flesh will fall off by itself; when it is thin and rotten, then cut it, and treat it as necessary, and the abscess will fall out as we have said;
when it is thin and rotten, then cut it, and treat it as necessary, and the abscess will fall out as we have said; and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the area as necessary, and close the wound.
of the ulcer We have said in the division the likenesses of ulcers, and how one should work with medicines, and how one should avoid iron treatment;
and we discuss the spreading ulcer in the joint, and great caution is needed in its treatment, and the ancients said that when ulcers are in a place where they can be scraped off like an ulcer on the nipple, and in the thigh, and in similar places, it should be completely removed when it begins;
no one ever heals from it before me.
And the work, when it is in a place where it can be removed, as we have said, is that you purge the patient of black bile;
then make him sweat if there is evident fullness, then prepare the patient in a good place to perform the work;
then apply your poultices to the ulcer, and cover it completely with hair, and remove it from all sides without leaving anything;
and let the blood flow freely, and apply pressure to the area with your hand or some object, and if the continued bleeding opposes the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize until the blood is stanched; then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
of dropsy We have already said in the division the types of dropsy, and in what manner the accumulation of water is formed, and the signs of each type, and the treatment done by medicine, and that which is treated by iron:
and one should not use iron in these two types: it is to know, tympanites and hydrops, for these are deadly things;
then when you treat this kind ofdropsy which is called "eclites" with medicine, and the treatment does not help, look to see if the patient is weak, or if they have another disease besides dropsy, such as fever and diarrhea and similar things; do not use iron, for there is danger;
and if you see that the patient is of strong vigor, and they have no other disease but only dropsy, and they are not too young nor too old, then you must act thus: lift the patient upright on your hands, and the attendant presses the abdomen forcing the water to the lowest part of the body, then take the spathmoil spine according to this form: And let it be sharp from two parts. At the tip, and always let it not be so penetrating that it can reach the intestine when inserted, and it cannot injure;
then look if the dropsy is spreading towards the intestines: then you must make three straight cuts below the buttocks up to the thighs; and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, then your incision should be on the left side of the buttocks three cuts;
and if it is due to mucus, then [the incision] should be on the right, and it is not suitable for the patient to lie on the incision so that the excess fluids do not flow to the weaker area;
then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and thrust it in, and lift your hand to spread the spatula between the skin and the surface as when flaying to the quantity of one inch or around;
then pierce the surface until the spatula comes to the empty place, which is where the water lies, then pull it out forcefully, and insert this instrument of which here is the form: And it resembles a thin silver chain, and it is made of bronze or light iron, and at the lower part, there is a small perforation; and on one side, three perforations; and two from the other side, and one from another;
and the head of the shoulder is shaped like a feather, and this is the form of the incision with which the scribes shape the feather:
at the top is the alamel, so that when the instruments come to the water, they now move up on the instrument;
empty then half or a third part, for if you empty more than is necessary at that hour, perchance the patient may die from the depletion of his spirit due to the remedy, or he falls unconscious, or he approaches death;
but empty according to the quantity of its power, and according to what the conditions of the patient's strength indicate, and his pulses;
then take the instrument and hold the liquid, and it is held now for the plug that stops the opening which is on the surface, of which I have spoken, that you pierce in this manner;
then use the instrument again the other day, if you see the patient tolerating that, and take a small amount of liquid;
do this for several days, and be careful not to add more than a little bit of liquid remains.
And if you doubt about the patient, and you leave a lot of liquid in, then treat with burial earth or hot sand, and by sweating a lot or bathing in the sun, and dye by drinking; and the treatment with drying medicines until it is healed, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the water, as I have said before.
Sometimes children are born who have no opening in the penis, or the opening is small, or it is not in its proper place.
It is necessary to pierce it entirely with a very fine instrument according to this form:
then put in a small tube of linen, and bind it and keep it that way for three or four days, and when he wants to urinate, remove the tube, let him urinate, and then put it back;
and perhaps none is needed, because the urine that comes out forcefully does not leave it closed.
He whose opening is small, is treated with the plug of lint, as we have said, so it will widen.
Those who do not have the opening in its proper place are disadvantaged, because some are born with the opening at the tip of the penis, which prevents them from urinating unless they lift their penis up; and cannot menstruate because the matter cannot reach the womb, and it is a bad disease.
And the method of the work is that the patient lies on his back, then stretch the head of the penis and cut it like the length of a feather, so that the hole falls in the middle, as it should;
and beware of the flow of blood which often occurs, and if it happens, stop it with what stops blood, and treat the wound until he is healed.
pustules of the penis Often this albathe comes to the penis, and it is an ugly appearance of flesh;
and there are malignant and non-malignant ones;
so you must take them by the handle delicately, cut and clean all of them, then apply cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment; then treat with diafinicon ointment until it is healed.
And if the ulcer is malignant, of a pus-filled color and oozing, then you must apply cautery to it.
When you have cut it, and if the hernia is at the top of the penis, with part inside the skin and part outside, then you must remove the part of the hernia that is inside first; and when it is sewn up, then treat the outside.
For when you treat it all at once, the head of the penis is not securely protected and may be pierced, leading to blackening and corruption in the penis and the groin;
so it is necessary to scrape off all that is black and corrupted, then apply the poultice of honey and flour which is made from pomegranate rind and beans, then treat with other treatments until he is healed.
And if bleeding occurs, apply the lunar cauterization according to this form:
The cautery thus helps in two arrangements together: that is, to the discharge of blood and to corruption;
and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, then you must insert a tube of bronze into the urethra, and let the patient urinate through it;
and when the skin is swollen at the head of the penis which happens to those who have not been circumcised, due to a wound or an abscess, then you must peel it with a sharp instrument until the bindings are loosened, and the head of the penis is freed on all sides;
and if it is a difficult thing to discuss this, then you must scrape with the spatula a little from the head of the penis and the skin;
then gently separate between the two, and place a fine linen cloth moistened with cold water, so it does not dry out again.
Circumcision is not the separation of continuity like other wounds; nevertheless, when we perform this work by our will, and especially on children, it is necessary that we do the best work, and the least harmful to their health.
I say that the ancients did not speak of the circumcision of their children, for they do not use it in their law, and we have nothing more than what we have acquired through experience.
For I have seen the majority of masters and surgeons who performed circumcisions around the glans, forcefully, and with an entire novacule;
so it flees the area because there are two layers, and by chance one cuts the upper layer and leaves the lower layer. or the recovery is worse, and the pain is doubled, and in the cleaning which is of the wound, the tip of the member is not secure;
and in the cleaning of the nail, by chance the iron slips, and ruins the work, and many times they grow back without needing cleaning, and I have wanted it this way.
Of the cleansing that is done with force on all the thread of the ligament I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the force cuts just as well above as below.
For when you press your hand, you cut evenly in one continuous motion; but make sure the thread is tight around the skin;
and let the method of the first work be such that you make the child think, if he understands, that you do not do more than wrap the thread around the penis just so, and then give him hope in every way that you can;
then make him stand between your hands straight, and respond to the forces between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments;
then put your hand on the penis and blow on the groin, and pull it up until the head of the penis is in; then clean it well of the dirt that has gathered there, then tie the marked place with a double thread, then tie it below one point to another tie;
then clean it well of the dirt that has gathered there, then tie the marked place with a double thread, then tie it below one point to another tie; and hold it with two hands by the second ligature at the pouch and the index finger, and cut between the two ligatures, then lift the heart upwards quickly and pull the head of the probe; then let the blood flow little by little, for it is the most effective; and put powder on and on the powder apply a cloth glued with an egg white boiled and diluted with rose water, cooked with good and fresh rose oil, and leave it on until the next day, and clean it again as needed until it is healed.
The form of forces in purification is as follows:
the two shoulders should be held tight and be sharp, and the shoulders should be as large as the sleeve equally:
The mistake of purification is when the pus inside flows at the incision;
then you must extend it with your nail, so that the wound forms an abscess;
and cut it evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your nail, then hold it with tweezers, and then cut it.
And if it exceeds three days, and what is under the penis is swollen, then leave it until the hot abscess has calmed, and gently scrape it;
cut it as much as you can without moving, and be careful of the part of the penis, for this will not harm it.
Treat then the area with a powder that causes heat to the wound, which we have mentioned in the treatise on powders, and if one cuts beyond measure from the heart, and it goes above, it will do no harm;
Treat it then, as we have said, until it is healed.
about the retention of urine
The retention of urine is due to the obstruction by stones, or frozen blood, or feces, or dead flesh, or similar things, which we have mentioned in the division;
and if the urine is not released, and you see that the retention is due to a stone in the neck or at the mouth of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be bent over on their knees; and let his feet be placed on his back, and stretch his belly from the part above the back, and restrain the patient as much as he can; and then the neck of the bladder is forced for the expression of the stone above, so the urine is released;
and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer extraction with all the instrument which is called "catheter", of which this is the form:
and let it be of fine silver, light and hairy, like the feathers of a bird; and let the cane be one and a half palms in length, and let it be thin at the tip.
And the method of urine extraction is that you take a double thread, and tie at the head a ball of wool or cotton, and insert the end of the thread inside the urethra;
and cut off the excess wool and insert it until the head of the urethra, then anoint the urethra with oil or butter and egg white, and make the patient sit on a chair, and lubricate the bladder and penis with moist oil, olive oil, and warm water;
then gently insert the urethra into the penis until it reaches the base of the penis, then fold the penis upwards towards the belly;
then insert the urethra until it reaches the bladder, and the patient will feel it come to the empty place, and this is not done according to this order forcefully because the conduit through which it goes is twisted;
then are the threads on all the wool little by little, and the urine follows the wool, then draw it out forcibly, and make the urine run;
and repeat the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and the patient is relieved.
When blood comes into the bladder or putrefaction is gathered there, and you see aqueous and medicinal substances distill, then make use of all the instrument which is called "clepsydre", and it is of this form:
It is closed, and has three openings: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see;
and the thread is placed so that the medicated plug is such that it stops up the penis well without addition, so that one may draw out moisture and push when necessary;
and when you want to introduce your medicine into the bladder, put the head of the catheter in the moisture, and draw with the suction that is inside;
so you will draw the moisture to the crust, and then firmly rejoin by drawing together; so the moisture will enter inside, and it will reach the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it;
and this is the form of the subtle clyster with which one clysters the bladder:
And it is made of silver or bronze, and the head is higher;
and below at the side where the limb lies;
then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture in it with which you want to clysterize the bladder, then tie it between the two sides firmly with a strong doubled thread, and heat that moisture over the fire;
then put the head of the clyster in the penis, then pull your hand over the bladder as all the moisture comes along, until the patient feels that this moisture has indeed come to the bladder;
and if you do not have the bladder, then take a piece of parchment, and make a circle, and pierce it roundly around; then put the strong thread through these holes, then join the circle as one joins metal, and put inside what you wish of oil and moisture and water, and bind it to the instrument;
and do as you have done with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
of the stone
We have said before in the division the kinds of stone, and the extraction together with medicine;
and I have said the difference between the stone in the kidneys, and all the signs, and in which stone one should operate with cutting; and in the bladder, and in the penis;
and I will tell you clearly and briefly.
I say that the stone which forms in the bladder happens more often to children, and the sign is that the urine jumps from the bladder resembling urine in its subtlety;
and there appears sand, and it irritates the patient's penis, and it can happen many times, and then it constricts; and in many of these leaps the foundation;
and the healing of children is light until they are four years old, and it is very severe in the elderly, and it is moderate for young adults, to those who are between youth and old age;
and the treatment is lighter for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to purify the patient with an enema, to draw out all the bile that is in the intestines. For it sometimes hinders seeking the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet, and set him upright and move him downward so that the stone descends to the neck of the bladder, and sometimes it leaves its upper position;
then make him sit between your spread hands, and his hands should be below his thighs, so that the bladder is completely inclined downward;
then she seeks it and touches inside;
if you feel the stone in the space, then hurry now to cut into the stone.
And if it does not fall at the full touch, then moisten your index finger with oil from the left hand, if the patient is an adult, or your middle finger, if the patient is a fully grown youth; and put it into his anus, and seek the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, then pull it towards the neck of the bladder;
then press with your finger, and bring it out where you want to cut into it.
And instructs the servant to press the bladder with his hand, and commands him to extend his right hand upwards towards the testicles, and with his left hand lift the skin that is beneath the testicles in the area where one makes the incision;
then he inserts the scalpel cutting, which is its form: And make an incision between what is between the testicles and the anus, not in the middle but on the left side;
and be straight on the stone, and your hands should be near the anus, and let the incision be transverse so that it is wide from above, and inside narrow according to the quantity of the stone, not too large;
by chance the pressure on the tooth which is in the jawbone causes it to fall out without effort;
and know that there is such a stone in which there are angles and edges: it is difficult to remove;
and there is such one that is smooth, resembling an acorn, and round, from which the removal is easy.
To the one that has angles and edges, make the cut larger;
and if it does not come out, then you must grasp with the forceps that are like a file at the head, to grip the stone tightly so that it does not escape; where you place under the joint a delicate curved instrument at the head;
and if you cannot apply it in this way, then enlarge the opening of the pore, and if the flesh is corroded, then treat it with vitriol;
and if there is more than one stone, then place the largest one at the neck of the bladder first, then cut above it, then pull it out, and the smaller ones afterward if there are several.
And if it is very large, then it must be sawn, and make a larger incision. For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or the urine comes out through the opening that the wound cannot close;
but nonetheless exert yourself in pulling it out, or in breaking it with forceps, until you pull it out in pieces;
and when you have completed your work, then apply the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it tightly, and place upon it a cloth moistened in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then lay the patient on his back, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
And when you release it, wash the area very well with oil and water, then treat it with ointment diafinicon and basilicon ointment until it is healed.
and if hot abscesses and corrosions, and clots of blood in the bladder come to the wound, and if urination is thus hindered in such a way that it does not occur with the urine: then put your finger in the wound, and draw out that blood, for if it remains there, it will corrupt the bladder, and cause putrefaction;
then raise the wound of water and ash and salt, and aid it in all ways that you know, until it is healed;
and it is necessary that all the hours that you treat it, you bind the two thighs, and apply the medicines to the place.
And if the stone is small, and it is in the channel of the penis, embedded inside, and the urine cannot exit; then treat it as I said before, that you cut it multiple times, and one is relieved of the cutting through this treatment. I have already proved it thus.
Take an iron rod according to this form and let it have three pointed ends fixed in one piece.
then take a thread and tie it around the penis below the stone so that it cannot move back into the bladder;
then insert the drill into the shaft lightly, until it reaches the bone; and turn the drill with your hand in the bone little by little, until you can pierce through the other side of the bone;
the urine will come soon, then press your hand on what remains of the bone inside the shaft. It will break soon, and it will come out with the urine, and the patient will be healed;
and if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then tie a thread below the bone and another above, then cut the shaft where the bone is between the two ties, then extract it, untie the thread, and clean the congealed blood in the wound; and treat until it is healed.
of the stone of women
It often happens that a stone is lodged in women, and if it ever occurs, the treatment is difficult, and is prohibited for three reasons:
one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin;
and the second is that one cannot find a woman who is knowledgeable enough to expose herself to midwives, especially when she is chaste.
And the third reason is that perhaps one cannot find a woman who is knowledgeable enough in this art to perform it with her hands;
and the fourth reason is that the stone in the woman is more embedded than the stone in the man, which requires a deeper incision, and there is great fear. And if necessity arises for this, you must take a very knowledgeable midwife, who is hardly found, and if you do not find one, seek a chaste subtle midwife.
and he presents a wise midwife in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and commands her to do what you command her from the inquiry about the stone; and look very well if the woman is a virgin:
and look very well if the woman is a virgin: then he must insert his finger into the foundation and seek the stone;
and if she finds it, then she should constrain it beneath her finger, and commands her to insert her finger into the patient’s vagina, and squeeze and press her left hand firmly on the bladder.
if she finds it, then she must move it bit by bit from the entrance of the bladder downwards until it reaches the root of the thigh;
then cut into the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the groin, where it appears to be located, and feel for the stone in that area; and do not move his hand above or below the stone, and let the cut at first be small;
and do not move his hand above or below the stone, and let the cut at first be small; then insert the probe into the cut, if you feel the stone increase the wound until the stone can come out freely, and know that there are many kinds of stones:
that is to say, small and large, rough and smooth, long and round, and those that have ridges.
and know the similarities to understand the outcome.
and if the pain overwhelms you, then apply ground vitriol to the area and keep it there for an hour until the pain subsides;
then return to your work, until the stone is strong, and have the instruments that I have told you in the extraction of the stone from men to help you in your work;
and if the blood overcomes you, and it is from the artery that is cut, then put the powder on the place and bind with cloths and bandages, and do not begin this again, and leave the stone and do not draw it, lest by chance the patient might die; then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is calmed, and the flesh softens, then return to your work, until the stone is removed.
Aquous rheum is nothing other than an accumulation of moisture or white fluid, which is beneath the cover of the testicles, containing the egg;
and it is called "syfac", and sometimes it is properly in the web of the eye, if one thinks that it might be another egg; and it is the skin of the testicle between the white syfac that we have mentioned;
and this does not happen if there is no pus. And the generation of this ramice is due to weakness that affects the testicles, and that material is spread out.
And sometimes it comes from a blow to the testicles, and this moisture has many colors: or it is of a color inclining to yellow, or without red, or black, or white watery, and this happens more often;
and these are the signs to recognize this condition, for if it is in the white syfac that we have mentioned, then the abscess is hard, the pus long like the shape of an egg, and the testicles do not appear, for they are surrounded by moisture.
And if there is moisture in the inner cloth, then the abscess is hard with part of the yolk, and for that reason, one thinks it is another yolk;
and if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white surface, then one can feel it well;
then when you want to know the color of the moisture, test all the inserted area thoroughly, of which the form is described above. According to what comes after the introduction, judge of what is within.
And when we cure it with iron, then the patient must be bled according to our ability and the fullness of his body;
then place him on his back, on something slightly high, and put many cloths under him;
then sit on his left, and instruct the assistant to sit on the right, and extend the rod to one of the two sides of the heart of the testicles;
then take the sharp blade, and cut the skin of the testicles lengthwise from the long part down to near the tip, and let your incision be straight, dividing the skin of the testicles until you reach the white surface, and peel it carefully according to your ability;
then pierce the surface full of water with a wide hole, and drain all the water, and then insert your fingers, and stretch the surface upwards;
and do not touch the heart of the testicles, but only the surface; cut it all or piece by piece especially the subtle part of it, that if you do not cut it wisely, the ailment will return;
and if the eye jumps out during your work, reset it in place when you have completed the work on the surface;
then sew the two sides of the scrotum together with one stitch, then treat it like other wounds until it is healed.
and if you find the eye corrupted by another disease, then you must tie the vessels that are suspensorial, fearing the flow of blood;
then cut the testicle at the suspensorial part, and extract the eye, and treat it as we have said.
And if water is collected in two parts together, know that these are two branches; cut the other part just as you have done the first equally, then wipe the blood, and put in the wound wool moistened in rose oil;
cut the other part just as you have done the first equally, then wipe the blood, and put in the wound wool moistened in rose oil; and put beneath another wool moistened in wine and oil, and put on the two sides, and place over doubled cloths, and bind it tightly according to this form:
Then take two cloths, and fill them with shredded wool according to this shape and let them be joined by stitching at the waist, and one of the shoulders should reach from the anus to the back, and the other to the area of the groin;
and the other two heads on the two angles, and let all the binding be gathered into the loop of the strap;
and sometimes this branch of cautery is used instead of an iron blade, and you take a fine surgical knife, and cut the skin of the testicles, and heat it as we have said, so that the white surface containing the fluid is exposed;
take the cautery in this form, and pierce that surface with the tongs, and scrape it with this fine hot cautery:
and cut it in every way that you can, until you clean everything;
and be careful that the fire does not touch the egg;
and know that this work is more beneficial; and keep watch for the flow of blood, and you must complete the tasks of cutting;
and if anything opposes you, whether an abscess or the flow of blood or something else, then treat what opposes you according to what has been said before.
And if the patient is fearful and does not wish to undergo this work because of its horror, then administer puncture, as I tell you, and it is that when you are certain by the signs we have mentioned that aqueous humor is present, then make the patient sit on the raised seat; then pierce the abscess in the part below all the spatule wide, and place the puncture of the long needle;
and let the openings be wide so that all the water flows out;
then put cotton on the place, and tie it, and leave for the remaining water to flow out, then clean it until the wound is healed;
and if the white cloth does not allow water to come out of the mouth of the wound, then you must put a quill or the instrument with which one draws water from dropsical patients, the form of which is described above;
and widen the wound slightly, and know that the water returns and gathers after about six months or so, and when it has gathered as before, thus will the patient spend his days.
Know that in the section of this branch there is fear in many positions, which is why it seems better to leave it alone;
and I will tell you the work and the similarities of the abscess.
I say then that many abscesses come to the body, especially to the testicles; and it is for various reasons.
It is to know by excess of sour and watery humors, which spread to the testicles, or from percussion;
and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body; and finds no pain, and there is a severe abscess;
and by chance some severe abscesses are fearful and stony, and of a flaxen color, and sometimes come from artery pus, or vein swelling.
When it is from artery pus, it is known by the abscess's condition being hot when you press it with your fingers; and it is not advisable that you touch it.
The one caused by vein swelling is known by its condition when touched with the fingers, and one can properly perform bloodletting on this appearance, and on other forms; and it is that you cut the core of the testicles, then the egg rises up, and the thread from the white surface, and release the suspensory from all sides of the egg.
if the egg is already cooked with these black spots, then you must draw out the egg, and cut it;
and if it is airy on the surface, or in what is inside the vessels, then you must release all of that tissue, and cut it roundly.
And if the birth of the flesh is at the back place, then you must cut it all away and extract the egg, just as we have said.
And when your work is completed, apply the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
This is an abscess enveloped in a wrapping similar to a boil, with the softening of the testicles, and the patient suffers greatly when urinating;
and the treatment of this disease is equally as frightening as the one mentioned before, and nevertheless we will tell you its procedure, according to what the ancients did.
It is necessary that you seat the patient on an elevated chair, then place the scrotal suspensory below with your hands, covering all the parts close to the penis, and hold the main parts tightly, stretching them out fully;
then cut with a broad and sharp knife across the parts to expose them, and then peel from each side, just as we have said in the extraction of arteries from the temples;
then insert a needle with double thread, and tie it at the first place where the vein appeared, and then tie it at the other end; then cut them in the middle straight according to the length of the body, and draw out the corrupted moisture;
then treat the wound like the others where we apply grease, so that no fluid falls that nourishes one of the testicles;
for by this no harm comes, and if pus comes to all the fluids, then it is necessary to draw from both testicles; so that the organ does not lose its nourishment due to the incision of the fluids, and they dry out and cannot help each other.
The effects of this procedure are by the incision that reaches the thigh, or the extension on the belly in the area of the groin, which causes the intestines to descend from that rupture to one of the testicles;
and this rupture is in the thigh or from the extension of it, and these two types come from many causes:
or from a blow, or from jumping, or from crying, or from lifting heavy weights, and by similar things;
and the signs when it is from the extension of the thigh, is that it happens little by little, over a long time, and does not come suddenly; and the abscesses are equal until they ripen, because the thigh presses on the intestines.
And the sign is when it is of the section of the thigh, that it brings sudden pain at the beginning, and the swelling appears different beneath the skin near, and this is due to the protrusion of the intestines and the body beyond the thigh.
And sometimes the hernias descend with the intestines, and are retained there, causing great pain to the patient, especially when they are pressed.
And in these iron treatments there is fear, therefore one must avoid them.
And the method of the work is that you instruct the patient to keep the intestines in with their hand inside the wound, if they can reach in; then remember on his neck. between your hands, and lift the hips;
then stretch the heart upwards, and cut all the skin of the scrotum lengthwise; then insert into the lips of the wound hooks according to what you need to open the wound, and they should be such that the pus may flow out;
then peel the underlying surface that is beneath the skin of the scrotum, until the white hard surface is fully exposed on all sides;
then insert your index finger into what follows the testicle, between the white surface beneath the skin of the egg, and the second surface, and separate what is behind the egg, and between the second surface;
and then move the right hand inside the core of the testicles, and extend the white surface upwards with your left hand, and lift the egg to all the surface towards the waist; and instruct the minister to stretch the egg upwards, and loosen what is air behind the binding;
and check with your hands if there is any intestine wrapped in the hard white surface, and if you find anything, put it back into the belly below;
then take a needle with thick thread made of several strands, and insert it into the back part of the surface, which is behind the skin of the testicles; After the cutting, then cut the shoulders that appear from the threads, until there are four threads; then assemble them one on top of the other in the shape of a cross, and tie the scrotal skin, which we have said is under the skin of the testicles, with a strong binding of two parts; then wrap the shoulders of the threads, and tie them firmly in two parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish can enter within, to prevent a hot abscess from forming; and place the binding according to the first binding long two fingers from that, and after these two bindings leave of the scrotal skin which is under the skin of the testicles the length of one finger; and after all the other according to the roundness that the eye bears;
then cut in the part that is beneath the skin of the testicles, as much as the sinew and the vein, just as we have said before;
then apply moistened wool in oil, and put it on the wounds, and apply the linen that we have mentioned. And sometimes the white surface that we have mentioned is cauterized after the incision, out of fear of blood flow. For this happens often, and leave the linen until it falls off by itself;
and if it takes too long to fall off, let it be soaked in hot water, and put on what we have said until it falls off;
then treat the wound with another treatment until it is perfectly healed.
of fleshly hernia
In this branch, I have never seen anyone who would dare to perform the treatment with iron.
And the ancients said that it is made like the twig which is together with the linden, in such a manner that you tie the vessels, after cutting lightly underneath;
then cut in the middle, and treat the abscess of the one who works, until the vessels fall out;
and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Sometimes rupture occurs in the arteries, as we have said, and the fluid leaks out;
and none of the intestines should descend to the testicles, and if they do descend, it is bad, and recurs frequently;
and if it remains too long at this stage, the wound or abscess grows, so that the intestines descend;
and this happens by the extension of the abscess which is in the veins, as we have said, for it is extended, then the fluids are softened and swollen and open;
and the treatment is by cautery, as we have said before;
and sometimes it is treated with iron in this manner: and it is that the patient lies down on his back between your hands, then cut the swollen area of the rupture lengthwise according to the quantity of three fingers;
and then extract the sebaceous substance which is under the skin that follows, then take the ointment and put it on the area where the sebaceous substance appears;
and press it perfectly on the belly, then sew the two areas where the sebaceous substance appears at the top of the ointment, and sew one and the other;
then extract the top of the ointment, and do not cut into the sebaceous substance nor stretch the egg or anything else, as I have made you know in the treatment of the rupture of the intestines; then treat it according to the treatment of wounds.
then treat it according to the treatment of wounds. And when you cut the boys, wash and treat the wound until it is healed.
The suture is tight, and there is no appearance in the fracture, and the cauterization is softer in this place, and closer to healing.
of the softening of the skin of the testicles
often the skin of the testicles becomes soft in some men because the semen inside is softened, and it is noticeable;
and it is necessary, when one wants to treat it, that the patient lies down on his back, and cuts the skin which is softened over the natural skin;
then bring together the two lips with a stitch, and if you see, first sew the excess of the softened skin with three or four firm stitches;
then cut between the stitches, and treat it like other wounds until it is healed, and remove the thread.
from the chaste one
Know that castrations are disapproved in our law, and for this reason I would prefer not to speak of it in this book;
and it is not necessary except for two reasons:
where one is that the physician should know how to answer when asked, and know the treatment;
and the other is that we often need to carefully use some animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and cats and other animals.
I say then that castration is done according to two methods: either by traction, or by cutting.
In the one that we do by traction, we make the animal sit in warm water until the testicles are softened and hanging; then take them in your hand until they are put back and you no longer feel them.
Of the punishment of the waist: you must dye the animal, and press the skin of the testicles with your left hand, then tie the suspensory ligament, and cut on each egg with one cut, when you have properly flayed them;
and leave some of the fat and the delicate membrane that is on the vessels;
and this method of castration is milder than that which is done by traction, because with traction sometimes something of the testicles remains, by which the animal desires lust;
then treat the wound until it is healed.
about hermaphrodites
Hermafrodite exists according to two ways for men: one is that between the two testicles there appears as the figure of a woman's nature, where it has hair, and sometimes it expels urine.
And the other manner is in women, and it has on the wrist like a rod and two coins.
And the treatment for the man and the woman is that you cut off all the attached flesh, and treat it like other wounds;
in the second way, for men whose urine jumps over the skin of the testicles, there is no treatment.
Tentigene is a piece of flesh attached to the natural part, so that it is too ugly to see; and some women have it as large as a hand, and that is the treatment.
You must dye the excess of the tendon on your hand or with needles, and lightly cut it;
and do not go too deep, so that blood flow does not occur, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed;
and to another growth that appears at the mouth of the gum, and it spreads, and sometimes grows large, and resembles a crown, and for this reason the ancients called it "crown disease". So you must cut it, as we have said about the tendon, and treat it until it is healed.
It is erratic when the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the opening is small; and it is caused by birth, or accidentally by disease that has come upon it;
and it is caused by birth, or accidentally by disease that has come upon it; or it is by a cartilage attached, or of a subtle or thick surface, and it is made in perfection in the marrow, or on the sides, or below, or wherever it may be;
and defend the conception, and the childbirth, and perhaps the flowers to have;
and the knowledge of this is by the look at the bile.
If the swelling is closely appearing, then apply to your hands or to the bandage.
if it is of a subtle surface, and it is close to the two temples, then hurry, and do it thus:
put your two index fingers together, and the woman should be on her back, with her legs spread apart;
then stretch the two temples properly, until the subtle surface is rounded, and it covers the stitches;
then take wool, and moisten it in oil, and place it on the area, and have the woman lie with the man each day so that it does not heal.
And if the surface is hard and thick, then you should shave it with a spatula resembling a myrtle leaf.
if the swelling is of new flesh, then suspend it at the incision and cut it;
and have the blood-stopping medicines, such as alum, dragon's blood, frankincense, mixed with egg white;
then apply a broad linen bandage so that the wound cannot heal closed;
and thus it should be done for a long time, and apply a dry linen cloth;
then treat with other treatments until it is healed.
And when new flesh comes in the wound, it must be cut according to this method, if they are not infected abscesses. For an infected abscess that is in the wound, one should not touch it with iron.
hemorrhoids Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that bleed without cause habitually, and when hemorrhoids are old they become warty;
and we have already said in the division the similarities of them, and the signs, and I will say here those that receive cure.
I say that the hemorrhoids and the hardening, when they are fully inside the body, and they do not appear to be felt, are not cured by iron.
Those that are at the opening of the body, which can be felt, are those that can be treated.
It is then necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then extend the tumor with tongs, and cut it at its roots, then powder over blood-stopping medicines such as alum and dragon's blood and frankincense, and similar things;
then place her feet to the wall for an hour, then put her in cold water;
and if bleeding occurs, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate peel and galls and similar things, and then take barley flour, mix it with honey and oil, and make a plaster to apply on her back.
And if it is stopped, it is good. If this is not so, make him apply leeches to the back and breasts without piercing;
then take wool, and moisten it in plantain juice or in elderberry juice with old wine, and apply it to the place.
And when the abscess has subsided, clean the area of ointment until it is healed;
and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a rough head, so it must be cut as I have said for the thelul; and then clean it until it is healed.
Many kinds of abscesses occur in the jaw, such as canker and stone abscess and herpes and stomatitis and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscess, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
It is therefore necessary that I speak in this treatise about the hot abscess that occurs in the marrow, which is not one of the abscesses collected by the bowels;
and if you wish to know the work of iron, then look if the abscess is sharp at the beginning of its appearance, and full of heat and fever, and if it turns red if you can see it. then do not hurry to pierce, but let it ripen until the pain is calmed;
and then have the patient sit on a chair, and let them have two small stools to lean on, and rest against their back and draw their legs together beyond the thigh;
and let his thighs be spread apart, and place his arms beneath his knees, and bind them well with a good binding;
then turn the patient towards the right side, and apply the instrument used to work the mouth of the wound, from which the form follows thereafter;
and it is necessary that when you apply this instrument there, that you first insert the tip to know the depth of the wound, so that what enters inside with the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and that it does not injure the patient; and if the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the wound with cloths, so that the instrument does not distress it;
and it is necessary that he place the nozzle of the instrument above, and that he soak the instrument.
And when the abscess is open, and it is cut by hand, it must be cut at the top, to the whitish part;
and when the boil is emptied, then you must put into the wound cloths soaked in rose oil, or in dried green oil;
and place the cloth firmly on the wound at the height of the swelling, and put over the swelling and on the arm clean wool soaked in water or infusion where mallows have been boiled;
then treat it after two days of applying an ointment similar to this, until it is healed;
and sometimes the swelling and the wound are reduced by an enema of water and honey, and then with water or roots of lilies and long Solomon's seal boiled; then return to the ointment.
And if the wound penetrates into the marrow, then you must be careful not to use hot iron, but treat it as we have said in the section.
of childbirth It is first necessary for the midwife to know the signs of natural childbirth, and these signs are when you see the woman pressing down, and desiring to smell the air:
then the infant hastens to come out; then you know that this childbirth is according to the natural signs, and the exit is under his head, and the afterbirth with it;
and when you see these signs, then you should gently press her belly so that the infant comes out quickly;
for when it descends with its head up, the afterbirth comes out with it, and the mother is cleansed of her excesses by proper cleansing;
and this one that comes differently does not come naturally.
For it sometimes comes upon his feet, and strengthens the body or the shoulder, and the hands, or it comes upon his belly, or spleen, and is converted by chance upon his neck, and by other bad forms;
it is necessary for the nurse that she be wise and subtle in these matters, and wary of error and deception, and I will show you all the forms how one should help her.
If the infant comes upon its head through natural passage, and the woman labors greatly, and her strength is weak, then make her sit on a saddle, or the women hold her;
and arises its nature of oil or fenugreek be cooked, and then puts the bath between his hands the small spatula whose here is the form: and split the membrane, and cut to his nail so that the moisture which is inside comes out;
and take the belly of the woman so that the fetus descends, and if it does not descend, it is necessary to administer an enema to the woman with a mixture of fenugreek and sesame oil;
then make her take and sneeze from condysium, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: the fetus will now come out.
And if both hands come out of joint, then you must reset them gently little by little; and if they cannot enter, then place the woman on the seat and lift her feet up; then stand the seat on the ground, and hold the woman so she does not fall when standing;
and if the hand cannot enter, and the infant is dead, then cut the hands with the knife that was previously placed there, and extract the infant, and reset equally.
of the birth of the child on its feet When the infant comes out on its feet, then you must push it upwards; and then turn it little by little until it is aligned;
then take the foot and stretch it little by little.
When it jumps up to the thighs, then order it to be caught, and make it sneeze with condiments; if it is strong, may God will it.
And if it does not become strong as we have said, then turn it little by little until it is according to its natural form. For then it moves easily.
And if it does not come as strong as we have said, take musliage of altitude, and oil of sesame, and dissolved gum, and grind all in a mortar; and apply it to the woman's affected area and strengthen this ointment, then have her sit in warm water up to her ribs;
and when it is moistened beneath, make her a collar of myrrh, and place it underneath, and leave it for an hour; Then have her sit on the chair, then make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose, and lightly take hold of her belly, for now the fetus jumps.
of the birth of the child upon its knees When the fetus comes in this form, then the healer gradually places his hands there; then let her be laid on her back, and let her legs be hung down, and let her lie on the bed; and bend her hands gradually, and then take hold of her hands on the belly, and remove the pillows underneath until she is positioned downward; and if the fetus does not jump, then take her legs and move them forcefully, then move her belly upwards, then put your hands there; and give the child little by little; and instruct the woman to strain until the infant comes out.
of the birth of the child who comes with one hand hanging down It is necessary to devise to return the hand: if it cannot be returned, then make the woman stand up and walk;
if she cannot walk, then make her lie on the bed, and firmly stretch her legs;
then apply the massage that I have described;
and if she does not give birth, then make her sit on the stool, then try to return the hand; and lift the child according to its natural position, and make it sneeze, and command her to strain so that the infant comes out.
from the birth of the child on its neck, and have its hands spread out, and its face turned towards its mother's back. It is necessary that the bailiff holds his hand, then turns it little by little, and lifts it gently;
and when it is leveled, then apply the natural mixture of altitude and oil, as we have said, then command her to move little by little;
and when you have done this, then make her sit on the seat, and command her to strain; and make her sneeze. In this same manner to all the second skin
In this same manner to all the second skin When it comes out in this manner and the second stage is complete, then cut the afterbirth with your nail until the moisture is emptied;
and if the fetus can move on its face and on its neck, then cut from the buttocks, so that it is not retained, and turn the fetus;
then push the child inside, until you have placed it as it should be, and instruct the woman to hold on somehow:
Of the birth of twins Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four are born; and this is not a strange thing, and it often happens. Two are strange things, and do not live, if they live at all;
Two are strange things, and do not live, if they live at all; I know this, that they are multiplied, and are separated by the surface which divides them, which is attached to the bud;
and sometimes they come out naturally like some drops, as we have said.
And if they come out heavily, then treat it as we have said, and let the bandage be fine, and do quickly and lightly what needs to be done; and do thus as it is worth moving towards salvation. of many children
Sometimes they are formed in the womb as I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more up to XV, and are fully formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the wise glorious, and it is necessary that the bandage know all this, for perhaps similar things may happen; so do according to what is proper.
of the dead child
When you treat the woman of the dead child in the womb, as I have said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are constrained to manual work; you must know if the woman is of sound health, and has no condition where she fears death;
the woman must be positioned on her back, with her shoulders tilted downward, and her legs raised;
and the attendant should hold her with two supports, or she be tied to the bed so that she is not strained by the descent of the child;
then rub the mouth of the patient with moist oils mixed with alum and fenugreek and flaxseed, then anoint his hands with these oils and these mixtures;
then apply them lightly to the patient, then select the place where you should apply the poultices that are suitable for this, and be careful if the child is prepared that it descends on his head;
then apply the poultices to his eyes or on his neck or in his mouth or in his palate or under the beard or in the throat or near the sides, and if the descent is on the feet, apply it to the ankles and the middle sides;
and it is necessary that he holds the poultice in his right hand, and places the salve between the fingers of his left hand, and applies it to his entire hand lightly, and applies the poultice to any of these places we have mentioned, until it reaches the empty space;
then place against the other oncine, or a third one if you need it, so that the extractions be equal;
and then stretch them equally by moving from one side to the other, for the teeth to come out, and let the oncines be toothed to hold the teeth, as is shown here the form:
And if a part of it remains, then anoint one of his fingers with oil, and insert it into that part, and pull the other part;
and if any remains, then place this oncine at the higher part, and do this until it all comes out completely.
And if one hand comes in front of the other and it cannot be brought back due to constriction, then you must wrap around the cloth until it all goes out; then cut at the joint of the sole or to the toe, and thus you must do in the other hand, and to both feet.
And if the shoulder of the child is large and it is stuck at the exit, or if it has a sharp pointed head, then you must place the spathula between your fingers, split the head and extract the water; or you round it with the instrument which is called "almidach," from which the form comes with the instruments in the chapter that follows this one;
and likewise do if the infant has a large head naturally;
and then pull the bones with tongs, and if the head jumps out and it holds by force, let it be split so that the moisture which is in the boil comes out;
and if it cannot come out, then cut it into pieces with the tool that you can use;
and if it is swollen in the belly or below the ribs, then you must pierce it until the moisture flows.
And if the fever is on its feet, then the attraction is light, and the adjustment at the mouth of the marrow is slight.
and if it is tight in the belly or the breast, then you must stretch it with a cloth wrapped around the hand; and cut open the belly or the breast, until the moisture inside flows out;
and if the other limbs are removed and the head remains, then the doctor puts his hand in the socket of the marrow, and pulls it to the mouth of the socket; then he puts in one or two fingers, and pulls it hard;
and if the mouth of the marrow is narrowed due to a hot abscess that has come there, then one should not work on it, but rather apply moist and greasy substances; and treat it with plasters, and sitz baths in softening and moistening waters.
And if the swelling is on its side, and you can make it even, then apply what we have said for the living child;
and if one has the power, then pull it out in pieces, and leave nothing of the membrane.
And when you have done this, apply what we have said for hot abscesses that come in the marrow;
and if bleeding occurs, then apply a binding with water, and treat with other remedies.
And I saw a woman in whose womb one fetus had been dead, then another was placed on top of it, and the other also died. After a long time, an abscess came upon the buttock, and swelled so much that it burst open, and began to severely rot.
I was called to treat, and I thought long about it, and could not heal the wound.
I put on a plaster of strong attraction, and an bone came out, and after some days others did as well. I was greatly amazed, because the belly has no bones.
I thought that they were the bones of a dead child.
I stitched the wound, and pulled out many bones, until the woman was in better condition; and the woman lived for a long time like this, and would now pass a little pus from the site;
and I have recalled this chapter for the reason that when the master finds a strange thing, he may know to apply help.
Hereafter comes the form of the pressor, with which books are pressed;
and to two turns at the two ends of the two bindings. Nevertheless, the horns should be finer than the restrictive part, and they should be made of ebony or boxwood;
and the mouth of the handle should be one inch wide, and the margin of the boards one inch, and in length one and a half palms; and between the two bindings should be two adjustments of this same handle, which are fixed on one side and the other, half a palm in length or a little more;
and these two adjustments are placed in the mouth of the instrument to open when one turns the two horns.
Another form, more subtle and lighter, should be made of ebony or boxwood according to the likeness of tongs; and have at the two ends two adjustments, as you see, one palm long, and two fingers wide;
and when you wish to open the instrument fully, have the woman sit on the bed, feet hanging down and legs apart, then place the two adjustments together into the instrument, and hold the head of the instrument beneath between her thighs; Then work your hand on all the instrument, just as you have done with the pliers evenly, according to the amount that you wish to open the mouth of the maris, until the thin blade does what it wants.
These instruments are all crowned, and their likenesses are multiplied; and when the physician has prepared them, the work is done more quickly, and they are more valuable to people because of their quantity.
Do not despair of the instrument that you have prepared, for their necessity is not avoidable.
When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold back her flow, and then make her sneeze with condiment, and hold your hands at her mouth and neck; and if it jumps out because of this, it is well.
and if not, take a pot, and make a hole in the lid, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the maris, such as calamus, rue, anise, camomile, casia lignea, and centaury; all these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked in the pot with water over the fire;
then place one end of a tube in the hole of the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the maris, and keep it there until the vapor comes inside the maris;
then make it sneeze, as we have said. The sinew springs quickly.
And if it remains after this treatment and does not go away, instruct the nurse to moisten her left hand in oil of sesame or in a mixture of alum, and then apply it naturally, and rub the area; and when she has found it, then grasp it and extend it little by little straightly, so that the dislocated part does not fall during the extraction;
but it is necessary to move lightly to the right and to the left, and then pull; it will come and be freed.
And if the opening of the dislocation is very narrow, we have mentioned the treatment of sneezing and fumigation with herbs;
and if it does not go completely as we have said, then beware that you do not follow in cutting;
but it is necessary that which is at the mouth of the wound, you tie it to the thigh of the woman, then cleanse it with an ointment of four drugs; then it will heal and reset, and will come to be strong;
however, when it heals, a bad odor comes to the stomach and head, and harms the patient. Then it is necessary to use appropriate fumigations for this:
some of the ancients have experienced the fumigation of cress and dried figs.
The form of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman for the retention of flowers and the second stage is as follows:
And it resembles true glass, and one places the fine head into the substance, and the wide heads over the fire;
and let the fumigations be on the coals, and the moth until it is destroyed, and begin another.
Many children are born who do not have their anus pierced, but it is plugged with a fine silkworm's thread: then it is necessary for the nurse to pierce that thread properly, and not use a sharp spatula, and be careful not to touch the suturing;
then put moistened wool in wine and oil, then continue the treatment of anointment until it is healed.
And if you doubt that it will not heal, then put a pin of pine in the hole, and leave it for several days, and remove it when the child wants to go to chambers.
And sometimes this swelling comes from a sudden wound or abscess; then it is necessary to cut out that swelling: it should be treated, as we have said about the spleen wound.
Fistulas that come under the anus are swellings, and growths that appear near the anus or in the space of the two parts, have one fistula or more;
and when that swelling is old, it discharges, and often produces white or subtle pus, and sometimes these fistulas are perforating;
and they are recognized by what comes out during defecation or flatulence when the patient defecates, and sometimes one of them jumps out.
And there are fistulas that extend all the way to the bladder, and up to half of the penis; and they extend all the way to the hip joint, and up to the knuckle of the knee.
And thus one knows the fistula penetrating to the anus, and not penetrating: and it is that you put your index finger in the anus, and insert a fine needle of iron into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
And if it has tortuosity, then insert a thin lead wire or horsehair until you feel the wire or hair with your finger;
and if you do not feel it, and there is no discharge of fluid or gas or worms, as we have said: know that it does not pierce; do not hurry with the cure.
And when the fistula extends all the way to the bladder or to the urinary duct, then the urine leaks out and cannot be sealed by medications.
if it is pierced up to the joint of the thigh, then the pain comes up to the place; if there is no twisting and the pain spreads around, then it causes immediate swelling, and neither medication nor salve by ointment is effective;
and in these perforated fistulas, there is no cure other than labor, and the foolishness of those misguided doctors who intervene.
In her who is not barren and is not old, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back;
and he lifts the legs up to his thighs, and has his thighs inclined towards his belly; then insert a probe of silver, or of bronze if there is curvature, until you know where the probe goes.
If the patient feels it around the anus, then you must put your index finger there, and if you sense then that the probe has pierced through;
and it is uncovered where you feel between your finger the surface or the flesh, then you know that she is barren; so do not work at it if it cannot be healed.
it is said nonetheless that one can indeed heal some, but this happens rarely;
and the help that is done consists in heating the fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as was previously said; and he inserts it entirely hot into the fistula until it reaches near the bottom; and do this two or three times until you know that the corrupted substances are burned, which look like bird feathers;
and then clean it with moistened tents in butter until those substances come out, then clean it with an ointment that heals and binds the flesh.
If he is thus healed, it is well.
If this is the case, no other remedy can heal him;
and if the tent penetrates and does not reach the bone at the base, and there is a thick covering of flesh or sinew between your finger and the tent, and you see the fistula beyond this covering from the core; cut it from the beginning of the fistula, and immediately push the tent forward, and then cauterize after, until you reach the head of the tent; and the tent will be released and fall out;
then cleanse those tainted flesh that resembles a bird's feather, and leave nothing behind.
And if the sinew overpowers you and cuts between you and the work, then cauterize it with fire or with medicinal heat.
For the fire cauterization brings together two good things: that is to know, the drying of these charred areas fitted together, and the stopping of blood and the drying of moisture;
then the treatment of moist tents with butter or crushed items, until the wound throws out pus, and the charred areas are expelled in the pus;
then treat the wound with poultices that soften hard flesh, and these medicines are dry.
For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
And if a fistula comes up to the perfect part of the anus, and is far from the body, put your finger in the anus, and explore it.
If you sense the tent, and between two is the cloth or the surface or charred area, where it is close to piercing, there should be no force but a way of trust and hope, through the administration of one of the three methods:
For when you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it to the bottom, or if you can then place probes and treat it as first;
and do not go too deep that you do not cut the tissue holding the foundation, and excretions come out involuntarily; then treat it as we have said;
then treat it as we have said; perchance it will be healed, or you remove that covering and clean it after it is cut near the foundation, whether by probe or another sharpened instrument; then clean that damaged flesh which is in the wound as much as you can; then study to restore the wound, and to keep the fistula on the outer part of the anus:
then study to restore the wound, and to keep the fistula on the outer part of the anus: it is a lighter thing for the patient.
And sometimes fistulas are according to this manner: and it is when you insert the tent into the fistula, and it is on the side of the anus near the skin above, then take a tent pierced at the top according to this form: And you twist the thread in two, and insert the probe with all the thread into the fistula until it reaches the head.
if it is passing through the margin of the anus inside, then pull the thread from that hole, as if you insert your finger into the anus;
and pull the end of the thread, and bring the two sides together, and press one against the other, and leave it for one day or two;
and he restrains sometimes until the son cuts these cartilages that are between two, and they fall;
then treat the wound until it is sealed and healed.
If the fistula does not drain, then have it pierced in every way that you can, if it is not too hard. For it is not right to cut too deeply for the suturing, and then clean it, as we have said, until it is healed.
The form of the spathumile spine with which one makes the fistula is very sharp on one side and cutting; and on the other side it is not, so that one does not cut what should not be cut, as you see here:
Emorrhoids are according to two manners: or they are inside the anus, like grains of resin, and there can be small and large ones, and they bleed immediately upon touch, and whether there is one or more, they are below the anus and at the top of the anus;
but those which are dry have little moisture, and still contain a bit of yellow water or a bit of blood, and the color of the body;
and the treatment for those who have them inside the anus is that you instruct the patient to strain as if going to the chamber, until the anus protrudes and the threads become visible; if you hurry, you can grasp it with forceps, or hold it with your nail, then cut it at its roots;
and if the forceps cannot hold them due to their moisture, then take them with a drapeling, or with cotton, or with a piece of linen; and you pull them out with your hands, then cut them, and sprinkle some hot powders over them where the cautery is; or you cauterize them as it is said in the chapter on cautery, then treat them with other treatments until they are healed;
and if the fundament cannot expel [the matter], then administer to the patient a harsh and biting enema to wash what is in the fundament so that it may be expelled freely; when the patient is purged, and if the stools are strong from the fundament, then the treatment is light;
when the patient is purged, and if the stools are strong from the fundament, then the treatment is light; and you should grasp them with your nail or with tweezers, then cut them, and treat them as we have said until they are healed, and that he fears the incision by iron. So you must treat the suture according to this manner:
So you must treat the suture according to this manner: Take a twisted thread, and put it in a needle, and then pull the thread above and pierce the needle from the other side, and twist the two ends of the thread under the needle, and so make it wide;
and tighten the thread firmly, then knot the thread, and remove the needle, and do this for all the others, and leave one to draw off the excess blood;
then place on the anus a moist cloth in rose oil or in ointment, and put it on the anus, and instruct the patient to rest;
and then let them fall until they drop, and when they have fallen, treat them with ointment and other treatments, until they are healed.
from the dryness of the feces or the wound Often it happens that there is dryness of phlegm in the intestines, and by constraint of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine does not work. and you must scrape at the surface with the tip of a spatula or your nail, which should not be allowed to become moist. then treat it until it is well cleansed as it should be;
and if it cannot be cleansed, then repeat the shaving more forcefully than before, until it heals well and is skinned over; then treat it until it is healed.
from the trembling Formice is a small spotted appearance around the body, and it spreads greatly in its perfection;
and sometimes the cold is found, and it is felt like death from shivering, and it comes throughout the body, and more in the hands than elsewhere.
And the treatment is that you take a quill from a goose feather, or a strong eagle feather, and place that quill on the shivering, until the circle properly surrounds the shivering all around; then turn your hand along the quill until you cut all around the shivering, and place it perfectly, and remove the shivering from its roots.
And if you wish, do this with a needle of brass or iron according to this form, and let it be sharp below and broad above. do not pierce, to keep the pain at bay, and to press the pain.
And if you wish, cauterize the shivering, as it is described in the chapter on cautery.
Sometimes a clyster of silver or archaut, or melted tin or lead, is made;
and sometimes these instruments are made small and large, according to those for whom they are prepared. Those that are administered in the treatment of children and those who are weak and painful, are small.
Those that are administered in the treatment of children and those who are weak and painful, are small. The form of the small and large clyster is wide on top, where the belly is tied according to this manner:
and there should be an opening where the belly is tied, as you see, and the cheeks be pierced inside;
and it should have two holes on one side, and one hole on the other;
and the belly into which one puts the medicines should be made of an animal bladder or parchment, and it should be pierced all around with small holes, and there should be one inch of space between each hole, then insert a strong thread through each hole twisted ten times or wound around, and gather the belly as if it were a kid; and when the medicine is inside, then it binds to the instrument with a strong thread, then irrigates;
and that is the form of the circle:
and let the medicine not be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the irrigator with oil or egg white, or a similar thing, then gently insert it; then the minister compresses it with both hands until it is all closed, then withdraws the irrigator, and lifts the patient's legs to the wall, and if the medicine wants to come out, holds it back as much as possible; and if he sleeps all night, it is of greater help.
And if you give an enema in a disease of diarrhea, and the medicine rushes to come out, restart it until it is absorbed.
And if the hemorrhoids are at the anus, or an abscess, then the enema should be as mild as for a child;
and this is the form of the mild enema with which the skin should be restrained:
We have already said in the division about the treatment of wounds;
or we will tell you the treatments of hands and medicine, according to the completion.
I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made by, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and from which they are made.
The things by which wounds are caused are by the throwing of stones, and the cutting of swords and knives, or lances or clubs or arrows, or similar things;
or they are made according to the parts of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or the back, or the belly, or the liver, and similar limbs;
and I will tell you the treatment of each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, for the reminder will come in its chapter.
and when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, then take care if it is from the throwing of stone or similar things, and the skin is entirely ruptured and the wound is large, and you fear the rising of a hot abscess: then make it bleed from the cephalic vein especially if a little blood comes from the wound, and let the bleeding be opposite to the injured part;
and have the patient avoid excess of wine and heavy foods.
And if he does not wish to heal, let his flesh be reduced, and let him drink no wine, nor eat any meat;
and place on the wound, if hot abscesses come, cotton moistened solely in rose oil, or in astringent wine;
and if there is no hot abscess, then place on the fresh wound, which is full of blood and has not been dried by the air, powder, which I will mention a bit later;
and if the burn has dried it, then apply some ointments until it is healed.
And if the wound is large like that of a sword cut and similar ones, and the lips cannot be brought together by bandages, then bring them together by stitching, as I will say for belly wounds, of the stitching.
If the wound is exposed to the bone, and can be, and only holds on by a bit, then cut it; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods, such as heads and cooked wheat, also like beans, and similar things.
And if you find rot in the skin, and it has not reached the bone, cut out all the rot entirely, throw it away, then treat it;
and if there is an artery in the wound or vein that cannot be stopped by medicine, tie off the artery, and if you find it dislocated, secure it with a thread; and if that does not help, then cauterize it.
and if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and it is that you put in this powder which closes as soon as the fire has moved it.
and the method of the powder is as follows: take frankincense one part; dragon's blood two parts; live charcoal three parts, and powder it finely, and apply to the wound, and bind tightly, until it dries well and adheres to all its blood;
and then strain it well, and leave it unloosened, if it does not swell; for one should not remove the medicine until it is healed.
And sometimes one does this with coals alone, when one does not have the incense or the dragon's blood, but the fire has not moved the wound.
And if the burn has moved the wound, especially in this state, one does not put this powder;
but put on somedigestive ointments, or powder of barley flour made with water and honey, until it discharges pus; then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
And if the bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with fine forceps;
and I will tell you hereafter about fractures of the head.
of the wound of the neck
If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, then there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut.
If it is the nerve, there is no other method but to leave the treatment and not put anything constricting, for it harms the nerves and makes them retract; and do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their connection to it is with the brain, which is the highest member;
but let the medicine be known, such as hot water washed in sweet water, and mixed with rose oil, and cucumber also washed in sweet water, and other minerals according to this manner, and moist ointments.
And if the wound is large, sew it up and bind it with bandages, then treat it until it is healed.
and if the wounds are deep and it is filled with pus, pierce it at the lowest point;
and if the artery is cut and bleeding comes from it, then tie it off, bind it, and cauterize it if necessary;
and if the thorn of the throat is cut, or the channel, and the conduit is preserved, by which the flesh goes, sew the channel onto the collar of the throat, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural form; and then bind it appropriately, and leave it for some days, then treat it with drying ointments until it is healed;
and if the wound has made an impression in the bone, then clean it; and if there are bone fragments, then extract them all if you can, and for those you cannot remove, leave until the wound becomes pus-filled, and is drained and cleansed of discharge;
and if the wound is fresh, then sprinkle on the powder that I have said. And if there is bone in the wound and there is a fistula, treat it as I have said in his chapter.
If it is from a spear or knife blow, and the wound is deep, then look if wind comes out of the wound when the patient breathes: then you know that the wound is mortal;
and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, then do not apply the powder at the first hour, nor bind it so that the blood does not remain stagnant and return to the heart, killing the patient; but apply an attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day;
and if you do not have ointment, then put old cotton in the wound to suck out the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more; there will not come spasm, nor trembling, nor strangeness of heart; and when you see the good signs, then know that the wound is healed. Then treat it with bandages and other treatments until it is healed;
and if it cannot heal and continues to work, then know that there is a fistula;
then treat it as one should. And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple, whether on the chest or back, then treat it as one who is in front; if it is large, by stitching;
and if it is small, by powder, and if it is pressed into the bone and has chopped pieces, then clean the wound, and draw out the fragments if they are separated; and if they are not separated, then let the wound fester, which will lighten the extraction;
and for other wounds on other limbs, the judgment is as we have said.
Of the rupture of the belly
The rupture of the abdomen is large, medium, and small;
From the great wound sometimes the intestines leap out, or the nerves of the intestines, by which the introduction of others;
and the suturing is more difficult, and sometimes a small wound is worse than a large one, because one delays in putting the intestines back in place if they are not put back promptly;
because the intestines swell immediately when they feel the cold, so they are harder to put back in, and therefore the medium-sized wound is worse because one must repeatedly put the intestines back in place more than with other two.
And know that the rupture of the belly is according to four manners:
The two common sutures occur at the suture of the abdomen, and the suture of other wounds of the body and two other proper sutures are common to other wounds;
and nonetheless they are more proper with the suture of the abdomen, and I will say one by one and explain.
I say that when the wound is small, and some part of the intestine comes out, and it is difficult to put back, this is by one of the two methods: or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen due to the cold.
And when it is cold, warm it in this manner: Moisten a sponge or the soft cloth in warm water only, or you boil in water squinant and cypress and spike, and moisten the intestine until the swelling is removed;
and sometimes it does this with constricting wines, and it is deadly for solely swelling to be reduced.
And when you see the swelling depart, moisten the intestine with water in which alum and mallows have been boiled, for by this the entry is made mild to a small degree;
and if it cannot enter, then make a small incision in the wound with the instrument used to cut hemorrhoids;
and the first treatment is deadly with cutting, which none should do without great necessity;
and these are the instruments for splitting:
and cut inside the curvature and do not weaken, and you see here the form: And when the wound is widened, and the intestines jump out, put them back in their natural place according to their proper position, if you are able to do so, for this is worth doing.
When the wound is wide, and it is in the part below the belly, then you must have the patient lie on his back, and raise his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the part below the belly, then raise the head and the chest higher than the parts below, and likewise if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts, place attention so that the wounded part be higher than the other;
and thus you should administer what I say in large and medium wounds.
In small wounds place what is prepared for you, then have between your hands the merciful plaster that completely closes the rupture with its hand, and brings together the lips;
and this is the common method of sutures, which is that you take one needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave from the head of the wound a span of space, and there insert a needle with strong thread; and pierce the two sides of the skin with the two sides of the sinus, which is beneath the skin inside, so that you make it pierced on that part, and bring together the two ends of the sinus four altogether;
then take a double thread around the needle from two parts, then bring together the two sides of the wound properly, and then leave a span of space, and there insert another needle;
then separate the thread just as you did with the first needle, and do not stop doing this according to your need for needles, until all of the wound is restrained;
and let the needles be medium, between fine and thick, for the fine needles cut all the flesh, and those too thick cannot enter well: for that reason, they should be medium;
and it is not right to push the needles too deep into the flesh and skin, so that they do not cut and harm the wound before the healing;
and then cut the heads of the needles so they do not hurt the patient while sleeping, and place threads or cloths on the heads of the needles to keep them secure, and leave them until the wound is healed;
And this manner of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because one or two needles suffice.
The second stitching is common, and it is that you bring together the two edges of the skin and the two edges of the surface together with one needle having one strong medium thread;
and when you have pierced these four edges together, then leave the needle at the part where you began, in the manner in which clothes are sewn;
and put a space between each stitch the size of a small finger;
This stitching know the men, and I sewed a wound that a man had on his belly, which was cut by a knife, and the wound was more than one palm in length, and the intestines came out about two palms in length, and the wound was in the middle of the belly.
I brought back the intestine after it had been outside for 24 hours, and the wound was sealed up to 15 days, and I treated it, and he was healed.
And the physician had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle;
and I did not treat it with ointment, for I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine; and I placed old cotton on the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until it was healed.
Now I will tell you the two proper methods of stitching:
take the needle, and push it from the outer part to the inner part;
when it has pierced the center straight through, then take the head of the thread where you have inserted the needle, and make it pierce from the inner part to the outer part;
and the understanding of this stitching is that you sew as the leatherworker does the skins, and that you leave once the surface from one side, and take it again from another, until the stitch is entirely completed.
The second method of stitching, which Galien properly describes, is such as some do, who join the two parts together naturally, and apply one end of the surface to the other end, in such manner:
insert a needle or the end of the thread there, and make it pierce that place only, and leave the two ends of the surface; then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the outer part to the inner part, at the two ends of the surface;
then have pierced one and the other of the outer part up to the inner part, in two other joints of the mirror that are on the opposite side.
and this is the most flexible way of stitching and the most common.
Galien says this word, and some testify that one should sew the belly with two needles, each having thread.
and one must insert one needle on one side and the other on the other side, in the manner of those who sew leather straps;
and know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, the stitching is more difficult than in other parts of the belly.
The judgement of the wound is such as the judgement of other wounds:
and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, although the heat has moved it, then reset the intestine, and sew it up;
then put the healing powder on it, and if the heat has moved it, then apply some ointment that is suitable, until the wound draws; and clean the threads, and let the sutures be sealed, and the wound edges; then treat the wound like the others until it is healed;
and if you do not have medicines, then put on it, as soon as it begins to draw, old cotton, and change it twice a day until it is healed.
For you have no need of other medicine in many cases when the wounds are simple;
and if you fear that the wound may spread to the principal members, then you should moisten light wool with tempered oil or rose oil, and place it around the joints, and under the armpits;
and if he feels pain or corruption in the bowels, which often happens, then cleanse them with warm black wine, especially if the corruption reaches the intestines;
and pierce it inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small intestine.
The intestine which is called "jeun" cannot heal when it is wounded, and this is because of the abundance of veins that are there, and because of the subtlety of the entire body, and its closeness in nature to the nerves.
And if the bladder jumps out of the wound, then put it back as you would with the intestine, while it is fresh;
and if it is old and has turned grey or black, then you must bind the area which is black so that no further bleeding occurs, for there are veins and arteries;
then cut what is between the binding, and let the two shoulders hang down from the part below the wound up to above to lighten the extraction when the abscess falls, and the wound closes.
Of the rupture of the boil
When the intestine is round, and the wound is small, it can be restored in some people, because I have seen that a man was wounded in the belly by a lance;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, and through it came out excretions and gases;
I put treatment according to what I could, and did not stop refining until he was healed, and the wound was sutured.
And when I saw it sutured, I feared that the patient might have pain in his stomach; and there was no harm, but he remained in better condition, eating and drinking;
and some experienced practitioners say that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be treated in such a manner: take frankincense with large heads, then bring the edges of the wound together, and when the frankincense has opened its mouth, place it on the two edges so that it presses its mouth upon them;
and then cut off the head, and this holds so that it cannot untie, then place the other fragment afterwards in the same manner as before, until the wound is entirely covered; and sew the wound.
The head thus burns in the intestine, and no harm comes to the patient, and one can tie the intestine with a fine thread that is cut from the intestine of an animal, in such a manner:
take the head of this intestinal thread that is very lean, and then tie to the head of this thread a fine linen thread tightly, then put the thread in the needle, and sew the intestine, and reset it in the rupture;
and this manner of stitching of wounds is not different according to the way of trust and hope;
and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the major intestines, there is no skill or health, except for subtlety.
about the fistula wherever it may be Know that any wound or abscess, when it awakens, is generally called a "fistula", and especially when it is hairy and discharges pus.
And a fistula is according to the truth a faulty nodulation hard and white, where no pain is felt, and it is also hairy like the feather of a bird;
and sometimes it spits clear phlegm, and at other times thick phlegm; sometimes pus, and at other times blood;
and I have spoken of this in the division of wounds, that any wound which is not healed and has no flesh, it is not due to anything except one of the Nine causes: it is to know, by the smallness of blood in the body; or because of its maliciousness; or because there is hard flesh inside, and on the lips, where no new flesh grows; or there is too much bile; or the pus is pusulent, and the matter is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good in the treatment; or because the corruption is of a pestilent nature; or because the property in the region causes late digestion, and delayed healing, and naturally swollen; where there are veins or bones:
and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division.
Now you must know the treatment of fistula which is done by manual work.
Know that fistula occurs in all parts of the body; for there are fistulas that come to the large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or to the spleen, or to the intestines, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet; and there is such that comes to the principal part of the member, and to similar areas.
And all the fistulas that are of this kind are of difficult healing, and there is only toil, and ignorance;
and if there is any fistula that does not come up to the place I have mentioned, and you are confident in its treatment, and you wish to recognize it, then take a probe of bronze or iron, if the fistula is straight, then use it;
and if the fistula is curved, then search it with a delicate probe of lead, for lead can bend around the curvature;
and if the fistula has multiple openings and you cannot probe it well with probes, then irrigate it through one of the openings, for the moisture will run from one opening to another, and cleanse it;
then carefully seek to your ability that you may know if there is bone or nerve, and it is perfectly felt, and ask well of the patient about the pain they feel when pressed by your hand, and the place where they feel it;
and when you truly know the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, then cut according to what I have said to you, and remove the corruption and the spoiled flesh that are inside;
and then treat it until it is healed, and if the fistula is very deep in a straight place, you must cut perfectly as much as you can, then put moistened bandages with healing medicines, and push them to the head of the fistula, so that the medicine corrodes the excess that remains at the bottom;
and then apply soothing ointments to the flesh until it is healed;
and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, cut it off.
If a vein or nerve does not trouble the principal limbs, as we have said;
and if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackening, scrape it until all the corruption is removed, then treat it with flesh-soothing substances until it is healed;
and if it is not healed and begins to swell as before, know that you have not gone far enough to the source:
so uncover and clean until you reach the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore the place;
and if it is thus healed, it is well. If not, know that the corruption is too deep for you to reach; there is no other method but to leave it to nature;
and if there is a small corrupted bone that you can pull with tongs, then extract it with the appropriate instrument for this, and if there are many bones, pull them all out, leaving none;
and if the moisture hinders you and there is no mistake or fear, then cut away both the moisture and the flesh, and free the bones.
And if you cannot remove them in an hour, then place on the wound a substance encouraging putrefaction, and leave until the flesh is rotten around the bones, and then the bones will be more easily removed;
and if it is a large bone, such as from the leg or thigh, then raise the putrefaction only until all the blackness is removed, then heal the wound;
and if there is a large part of the corrupted flesh, it will reach to the marrow of the bone; one must scrape and cut all the way to the putrefaction, and then treat it until it is healed;
and I will tell you of an ulcer that occurred in a man's leg, so that you may take example and aid in your work.
The young man was about thirty years old, who had pain in his leg from a cause that came inside the body, so that the matter came to the leg, and it swelled with a large abscess, and he had no reason to fear to open;
but the physicians, by their folly, worked so much on it that the abscess opened, and there was a great outpouring of matter, and it became a fistula, and there came many openings from which all poured forth bowel and moisture of the body;
and many physicians applied treatments around two years, and there was no wise person in the art of hands until I was called there, and saw his leg and the medications with which he was being treated, and what poured out through the openings with great body fluid; and the body of the young man would become red, and had a yellowish color.
I pitched a tent in one of these holes, and then searched all the holes, and found that one came opposite the other from all parts of the leg.
I hurried then, and cut into one of the openings until I discovered part of the bone, and found it corrupted and pierced, and the corruption reached to the inner bone;
I scraped what appeared to be the corrupted bone, and thought there was no other corruption except that which I removed;
and began to treat the wound with poultices for a long time, and it could not heal;
and then I began again, and uncovered the bone as before, and found the corruption continued in the bone, and scraped it, and then removed it, and tried to heal the area; but I could not cut around more than a palm's width from the bone, and I pulled it out with all its flesh, then I restored it with medications; and he was healed and stitched quickly, and there was no need to start the work again except for the weakness of the patient, who could not endure, and for the fear of death that I had for him. For the bloodletting it often bled profusely, but he was completely healed, and in place of the bone a hard flesh grew, and he was of good disposition and had no harm nor contrary at all from it, neither going nor coming.
and if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be treated in this manner: take the linen, and tie it at the head of the exposed bone, and instruct someone to pull it upwards; and put another thread of wool thicker than the first thread, and tie it on the flesh that is over the bone, and pull the top end so that you draw the corrupted flesh below, and expose the flesh in the place where you wish to suture, so that the suture does not injure the flesh;
and put the ember on a board under the bone to cut away the corrupted flesh;
and one must scrape as much as can be seen and felt of the corruption, and scrape yet again another time.
And if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, then uncover all the flesh;
then put the ember underneath, and then scrape from one part to another the corruption, and let the scraper be of the length of the corruption close by, as we have said;
and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut away the corrupted joint, and scrape the bone where it contains from the other side;
and if the corruption is in the continuity of the two joints, there is no other remedy but to cut;
and if the corruption is in the wrist of the hand or the ankle of the foot, it is a very serious matter, but nevertheless you must investigate that corruption, how it appears to you; and cleanse it in every way that you can, but do not let the vein or nerve oppose you;
and know that the incisors and saws for cutting these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and the appearance of them, and their thickness and fineness, and their size and smallness, and their hardness; and for this reason, it is necessary to prepare one's instrument for each kind of work;
and know that the work will show you the instrument you will need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of diseases; so consider the instrument you need according to what is necessary.
The joints swell either due to internal causes or due to external causes;
and when you have treated that corruption with medical care and it does not help, then it is necessary to amputate the limb up to the place where the corruption comes from, so that the patient escapes death or the greater evil of the loss of the limb;
and the sign is that the limb becomes black, as if it were burned by fire, and after the blackness, the corrosion goes from member to member, and takes hold throughout the body;
and if you are quick to cut, and if it is due to the bite of venomous beasts, such as sea scorpion and basilisk and similar, if the corrosion is at the top of the toe, then cut it off, and do not give it time to reach the hand.
and if it reaches the hand, then cut it at the joint, so that the corrosion does not reach the arm;
and if it comes to the arm, then cut it at the elbow;
and if it passes the knife, it is death, and there is no remedy except for the quantity of its virtue;
and do the same when the corrosion comes to the stone: if it comes to the first joint, then cut after the other joint;
and if it comes to the stone, then cut the entire stone; and if it rises up the leg, then cut at the knee joint;
and if it comes above the knee, then there is no other remedy but to let the patient die;
and the method of cutting or shaving the limb is that you tie above and below, and extend one minister one of the ties down, and another minister the other tie up, and you separate the flesh which is between the two ties to a spatula width wide, until the bone is uncovered;
then cut or shave, and place on each side a linen cloth, so that the shaved area does not touch the healthy area, and prevent the patient from getting another injury and warm abscess.
and if bleeding occurs when you operate, quickly cauterize the area, or apply some binding powders;
then return to your treatment until it is completed, then bind the wounded limb with a suitable tie, and care for it until it is healed;
and I will tell you what happened to a man in such need:
a blackness befell him which seemed like fire's burn, and that corruption came first to his toe of the foot, until it would spread to the whole foot;
and when the man saw the corruption, he hastened to cut off the foot, and was healed;
and a long time after, the corruption returned to his toe of the hand, and he came to me, and I put on repellent things after cleansing the body, and the corruptions could not be stopped;
and he wanted me to cut off his hand, but I did not want to, for I had hope of repelling the matter; and I doubted also that if I cut his hand, he would not die, for the strength of the man was weak;
and he completely despaired, and returned to his land, and hurried to cut his hand, and was healed;
and I have not found content elsewhere except for what is done differently when it is necessary.
Sometimes an abscess comes in the flesh, and remains so long that it causes a large gathering of pus; and then it rots and bursts, and the pus comes out, and the wound remains open for a long time, like a vessel; and the skin that is above is as thin as delicate cloths, and does not run down to the bone, nor to the nerve, and such a disease is called «healthy», and is not called «fistula».
but if it is so extended that it reaches the bone entirely, it is called «fistula».
and the skin is such that you cut all around that skin, especially when it is thin, just like a cloth; and it does not matter because of its corruption.
And if you fear that the skin will burn, and the corruption is not complete, and the skin is thick with flesh, then treat it with a clyster thus:
Look if the breast is large, and the milk that comes out has a foul smell, then cleanse it with Egyptian medicine which is made thus: take ceruse, and oil, and litharge, equally, and put to cook in a vessel over fire, until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey;
and then take of this according to your need, and mix it with water and honey, and use it to cleanse the breast, and bind the opening; and leave the medicine on for two hours, then remove it by squeezing;
do this many times until the breast is cleansed and the filth is removed;
and sometimes it is administered as an enema with ashes water, when this medicine is not present, and that you take ashes of vine wood, and throw water over, then strain it, and use it as an enema, until you know that the intestines are well cleansed;
and if the patient cannot tolerate it, nor the Egyptian medicine nor the ashes water, then administer an enema of water and honey in which there is a bit of ground white lead; or you administer it as an enema of honey and mixed wine, for the honey has the property to cleanse and wash, and the wine makes the body dry;
and when you have done this and are confident that the intestines are well cleansed, then administer an enema of what causes flesh to grow in it, and that you take a diaphoretic plaster, and mix it with rose oil and wine;
or you clysterize him with some medicines and ointments, of which I have mentioned the properties in treating the ointments;
and if the opening of the breast is small, and the tube of the clyster cannot enter, then widen it a little with an iron, and put in a tent of Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is widened;
and if the wound is too wide, sew it up leaving only enough space where the clyster can enter, and if the opening that discharges pus is at the top, cut it lower where there is pus.
and if you cannot cut the breast below as you wish, then arrange in such a way that the pus runs to the lowest place, for when the pus is perfect, it does not let any other matter enter and if you cannot cut the breast below as you wish, then arrange in such a way: that the pus runs lightly down, and leave nothing of the pus;
that the pus runs lightly down, and leave nothing of the pus; and take consolidative medicines to put on the wound, and spread on the linen cloth that covers the entire wound; then cut at the strongest part the opening of the breast a bit wider than the first, then spread an ointment on another cloth according to the size of the opening, and place it over the wound's opening to alleviate the pus, and do not remove the large cloth more than once after many days;
and the one that is on the nipple of the breast, often remove to take out the pus, and you know what comes from the pus, if it is venom or thick or enough, or digestible, or undigestible;
and take note if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has spread in such a manner and you see that nature rises on the nipple of the wound, then you know that the breast is already healing, and health approaches;
and then untie it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you untie the wound, change the other bandage, and renew the ointment.
And if subtle phlegm comes after a long time, do not despair of health, for recovery approaches.
For there are people who are slow to granulate flesh in their wounds, and of those who do the opposite;
and if undigested milk jumps from the breast after many days, know that the breast is not healthy;
and if the breast is slow to heal and is swollen, apply medications that are moist in substance but dry in virtue, such as a diaphoretic ointment, for it contains a large part of vitriol, and this is the last medication;
take diaphoretic ointment, and make it with rose oil, and sprinkle it with old wine equally in substance;
then cook it and use it;
and the same thing is better when it is cooked and thickened, when diaphoretic ointment is not present, or you take myrrh and aloe and frankincense, and grind them, and powder them over the honey when it is on the fire;
and then in glue the cloth, and stretch it over the breast, and sometimes administer aristologe longe, and roots of celestial lily, which is also like flour of vetches and centaury; and use simples or composites: grind them, and make powder, and put on the honey that I have said, and use it;
and if the cure is prolonged, and is not cured by this treatment, then know that the corruption is profound, and makes an impression in the bone, or on the hard members, or on the tendons; if you treat the treatment of fistula, as we have said before.
Pannarice is an abscess that arises beneath the nail of the little finger of the hand, or of the foot, or perhaps arises in other fingers;
and when it is aged, and one does not pay attention to it, the abscess becomes hot, and it spreads and discharges pus until it reaches the root of the nail, and perhaps it corrodes it entirely;
and the corrosion reaches the bone, causing a foul-smelling pain, and the joint of the finger becomes swollen, and the color turns purple.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, then you must cut away all the excess that remains of the nail with a knife, then cauterize the wound afterwards. The cautery is of great help if the bone is healthy, and the nail is sound;
and if the nail presses against the flesh underneath and begins to pierce it and injure it, then you should place something thin under the nail that pricks the flesh, lift it up, and cut away that flesh subtly and gently, and apply burning and corrosive medicines on the remaining flesh to remove everything; then apply the treatment of ointments until he is healed.
and if the corruption is in the bone, cut it away and draw out entirely, for as long as the corrupted bone remains, it cannot heal;
and if you see the toe become corrupted, cut it as it was previously mentioned, then treat it until it is healed;
and if it is bitten, and swollen, and he feels great pain, then you must bleed him first;
then cut the nail of the spur with a sharp tool by cutting across it, and be careful that the cut does not reach the flesh beneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain;
and if it happens, then put something on that soothes.
The dislocation that occurs in some men's hands by chance is entirely fleshy, and sometimes there are bones, and sometimes there is a nail, and some occur at the root of the joint, or the origin is in some ways of the fingers.
He who is born with a knot on the toe does not move, and he who is born at the joint of the toe may move;
the size of the one who is fleshy is light, in such a manner: cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
He who is born in the root of the joint is difficult to treat: be careful with cutting.
In the one who is born with or has to at the rear knot, you must first cut away the flesh roundly up to the bone, then cut the bone to an appropriate seam for that, then clean it until it is healed.
The web that comes to the fingers together comes by birth, or by wound welding, or by fire burn, or by similar things.
you must cut that suture so that the toes return to their natural forms; then place between two cloths or moistened rose oil towels so they do not stick; or you place between two pieces of thin linen until the wound is sealed, as it should be.
If webbing comes to any of his fingers with the palm, then cut that webbing as is proper.
Varicose veins are large wrapped vessels full of melancholic superfluities, which occur in many parts of the body;
and it happens more in the legs of those who walk on foot and work and carry loads than in others.
It is therefore necessary that you administer to him a purgation of bile, and then heal him with basil.
The iron cure is according to two methods: one is to cut them and draw out the black blood; and the other method is that you lift the vein, and draw it completely out.
The castration is according to this method: first raise the leg with very hot water until the thick part is made subtle, then remove the leg of the patient from above the thigh down to the part below the knee;
then cut the vein in one place, or in two or three, with a wide incision, then lift and draw out the black blood forcefully from one end to the other, until as much blood comes out as the strength of the patient can withstand;
and then bind it, and instruct him to diet on cooling black bile;
and repeat the evacuation and bleeding when the veins are full, and it harms the patient.
The treatments are according to this manner: shave the leg of the patient, if there is much hair, then put it in the bath, and rinse the leg with hot water until it becomes red, and the veins swell;
and if you do not have a bath, then heat it with fire, and then cut along the vein from the ankle to the top of the knee, or in the part below at the ankle;
then work the skin with the lancet, and strip the vein on both sides until it appears when you feel it;
and when it is seen red and black, and when it enters the skin it appears like a white string;
then place the root underneath, until it is lifted from the skin, and then shave it lightly with a razor, then cut it in another place three times;
then peel the skin over the vein until it appears, then lift it with a root as you have done, and shave it with another razor as you did first;
then cut another section, or more if you need them, then lift it, and cut at the tip with your thumb, then pull and lift until the second section;
then extract it piece by piece, until it all comes out, then cut it;
and if you cannot pull it out and lift it, then insert a needle with a strong double thread, tie it and pull it, and push under the seam, and turn your hand from one side to the other, until it comes out; and be careful that it does not break, for if it breaks, one cannot pull it out or lift it, and it causes harm to the patient;
and when you have pulled it all out, then place on the site of the wound wool moistened in wine and rose oil; and treat it until it is healed.
And if the skin is contracted and twisted and folded together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must cut it crookedly, but do not chop it. and treat it as we have said before.
The shape of the iron with which one cuts the skin is curved, and it does not cut deeply, so that it does not cut the vein;
and it is of thick curvature, for if it were fine, it would cut the vein, but let it be thick as we have said, and here is the shape:
This vein is located in the legs, in warm areas where no herbs or trees grow, and in soil that has no moisture;
and by chance it may arise in another place than the legs, and this happens due to putrefaction that comes under the skin, just as it comes inside the body snakes and worms, between skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are such that there comes in the leg a very great inflammation, then changes the color, and begins the vein to forcefully issue out, like a root of a plant.
When the shoulder is open, you must wrap around a piece of linen from one and a half to two inches, and tie it, and leave the linen hanging on the leg, and every time some comes out below, wrap it around the linen, and tie it;
and if it is too long, cut off a part of it, and wrap the remainder, and do not cut it at its root until it is entirely out; for if you cut it, it will reenter the flesh and cause an abscess and putrefaction in that place, leading to a severe illness;
For this reason, it is necessary to treat it little by little until the end, and that nothing remains in the body;
and sometimes this vein, when treated, measures five palms in length, or ten, and a man came to me once whose vein was ten palms long, and when you cut it, you put one reed into the hole, and pierce it to the bottom so that everything comes out;
and the matter which is inside should be emptied, and apply to the area purifying medicines for one day to prevent putrefaction, then treat it like an abscess.
And sometimes this vein has fewer reeds, especially when it opens at the junction of the foot or in the foot, and there comes a great number of holes, from which many reeds sprout;
Then cure it as we have said before.
worms that are born between skin and flesh This disease is called in our land "cattle sickness," for it often occurs in cattle, and it is a small worm that is born between the skin and flesh, and travels throughout the body moving up and down, and one can feel it well as it moves from member to member, until it bursts through the skin where it goes, and comes out forcefully;
and it arises from the putrefaction of certain humors, such as worms and serpents and earthworms and ascarids in the belly;
and there is fear of its maliciousness, for when it travels through the body, and it rises to the head, and comes to the eye, by chance it enters and destroys the eye; and this happens often.
When you want to treat and care for it, it cannot be done except when it is going:
then you must bind the area above and below with a strong tie tightly, then cut above and draw it out forcefully, and if the worm is deeply embedded in the flesh and you do not find it, then cauterize with fire until it dies;
and the greatest harm that it causes is that it corrodes the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming near the eye on the head, then pinch below it firmly on the eyelid, then cut above and draw it out forcefully;
and it is necessary to treat the patient with bodily purification of solutive medicines for the corrupt bad humors, and to beware of nourishing foods that cause corruption.
of the pain that comes from windiness This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and it is a pain that comes to some limbs, and then moves from limb to limb;
and I have seen what I tell you. I was called to a sick woman, and she bared her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm;
and it then rose up as quickly as a worm to the shoulder, faster than anything, just like quicksilver when it moves from one place to another;
the pain departs from that place, and fixes in the shoulder, and then a little after runs throughout the body, until it comes to the other arm;
then she told me that it turned around the body, just as I saw it.
I was greatly amazed at how it moved so from member to member, for I had never seen this disease in such a manner. However, I had always wanted to see pain move from one place to another, but I had not wished it, as I saw in the woman;
and I thought it was because the woman had a dry body, and her veins exposed, and because of this the constrained wind appeared;
and it does not appear according to this reason in those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and veins hidden.
And when you wish to treat this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears as we have said, then spread over and under quickly, and then cut so that that wind constrained in place comes out; and cauterize the place;
and if you do not see it with your eyes, then treat it with those that expel the winds, such as foul pills, and pills of theriaca, and similar others.
Arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the parts of the body where they strike.
The diversity among them is that there are those which have large points, and small ones, and branched ones, and soldered ones; and there are those which have two angles, and those which have tongues, and those which have pieces;
and that which falls into any limb falls according to two ways: or in a principal member it affects, such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it falls then in any part of these members, and the sign of death, which I will tell you afterward, appears to you: then you must beware of the extraction of this arrow, for death follows in many cases; and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not embedded deeply, then extract it, and treat the wound.
And the sign of the brain when the arrow hits and pierces the bone, and the cerebral membrane jumps which is on top of the brain, is when there is scotomia and soreness and vertigo and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile; and sometimes it comes out without force from the nose, or from the ears; and perhaps he loses speech and voice; and from the wound jumps white moisture resembling pus, and it also jumps like boiled flesh;
and if these signs appear to you, then be cautious with the treatment, and extract the arrow if it is still there.
The signs of the stone when it falls upon the heart are that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it were fixed in something hard, not empty; and by chance the stone moves as the pulse does, and black blood comes out, and coldness and cold sweat come, and syncope: then you know without doubt that death is impending.
And the sign of the arrow that is stuck in the throat is that without pain foam jumps from the wound, and the neck swells, and the patient changes color, and sighs loudly and seeks the cold.
And if the stone falls on the covering of the kidney, it is near the lower ribs; and causes great distress and great pain and sighing; and it moves all the limbs from the shoulders.
And if the arrow falls into the stomach, it may cause some undigested flesh to jump from the wound.
And if the arrow falls into the abdomen, and some hay comes out through the intestines, there is no hope in the treatment, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine jumps and comes out forcefully, and the patient feels great pain: Know that the wound is mortal.
The other members, such as the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the arm and the spine and the wrist and the thigh and the legs, and similar members, are safe according to many dispositions. When the arrow is in the nerve or the artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me, so that you may do likewise.
It happened to a man that an arrow struck him in the armpit at the root of the nerve: I tested it and pulled it out from the other side beneath the ear fat, and he was healed without harm.
And in one case, an arrow struck him in the eye fat beneath the eyelid, and the arrow was embedded, and I could not reach beyond the tip towards the shaft, and the arrow was large, made of a Turkish bow, all the iron lightly without barbs;
The eye was healed, and no adverse accidents came to him.
And remove an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic with ears:
I threaded the beard hairs, and manipulated them so subtly that I removed it, and the Christian was healed.
And remove an arrow from the man, which had pierced his stomach, and I thought he would die;
and after he had passed thirty days, his condition did not change; I cut into the arrow, manipulated it, and removed it forcefully, and he had no adverse accidents.
And if you see a man to whom an arrow fell on the back, and the wound was sealed over;
and the arrow remained inside him, and did not change its natural disposition, nor found harm in any of its natural functions.
And you see another man to whom an arrow fell on his face, and the wound was sealed; and it remained thus without suffering great pain;
and many other similar cases.
And extract an arrow from the man of the king's court, which had fallen in the middle of his nose, and was slightly leaning to the right side; and the arrow was entirely removed.
I was called to treat her after she had been fallen for three days. I found the wound very narrow.
I wanted to examine her thoroughly, but I did not feel anything; and he felt pricking and pain under his right ear.
I thought it was from the tip of the arrow. I put on the area a poultice that is attractive and digestive, so that the area would not swell; and the tip of the arrow appeared.
and the tip of the arrow appeared. I applied the poultice for several days, and reopened the wound again, and the patient remained this way for a long time, until he felt the arrow one day inside his chest;
and he told me that. I put corrosive medicinal plasters on the wound for several days until it opened up, and I probed it, feeling the head of the arrow that was embedded in the place;
then I applied that corrosive medicine to the opening of the wound until the head of the arrow appeared visibly;
and it took about four months to pass the stages around that time, and then I widened the wound so that I could insert the forceps, and moved it from one side to the other, but it could not come out;
then I did not cease to be subtle and devise methods of instruments until one day I grasped it with well-made forceps, according to what its form will come at the end of this chapter, until I pulled it out and restored the wound.
And the physician judges that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: Then I restored it, and the wound was sewn up, and the patient was completely healed.
Now I have told you the quality of extracting certain arrows, so that you pay attention to what I do not say, for the books cannot take everything into account;
but wise masters compare very little, and upon what is present and lacking, find new work and new instruments, through the understanding of foreign things that happen in this art.
I say that arrows do not remain in the members where they are embedded without two manners: or through the place where they enter, or by another part;
and that which jumps forth where it enters is an arrow entering into their flesh, and sometimes it jumps forth immediately.
And if it does not jump out immediately, leave it until the flesh around is rotten, and the discharge is cleansed;
and likewise if it is embedded in the bone and cannot come out, leave it that way for some days, and move it each day;
and then it will jump out, and if it does not jump out, pierce around with a fine tool until the surrounding area is widened, and then extract it.
And if the arrow is embedded in a part of the body that cannot be seen, then search for it throughout the entire area; and if you feel it, then pull it with a suitable instrument;
and if you cannot do so because of the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone or nerve or vein, then cut it open until the wound is large;
and pull the arrow if you can, and if it has ears by which it is stuck, then remove the flesh that is embedded around it as much as you can, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow so that you can pull it out;
and be careful not to break the arrow so that you can pull it out more easily.
And if you cannot do it at once, then leave it until the skin around is swollen, then pull it out, for the extraction will be eased. And if the bleeding is contrary to you, then administer what we have said about the treatment in its chapter;
and beware of the incision of the nerve and the vein, and use ingenuity on how you can draw out the arrow without danger, quickly or slowly, firmly or gently;
and place the patient according to the position they were in when the arrow struck them, for this is the greatest help that can be provided, and if you cannot, then place them according to what the signs show you.
The arrow that comes from another direction, where some part of it is visible, or the skin is swollen in such a way that it can be seen or felt clearly:
Cut then up, until the pincers can grasp, and then extract: then leap forth now.
And if it is retained in the bone, then rotate your hand roundly, until it enters into the bone, and widen the bone, then pull it out.
And if it cannot come out, leave it again, and then restart the extraction until it comes forth;
and if the shaft of the arrow is there, push it with the entire shaft;
and if the shaft breaks, and you wish to administer further, then apply the instrument hair-wise, so that the tip of the arrow enters into the hair of the instrument;
and then push forth, and if the arrow is embedded, use the instrument with the tip entering in, to ease the extraction.
And if the arrow is poisoned, then you must cut away all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, then treat the wound as appropriate.
And if the arrow falls on the bone or in the belly or at the bladder or to the side, and it is close, and you can cut above, if you cut;
and be careful not to cut the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then sew the wound if necessary; and care for it until it is healed.
The form of the tongs used to pull out arrows is similar to the beak of a bird, and you see here the shape:
And there are many methods: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
The form of the hair tip is also like the feather of a bird, to place on the tip of the arrow, as shown here in the shape:
There are thirty-one veins from which one recovers, of which sixteen are in the head, to be known as: The flaps that are behind the ears, which are called the two "herbech"; and the two arteries that are in the two temples, appearing; and two veins that are in the tear ducts of the two eyes, which are called "aspires"; and the vein that is in the middle of the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the nose; and the two glands that are in the neck; and the two veins that are on the upper lips of the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich"; and two veins that are beneath the tongue.
The veins that are commonly used for bloodletting are 5 in each arm:
one is the cephalic, and it is on the left side, and the common people call it the "vein of the head"; and the middle one is called "fastus," and it is composed of the cephalic and the basilic, and the common people call it the "vein of the heart"; and the basilic is on the right side, and the common people call it the "vein of the belly," and it is above the flexor muscle, and it is the one used for bloodletting, which appears clearly on the forearm.
And the saver vein is the one between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has two branches;
and in the leg and foot there are three veins: one is below the corrugated part of the instep on the left side, and the second is the saphenous vein which is at the ankle on the right side; and the vein which is called "ness," which is at the ankle on the other side;
and in the other leg there are three veins below those.
The swelling of the veins behind the ears helps with chronic catarrhs and migraine;
and the qualities of the healer, as I tell you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth; then have the patient compress his neck with a twist, until the two veins appear behind the ears in two places dependent on the head: then grasp them with your hand, and where you feel the pulse under your hand, mark it there;
then take the lancet, and insert it under the vein until the bone, then lift your hand along the entire vein above, and cut both the skin and the vein well twice across, and let the blood flow out as much as you wish;
then extract and bind until it is healed;
and I have already said about the incision and the cautery in the first book.
The inflammation of the two arteries that are in the two temples is good for old migraines, soreness, and customary ophthalmia, and for the discharge of watery tears from the eyes;
and the qualities of the inflamed condition are as I say: and it is that the patient strains his neck, so that the two veins appear clearly; and feel the pulse under your thumb, and then sign from there;
then lift the skin over the vein upwards with your index finger, and place the lancet beneath, and lift the vein up, and cut it, just as you have done in two other veins, and let blood according to your necessity;
then unbind the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it; and then bind it tightly, and leave it until it is healed;
and we have already spoken of their cutting and extraction at the beginning of the book.
The bleeding of the frontal vein is as effective as the bleeding of the cephalic vein for old facial diseases, and for migraines, and for redness;
and the quality is such that the patient twists their neck, so much that the veins appear; then take the instrument which is called "digging tool", of which this is the form:
and place the tip on the vein, and press firmly with your hand, or with something else, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you wish; then loosen the patient's neck, and tie the vein so that it is sealed, and sometimes the work is done with a wide flame.
However, it is not appropriate for the flames to be too sharp; and cut sideways, because the bone is close, and by chance the flames might break when they are thin.
The swelling of the two veins that are in the two temples helps the eyes, and for headaches, and for redness, and for the pupil in the eye, and for diseases of the face;
and the quality of their swelling is that the patient strains his neck by twisting some part, as mentioned before;
then it swells, and the swelling should be sideways, a bit long from the flame and a bit wide, for there is no flesh. And if the flames are fine, they may break;
then let blood as much as you need, and then apply cotton on top, and bind it well.
The swelling of the neck vein is good for water retention, and for severe fever, and for face ailments, such as migraine and redness that comes on the face, especially when it is old;
and the quality of the swelling is that the patient tightens his neck, then stretches his neck to your left hand, and take the fine long flame, and insert it between the two nostrils in the space there, because the vein does not open well by itself, and the blood will now begin to flow;
and do not go too deep, and let the blood flow according to your need, then stop for a night, because it is restored very quickly;
The salve of two binders helps with the tightness of the collar, and at the beginning of mixing, and for many diseases, and for impetigo, and for corroding sores, and for herpes, and warts;
and the quality of the salve is that the patient should pull his neck under one and the other, as we have said;
and let the master be standing on the head of the patient, and the patient sit on the chair, then incise the vein slightly wide, then draw blood moderately, as much as is necessary;
then redo the same on the other vein, then loosen the ligature, and moderately compress the veins so that the patient does not strangle; and leave it until morning, when the wound should be healed.
of the salve of the lips The swelling of the veins of the upper lips helps to cause cough in the mouth, and corruption of gums, and chapping of lips, and from the nose and around.
And the quality of the bleeding is to sit the patient in front of you and compress his neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one of which is on the right lip and the other on the left, and they are recognized by being black, and by having small black veins around them:
cut both of them, and if you do not recognize them and are in doubt, then cut the largest one on each side, and do the same for the two veins that are above and below, for it is the same method.
of the swelling under the tongue The swelling of the veins under the tongue helps after the swelling of the cephalic vein, and it is at the constriction of the throat, and for diseases of the eye, and for diseases of the mouth;
and the quality of the swelling is that the patient sits between your hands in front of the sun, and he lifts his tongue, and looks underneath on each side a black vein:
swell then both of them, and do not go too deep, for underneath are the arteries.
The veins of the body that are commonly swollen are treated in two ways:
or by pricking with a broad martian blade, or a fine olive oil blade like cutting bodies, and it is called "anesil"; and they are wide and subtle according to the width and narrowness of the veins. The first form of the martian flame is much renowned, and it is wide as you see:
and it is necessary to open the full veins filled with thick visible blood, and which contain thick and turbid blood; and this is the form of the olive oil flame:
and it is more finely pointed, and it is for bleeding the fine veins where there is fine citrine blood.
The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are below the throat, and in the neck, and in the back, and in the abdomen;
and it is necessary for the surgeon to bleed wisely, and to be careful of the artery that is below. and if he cuts the artery, and a flow of blood comes, then he must stop it, as I have said; and the flames should not be pricking but cutting like a file.
and if the abscess does not open clearly, you must extract it and change to another one; or if you cut any vein, or incise in its place the vein on the arm: it opens clearly; and the cut with the flame like a file, as we have said.
and if you wish to know the place of the incision, you must first extract the arm, touch the place until you feel the pulse; then mark the place of insertion, then bind the arm, and cut the vein from the flame's vicinity; and be careful not to hit the artery when you see the place swollen, for it is from the artery: avoid it then.
and if you see it squirt up like a child's urine, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is the blood of the artery: hasten then, and place your finger on it firmly, then remove your finger if the bleeding stops, which often happens; then bind the arm, and leave it thus, and let the patient not move it;
and let it be out of fear, and do not move it until it is healed.
And if the blood flow is not stopped, and it overcomes you, and the medicine is not present, cut the artery if it opens, for the head of the retractors; and stop the blood flow.
and take a bark of fennel, and split it, and take one of the halves and bind it on well until the next day;
if the blood is stopped, that is good; if not, then treat it as we have said, with powders that stop blood;
and the tightness is not great in many positions due to the small area of the wound, and the strength of the arm's joint.
The vein in the middle helps draw blood from the head above, and from the body below, because it is composed of the basilic and cephalic, as we have said;
and it is necessary for the surgeon to be careful of the nerve that is below, and if he punctures too deeply, and he hits the nerve, it swells and the patient suffers greatly, and perhaps cannot recover;
and this nerve appears often, and if it does not appear in some people due to its subtlety, you must expose it with the anisel instrument; and clean the nerve to your ability.
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, then cut it lengthwise.
The application of the cephalic vein helps, drawing blood from the head, and aids the eyes;
and it is necessary to apply it by puncturing with olive oil or myrtle oil, for it is the safest of all veins, for there is neither nerve nor artery beneath it. Nevertheless, it is necessary to find the lightest spot, and it does not matter if one misses the first time, and one retries; and by chance the area may swell in some people when one misses the first time, but it does not matter.
The quality of the sanity is according to your thought.
The first thing you must know of medicine, is that medicine is not practiced for any other reason than to preserve health, and to avoid future illnesses;
and let the medicine be applied in one of the three veins that are on the wrist: that is to know, cephalic, saphenous, and basilic; and one should practice medicine at the beginning of spring in January, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the sign of fullness appears;
and one should practice medicine on the first day or the third, after two or three hours of the day.
The medicine which is administered to the diseases has no fixed time, but when there is need of day or night, at all hours and in all seasons;
and it is not proper to bleed children until 14 years, nor a woman carrying a fetus from the fourth month until the seventh. And one should not treat those who have passed sixty years.
And when someone wishes to be bled, in whatever manner that may be, it is proper that they cleanse the intestines with a mild enema if they have much retained feces, so that the veins do not draw from the intestines the harmful superfluous putrefactions affecting the principal members;
nor should one bleed someone who is overly satiated with food, nor those who are drunk until they have sobered, nor those who are dropsical;
and if one wishes to purge after colic, passion, and vomiting, and diarrhea, and frequent intercourse with a woman, and labor, and staying awake and fasting, and that which weakens entirely the virtue, or by something from the weapon or of the body;
then refine the humors, if the blood is thick, through foods and drinks and medicines, if you have the power;
then enter the bath, if nothing prevents it, to refine the blood, and purge from the vein of the foot around the third, as we have said;
and on that day, avoid work, and piercing, and lust, and similar things;
and be bound and joyful, and let the bloodletting site be higher than the person being bled, and rub the arm two or three times, then moderately tighten the ligature above, for when it is too tight or loose, the blood cannot flow;
and then rub the area with your hands until the veins swell, and they can be felt;
then moisten the bloodletting site with a bit of old oil, then place your left hand finger on that vein below the spot where you want to bleed, so the vein does not move when pricked.
For there are veins that shrink like cords when being bled, and some are full of windiness, so that when one applies the flame, it recoils from the flame, and the vein cannot be opened, and thus one is in such a condition; and if he works the vein, the wound is too narrow, therefore the surgeon must be cautious in these matters.
And if the vein is worked the first time, it is good; if not, then start again a little below that place or above quickly, if the area is not swollen.
And if the area is swollen and the patient is frightened, leave it for one or two days, and do not loosen the arm: perchance an abscess may come that is hot;
do not enter the bath, then resume the surgery if it pleases you;
and if the opening is small, or the vein thin and delicate and you fear that not enough blood will flow as you wish, then apply fire directly to that same opening;
and perform it somewhat hastily, so that the area becomes swollen; for this often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the area swollen, do not begin the bleeding again, and apply a bit of egg white, for it lightens the body from blood, and in this place the white is more effective than the yolk;
and thus administer the white of egg in each bleeding that you bleed the veins to stop the flow of blood;
and this same thing makes treacle and bow of juice, when it is put upon the place; and refine the sinew and split it when it is too thick.
And if there comes a large abscess, which often happens, especially when it is not properly treated at the time when the opening of the vein is small, then hurry and put upon the place a sponge moistened in water and warm oil, and bind it for an hour;
and it is necessary that you do this after the blood has flowed from the vein, and if there remains any blackness or greenness in the place after some days, it does no harm; and if you wish, put on some aloes or mastic dissolved in calamus juice, galbanum, or similar.
And often an abscess and inflammation appear on the wound of the basilic vein:
put your hand on it, and if you find the spot soft to the pressure of the hand, then that inflammation is bad. Therefore, avoid putting on any of those things we have mentioned, for fear that it might cut into the artery;
but make him a dry plaster to harden the spot, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
And draw from each the blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and of the color of the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it flow until it turns red; and if you see it thick, let it flow until it becomes thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it is necessary for those who are full and strong, and need bloodletting, that a larger wound be made, and the flames be wide;
and for those who are weak, do the opposite, and it is necessary to bleed them a little and often, and one should bleed them by cutting across, not by pricking;
and this method of bleeding is safe from blood flow and nerve damage, and is better than long or wide bleeding.
And to him whose body is lacking in strength, one must give moist bread in pomegranate juice; if he is heated, then bleed three or four times; and if he is of a cold temperament, then before the strength, give moist bread in muzé syrup, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and strongly scented syrup.
And if he faints at the incision, after a great outflow of blood, then it is necessary that he inhales broth of flesh, and subtle aromatic syrup, and uses the other things we have said in the section or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of veins.
And if he wishes to bleed his arm and incise another time, then it is necessary, when he is weakened by great bleeding, that he bleeds a little at a time, according to the amount of his continuous strength.
And whoever wishes to bleed his arm after the first incision, and he has a strong body, then he bleeds seven hours after the first incision, or after the ninth hour.
And whoever wishes to be bled on another side, they must be bled the second day or the third.
For there is much blood within the body that is already heated and causes fever; so it is necessary to let out a great quantity and enlarge the opening until it flows into the basin; since you restore all the conditions of strength, and place your hand on their pulse when they strengthen, so death does not come instead of strength, and this happens often when the strengtheners are negligent;
and it is not appropriate when you wish to release the arm, and let blood a second time, and the wound is closed, that you press forcefully on; and if it is swollen, that he extends the arm hastily, for that would be bad;
but leave it until it heals a second time; or you prick with the tip of the flame until the blood that is clotted in the wound comes out, and apply a poultice of lint soaked in water, and press on lightly.
And if the vein is swollen, then leave it alone and do not constrict it, until the abscess has subsided.
And if there is need to bleed the second time, then draw blood from the same spot or from another vein, or from the other arm.
The vein inside the arm is bled instead of the vein of the head because it is composed that way.
And the method of healing is that the patient puts their hand in hot water until the skin turns red;
then it should be moderately tied so that the vein appears well, then heal it now acrosswise, not lengthwise or breadthwise;
and let the wound be wide, and heal it well near the joint of the hand, and if no blood can come out, then put the hand in warm water, and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough;
and if it is summer, do not put the hand in warm water, for it is used more in winter than in summer;
and the healing of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there is neither artery nor nerve.
The salve of the right hand's palm is worth for all liver diseases, and this is the manner:
Stretch the hand and put it in hot water until the veins are swollen, as can be seen; and if the wound is across, and if you cut it entirely through, it will cause no harm;
and do not go too deep, for the nerves are all bare of flesh underneath, and then put the hand back in hot water, if the blood is congealed in the wound and cannot come out.
And when you have drawn as much blood as necessary, put oil and salt on the veins to quickly seal them, and do this for each cut.
The swelling in the left hand is good for the disease of the spleen, and do it all as I have told you for the right.
The salve of sophene is worth for all the diseases that are below the body, such as diseases of the marrow, and retention of urine, and disease of the kidneys, and of the hips and old legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of its salve is that the patient puts some foot in hot water and rubs on the veins until they break, and binds it above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot many veins run;
then heal it at the widest vein, or at the ankle, whichever is better.
And if you heal it on the foot, be careful of the nerves below, and heal it crosswise as in cutting;
and let the flames be extinguished.
And if the pus cannot come out, then put the foot in water, and let the vein fully empty.
and if the healer fails the first time, start again a little above, for the place is salty;
do not doubt about the nerve, as we have said, and thus do the same for the other foot equally.
The place of the sciatic vein is at the ankle of the foot, and its sinew reaches to the pain in the hip when it is due to hot blood.
And the quality of his salve is that the patient enters the bath, and holds above the ankle four times in twisting, for otherwise the vein does not open;
and if it opens, then heal it in every way that you can, and by crossing; and it is better that you cut it, for the pain is slight, and it is very beneficial to many people.
and it is better that you cut it, for the pain is slight, and it is very beneficial to many people. And if you do not find it, then heal any vein that opens on the back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and beware of the nerves;
and let as much blood flow as you wish, and then loosen the tie, and place cotton on it and bind; It is now healed.
Bleeders are made of horns, or of amber, or of glass;
and ventilation is done in two ways: either by striking and drawing blood, or without striking.
And this ventilation which is without striking is in two ways: either it is done with full heat, or without heat;
and ventilation which is done by striking and extracting blood is done in fourteen places of the body, one of which is at the very top of the head; and the other is within the neck; and two others on both sides of the neck; and the suction under the chin; and the suction on both shoulders; and the suction on the buttocks; and the suction cups within the two arms; and the suction cups on both legs; and the suction cups on both ankles;
and the ventosation does not draw any blood, for it acts on the small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and therefore it weakens no one, as is done with bloodletting from a vein; and it is not appropriate that it be administered, neither with full fire nor without fire, in any disease that comes from repletion, until all the body is emptied.
and if by necessity of diseases it is needed to apply cupping, or for customs, then we administer it each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in between and at each time;
for there are some who, when they need cupping, have a heavy head;
and there are some who find repletion and redness in their face, and in their head, and at the neck, and darkness to the eyes;
and there are some who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have a swollen tongue, and spit blood; and there are some who dream, and see by night blood and wounded and dead and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the middle of the month, we order it to be bled after three hours of the day.
The salve of the mouse helps with the headache… that comes to the eyes, and it should not be applied after the evacuation of the whole body;
and this ventilation is in place of the salve of the cephalic, and it should not be used by those who have a cold temperament or who have catarrh, for it does them great harm;
and for that reason, the elderly should not use it, nor those who have cold diseases in their head.
And those who often recover from it become forgetful, and for that reason the cup should be placed a little lower due to the fear of forgetfulness.
Ventilation through the neck is in place of the head salve and the basilica, and for that reason, it is useful for constriction of the breast, and to open the nasal passage, and for cough, and for congestion;
and there it is necessary to apply a little pressure, for if it holds too firmly, it causes obstruction in the stomach or in the heart.
Wind in the two ribs of the neck is good for headaches, and ophthalmia and migraine, and strangulation, and pain at the roots of the teeth, and it is in the place of the effect of basilica;
and you must instruct the surgeon to press his hand when applying it, so that he does not cut the artery, and there are no flows of blood.
Wind beneath the chin is good for diseases of the mouth, and for the corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the place of the swelling of the two lips.
Wind movements of the shoulders are good for diseases that come from heat and fullness.
Wind in the guts is worth as much as three veins of the arm, for it draws blood from these large veins;
and instructs the surgeon not to cut too deeply, for the bone is bare of flesh, and lies beneath nerves and arteries.
The ventouse that is on the buttocks is worth for hemorrhoids of the anus, and for diseases beneath, and it is necessary that the ventouse be large, and be made of glass, as it needs to draw well; and by chance, if it were thin, it would break; and there are great wounds.
The cupping of the legs should be applied openly, for it draws blood from the entire body, and it is good for old pains in the thighs, and the womb, and the bladder, and repeatedly clears the flowers;
and they are placed at the site of the two ankles, and the two heels, and over time they weaken the body with long use, and cause paleness in many conditions.
The method of applying the cupping is that you first place it empty, and suck moderately, and apply it quickly, and move it evenly, and do not stop doing this until you see the area red and swollen, and then let the blood flow out;
then apply force, and reset the suction cups, and take care in the positioning of the body, for there are those who have too much flesh, and clearly weak: so it is necessary to strike only once, and it is necessary to make wide wounds, and one poke deeply; and suck lightly.
And if the vein is large, then it is necessary to strike twice: the first time to refine the path of the thick blood.
And if the blood is very thick, then it is necessary to strike a third time;
and when we want to draw blood little by little, then we strike only once. And if we wish to draw much blood, then we often reopen;
and if the blood is thick, then apply it to perfection, and the goal is that the veins be pierced suddenly, and it is necessary for those who have thick and hard skin, and who have narrow pores, that you anoint the areas of the cups with opening and dissolving oil: if it is in this state, of violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or oil of cucumber seed;
and if it is in jaundice, of watercress oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or other similar oils.
And if the superfluities are thick and cold, then take oil of marjoram, or of balsam, or oil of anise, and similar things.
And if the person being treated has tender flesh and large pores, then no oil should be applied, but they should be washed after ventosation with rose water, or cold water, or water of black nightshade, or water of gourd, or water of porcelain, or similar things.
And for those who have much moisture, it is lifted with ashes, or water of myrtle, and of sumac, and similar things.
And those who have gross excesses arise from old wine, or water of juice, or decoction of anise or chamomile, or others similar;
and it is not appropriate to bleed with cupping before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath one hour or two;
and do not sleep after the cupping, and it is necessary that he exercises when he should be cupped and when he has been cupped.
And beware if the one who is bleeding is choleric, and if the blood is too sharp and inflamed; it is necessary that he takes cold things, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuces with garlic, and similar things; and soft porridges, and castrated animal meat, and moist foods.
and soft porridges, and castrated animal meat, and moist foods. And he who has a cold temperament, let him take honey syrup, and moderate wine, which is between old and new, and soft foods, and soft porridges and small birds and pigeons;
and on the day he will be cupped, he should drink more than he eats;
and it is necessary to give some men at times treacle or musk before cupping, or after, to strengthen the principal limbs; and let the broth be diluted, but it is not suitable for those who are hot to drink it.
The suction cups that are placed without piercing are those that are placed on the liver, and on the spleen, and gout, and on the belly and the buttocks and the kidneys and the hip, for these parts do not withstand being pierced, and it is only done to draw blood from one part to another, as we place them on the breasts when the infant suckles;
to remove the viscosity that is in the limb, as we place suction cups on the belly and on the buttocks to reduce the swelling of the limb;
and it removes the pain when there is an obstruction or stone, as its attractive power might remove the obstruction, or perhaps dislodge the stone from its place;
and thus it does when placed upon the liver and upon the spleen when there is retained wind, and these cupping vessels are administered empty for suctioning solely; and sometimes fire is administered together, and sometimes filled with hot water, as in diseases of pleurisy, and in such a manner that one fills the cupping vessel with only hot water, or with water in which suitable herbs have been boiled for this.
The form of the cupping applied with fire is here:
And it should be two fingers wide and half a palm in length, and on the side around the middle, there should be one small hole, as if to insert a needle, and it should be made of glass, smooth at the edges so that it does not hurt the patient when placed on the limb;
and have in the middle a crossbar of bronze or iron, to hold a lamp suspended, and let them be both large and small according to the diseases and age of those who use them;
for the suction cups for children are different from those for the elderly, and for the thin different from those for the fat.
And one should place this suction cup on the limb in this way:
take the wick of wax or linen, and place it inside the suction cup through the bar that is inside the suction cup, so that the light is at the bottom of the suction cup so it does not burn the patient;
and then place it on the limb, with your fingers on the openings we mentioned, so that when you want to, the vapor comes out, and you remove the suction cup;
and imprint the liniment as before, and frequently reapply it if you need to.
In the cupping which is administered in the disease of pleurisy, all water, has no vein nor pore, and is not administered except when it is full of water, and is placed on the limb only.
and this is the form:
Bloodletting is only administered in members where cups cannot be placed due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar areas; and in areas bare of flesh, such as the toes or penis, and other similar parts;
and the quality of using is such that when you find sponges that are in sweet clear waters without putrefaction, then take them;
and place one at a time in sweet water, until they become accustomed, and have nothing in their bellies; and then let it be bled with a vein and cupping, then rub the limb until it is red, and place the sponges on;
and when they are full and fall off, if it is a place where you can apply cupping, then apply it, for this helps greatly afterwards.
If not, then clean the area with oil, and then with water, very well, and then apply it;
and if the wound is too far from the body of the veins, soak the linen cloth in cold water, and apply it until the blood is congealed;
and if the blood is multiplied, put ground vitriol or gall, and similar things, until it is congealed;
or you put on the place half of peeled beans, and leave them until they burn at the site, it will now stop the flow;
and if you need more, take other veins.
and if the veins do not want to take [the blood], rub the place with fresh blood, or pierce it with a needle until blood comes out, and then put them on, and as soon as they sense the blood, they will burn;
and when you see that they fall, sprinkle over a pot of aloe and charcoal powder, or of ash, so they will now fall.
Here begins the book of fractures This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Know, dear son, that the foolish doctor disregards this chapter, who never saw any of the ancient books, nor read a letter from them;
and for this reason, the knowledge is rare in our land, for I never found any good one;
and I know nothing of it except through the knowledge of ancient books, which I have studied so much that I have treated the subject with knowledge, and by experience, and by the habit of my life;
and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained, and have summarized at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are mentioned, as I have done in these two chapters before.
It is therefore necessary that we say in the prologue of this book the summaries of the speech and the chapters where the wise put their understanding, and remain on the truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when a fracture or dislocation or torsion or contusion comes to anyone, you must hurry to treat the patient on one side and the other, if nothing else prevents it, such as weakness of the body, or fainting, or old age; or if the weather is not very hot, or too cold;
and eat cold things, that is to say cold broths, and meat of chicken and goat, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not overload yourself with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you have no fear of a hot abscess or an outpouring of matter in the limb;
so the patient returns to his first treatment that he has used.
And when the broken bone begins to heal, then it is necessary that one nourish the patient with foods that promote thick nourishment, where there is viscosity, such as wheat cooked in water, and rice, and heads, and feet, and cow's stomach, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things. For with such nourishment the break repairs itself faster and better.
And know that the bones of old and frail people cannot be well reset or joined according to their nature because of the dryness of the limbs, nor can those that are too soft, like the bones of small children;
but do not worry, place on the broken bone the thick tendons that hold and join the limb together, until it strengthens as it was before; and do not deprive him entirely of his work, and for this reason, he should be nourished with hearty meats, as we have said.
And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot, or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures. For there are fractures that require setting, and others by sharpening, such as the cutting of a quill for writing.
For there are fractures that require setting, and others by sharpening, such as the cutting of a quill for writing. And there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture with a small split.
And for each method have your ingenuity and proper tools in the restoration, according to what the memory brings to mind;
and the bone fracture is known by the fact that the limb is twisted, and it is clearly visible by deficiency, and it sounds when pressed by the hand;
and when there is no twisting or sound on touching, and the patient does not feel great pain, there is no fracture;
but there may still be twisting, or a split, or a small fracture. So it is not right for you to move it by hand, but put on medicines that come after here, and then hold it now subtly.
And know that for fractures that go lengthwise, and where the two parts are separated, they must now be put exactly equal, so that no warm abscess forms;
and if warm abscesses do form, then leave it for some days until the abscesses calm down;
then place it equal to the movement that you can do lightly and wisely, and know that the restoration of this is lighter than the restorations of those in which there are fragments;
then restrain it, as is appropriate afterwards.
And if the bone has broken pieces, stretch it in two parts, if it is an arm or leg, or with your hand if it is a small limb, or with two ropes, or with one rope and your hand;
and place the limb according to its natural form, so that when the broken parts of the limb are separated, you reset all the fragments in their places as much as you can move them, and be careful that your work does not cause injury or pain to the patient;
and properly align the two head bones of the bone according to the best forms.
And you can feel with your hand if it does not seem well in place:
so raise it beautifully, and do not pull too tightly, nor press as those who cause by their work a hot abscess and contraction in the limb, as we have seen many times.
And when the limb is set right, then instruct the patient well that they do not move it, neither while awake nor asleep, nor when turning, nor in any other way; and ensure that the limb is so secure that it feels no pain. For when he feels no pain, it is not fully healed, and it must be put into such a position that he feels no pain;
and ensure that the limb is so secure that it feels no pain. For when he feels no pain, it is not fully healed, and it must be put into such a position that he feels no pain; and take care that it is set straight, so no twisting comes when it is restored;
and the qualities of the broken member are according to what I tell you.
Know that broken limbs are diverse in smallness and in largeness and in form.
For there are small members, such as arms and legs and similar ones: one must wrap cloths of soft and fine linen; and those that are large, such as thighs and legs:
one must wrap with a wide and hard bandage, for the wide bandages embrace the entire large member and compress it equally on all sides, so there is no unevenness;
then bind around with light bandages, three or four turns according to the limb, and tighten your hand a bit on all the binding, then go above the break and tighten less, so that the break moves away slightly;
and soften the binding little by little, until you take a large part of the healthy area, then take another binding, and wrap around again over the broken area;
then go back to the part below the break, and tighten moderately, not too strongly nor too loosely, as we have said in the first line above;
then place between the bindings linen or cloths until it is all even, then bind everything above with a bandage, and then put your well-made splints on, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or an abscess, then place on it something soothing for the hot abscess and which reduces the swelling, and leave it thus for some days;
then place it on your steles, and they should be half a large cane length prepared wisely, or of wood from which cleaves are made, or of palm ribs, and they should be according to this figure:
but it is necessary that the stele which one places on the fracture be a little thicker and wider than the others;
and it should also be as long as is necessary for the member's smallness or largeness; then bind on the steles just as you did at the first place, then tie over a thread appropriately, just as in the first place on the fracture; more narrow below, immediately less;
and it is necessary that the threads be medium, not too thick nor too thin, and be of soft flax;
for if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the works of fools who make their sutures from twisted linen cords, and this is great error, for the suture cannot be even if it is too fine, and there should not be less than a wheat grain's space between each stitch.
And if the patient is wounded by the heads of the arrows after they are embedded in their flesh, then place under them tufts of flax, or shredded wool, so that it does not get worse.
When the wound is with a fracture, and the bone is broken, I will speak of the treatment hereafter.
And know that it is not advisable to extract all broken limbs of arrows on the first day. For when the limb is large, it is not necessary to place stitches that after five days or seven, or more according to your certainty of a hot abscess ensuing;
and here is the method of the ancient plasters for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists:
and it is that you take of the flour that sticks to the mill walls, and mix it with plenty of egg, and apply this mixture, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common way of the plaster restoring the break in many conditions, and especially for women and small children, for it is not too hot nor too cold.
Another way of the plaster restoring the break and the dislocation and the twist: take 3 pounds of balsam and labdanum and honey and asafetida and gum Arabic and myrrh, in total 10 parts. myrrh and aloe, in total 5 pounds. Take nine aleches; and make it into powder, and mix it with egg white; if the person's complexion is hot, then use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and quickly restores broken bones, and is beneficial to many people.
Another method of plaster for sprains: take mugwort and malva, each ten З.; myrrh and aloe, each nine З.; acetum six З.; boil Armenian saffron X [likely a measurement], and grind well, and cook with water or egg white, and administer it.
Another method of plaster for joints and bones dislocated from their places, and to soothe the ensuing pain, and for bone fractures and breaks: take new wool, and melt it in fat and in cooked oil, and apply it to the area.
These plasters do not restore, but they are good for soothing a hot abscess and properly removing the pains.
Another method of plaster that restores broken bones: take dried fig leaves and ground ivy leaves, and grind them together, and make a plaster.
Another manner of plaster for the restoration of bone fractures and to reduce the remaining abscess. Take root of malva, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of fumitory, of each one part;
and grind, and mix with wine, and if the limb is heated, mix it with coriander water or water, and use it.
Another method of plaster stronger than the first, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the limb. Take roots of malva, and flaxseed, buckthorn, sweet clover, and sorrel, and flowers of violets and chamomile, of all one part; and grind, and mix with salt water, or fresh water, or with wine, according to the heat of the member, and its condition.
Hippocrates says in his book that one should not put on the broken limb to restore strength a salve made of wax and oil, and nothing else more, and he says it should be between two neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems Galen says one should put on the broken limb to restore dry things somewhat warm, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another method of plaster that is good for injury and pain: Take madder and human hair that has been cut off, or bird feathers, and wormwood, and salt equally, and grind them, and make a poultice and apply it.
And then loosen it a little after, and take care if the patient does not feel any pain, or if the bone has not moved from its place; do not loosen it for several days. And if pain comes to the place, or itching, without rest or swelling, then hurry, and loosen it, and remove the poultice now;
and take a light cloth, and moist sea sponge, and soak it in water, and apply it to the place until the itching stops, and the pain is soothed; then let the limb rest for an hour, then apply dry wool soaked in water or rose oil, and bind it tightly until you are sure of a hot abscess;
and the inflammation of the limb is calmed, and the pain is removed, then begin a subtle bandaging again, and apply a poultice, but do not bind it as tightly as before; and tend to it carefully until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess is hot and red and swollen with pain have been entirely removed, and you need a plaster and binding, then restart it as you did first equally.
and if none of what we have said applies to the limb, do not untie it until after three or four or five or seven days; and sometimes leave it for twenty days, according to what is observed, until the fracture heals, and the flesh grows over the alignment;
then he restrains it more than before, and his flesh swells, as I have said before;
and if you see the area dry more than is necessary, know that no growth can come from it; so then use warm water, every time you release it, and do this every third day, and slightly reduce the binding;
through this work, then, growth comes to the limb, and quickly corrects what the foolish doctors do, who restore the limb incorrectly:
it is harmful, and it is fearful work, and I see nothing else but to leave it alone and to treat it properly.
Many kinds of fractures are there, and diverse shapes, and the causes are distinct;
for there are fractures caused by the blow of a sword, and the collarbone breaks all the bone down to the surface that is under the bone, just as an ax breaks wood; and for that reason, this kind of fracture is called "hatchet blow.
When the sword cuts through the bone from above without piercing, this kind of fracture is called "absolute";
and the wound from these two fractures is large or small.
And if there is an embedded impact, or a split from the neck of a stone, or from falling on stone, or from other similar causes.
And if it has a penetrating fracture, which approaches up to the membrane that is beneath the bone, or on top of the bone, and this wound is either large or small.
And there is a wound that penetrates the bone as fine as a hair, and the split is small, and for that reason, this fracture is called "hairline";
and the wound which is made either by hitting a stone, or by falling, or by similar things, and makes the piece of the bone go inwards, and the place is bent like how the blacksmiths bend when they hit the cauldrons; and the stone enters inside.
And this happens more to those who have moist bones in their head, like a child's head;
and it happens in all these kinds of fractures that small pieces are separated like stars; and I will speak of it in its place.
And we know all kinds of fractures by the traction on them, and by the examination attempted, and by the corrupted flesh that is on them.
The hairline fracture is known by this, that when the bone is exposed and rubbed upon, the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of the fracture, take note of the patient’s accidents, and if you see any bad signs, such as vomiting bile, loss of consciousness, convulsions, sweating, fever ague, and eyes coming out forcefully and turning red, and other similar conditions in various dispositions, then it cannot heal without doubt.
And if you do not see any astounding accident and you hope for recovery, then begin the treatment.
And when the wounded comes to you first, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day at the latest.
And if it is in summer, then you must hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, otherwise the tissue under the bone may be corrupted, and the accidents we have mentioned come about.
and if the bone fracture reaches the membrane that covers the brain, then you must split the fractured part thus:
and it is that you take the head of the wounded patient, and uncover over the bone in every way that you can, and over the face of the wound more so than you can, and if blood flows out when uncovering the bone, or an abscess is hot, aid with what is necessary, and fill the place with cloths soaked in rose oil; and let the wound rest until the hot abscess is calmed, and be sure of the flow of blood; then begin to remove around the bone, and it is done according to two methods of work:
one method is that you cut with a narrow incision in front, and this is the form:
And then make another incision larger than the first one.
And the second method is that you have various numbers of cuts, some narrow and others wide, and they should be pointed, and they should be made of iron;
and work lightly so you do not bruise the head.
And if the bone is hard and strong, then you must pierce around it, otherwise you administer cuts with drills, not so deeply that they do not penetrate beyond the skull bone, and the tip should have a margin or circle above it, which does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone;
and you must have several, so that each comes to its place according to the thickness of the bone, so that you have drills for all skulls;
and these are the forms of the three types of scarifiers:
and the quality for piercing around the broken bone is that you place one scarifier on the bone, and turn it with your fingers until you know that the bone is pierced;
then place the scarifier in another part slightly after, and thus do all around, then cut with the incisors the space of the bone that is between the holes, and do this more subtly than you can, and gently, as we have said, until you extract the bone by hand, or with any of the instruments you have such as tweezers, pinchers;
and be careful not to touch the brain or the surface.
And when you have pierced the bone and pulled it out, then you must remove the residue that remains on the bone with another instrument similar to an incisor, but it must be finer and more delicate than other incisors;
and if any small bones or scales remain, remove them lightly with the instruments; then clean the wound with tents and ointments as we have said.
And another method of work is the one that Galen said, which is more safe; and he praises it greatly, and these are his words. You must first uncover a part of the bone where the break shows movement, so that once you have uncovered that part, you will place under the head of this lenticular incisor, of which here is the form:
And do not cut from one side, and the part to be cut is on both sides, so that the cutting is towards the bone;
then strike with a small mallet so that you cut the bone lightly all around, and be careful of the tissue that is beneath;
if it is loose from the bone, remove it lightly, for it can be removed without harm and without fear.
And if the bone fracture does not pierce through to the skin, and the bone is cut only on top, and there are small pieces, then you must return that roughness, and remove the scales with a fine scraper which you should have in various quantities, to administer in each place what is most suitable, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
And scrape first with large scrapers, and then with finer ones, and do not stop doing this until it is smooth.
In each of the other haircuts and subtle breaks, you should apply treatment according to its direction;
and this is something that is not easily understood by one who has not studied this art.
And if the surface is exposed, then you must take a piece of linen, according to the size of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and place it on the wound; then take another piece of cloth folded in two or three, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first piece of cloth; and do this as lightly as you can so that you do not weigh down the surface, then apply another bandage on top, and do not bind it too tightly but only enough to cover the wound;
and leave it this way for one or two days until the heat of the abscess is calmed, then untie it, and apply medicines such as lily roots, and wheat flour, and incense powder, and aristolochia, and similar things;
and of these things make powder, and put it on the wound, and administer immediately cleansing medicines without irritation;
and ensure that the wound is immediately clean, do not leave any ointment, nor allow scabs to form, for when scabs form on the brain's membrane, they can corrupt and harm it, causing great mischief to the patient;
for when something corrosive is placed on the surface, it can burn above. Take heed then, if any bad accidents come to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without a doubt.
And if darkness does not come except from the medicine that has been placed on it, which has such power, then you should take one part of honey and three parts of rose oil and glue one bandage, and put it on the surface; then heal it with methods of healing as is needed, until it is healed.
Know that sometimes the two parts of the nose above are broken, or one part by itself, for these are two bones;
and the one below is cartilaginous, and does not break, though it can bend or twist, and then heal.
And if one of the two parts is broken, then you should put your little finger into the nostril hole, and place that break evenly inside with your index finger, and press gently to bring it back to its natural shape; and do this gently, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
And if the break is in the upper part of the nose, and the fingers cannot reach the place, then you must put it equal at the head of a rod a bit thick.
And if the break is of two parts, do likewise, and hasten to restore on the first day, if you can;
and if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the hot abscess is calmed, then place at the head of the nail pieces of linen cloth, if the break is in one part.
Place one another on the other side, if the break is there; and let the pieces be so large that they fill the gaps of the nail.
And some say that one should moisten the threads with butter and change them each day. It does not seem right to me, but they must be moistened in a mixture of egg white and mill powder; then leave the tent, until the bone is hard, and the cartilages are hardened.
And sometimes put in the navel goose quills instead of tents, and wrap a cloth around it, and hold the breather, and the patient blows through; or do the task that you wish.
And if warm abscesses come to the nose while you are working there, put a poultice or cotton moistened in rose oil, or in the juice of euphorbia.
And if hot abscesses do not come, then apply a plaster by force, of powdered flaxseed, and incense powder, mixed with egg white, then put light bandages on top, and do not bind the navel;
and if the break of the navel is small, and it is broken into small pieces, then extract it with appropriate instruments, then sew the tear, and treat with things that heal flesh and promote healing, such as plasters and suitable ointments;
and if there is no wound inside the nose, then treat it with tents, and put in plucked chicken feathers until it is healed.
When the jaw is fractured below, and there is no wound outward, and the break is only outward, and it is not broken into two, but rather bent inward, this is recognized as a slight injury.
It is necessary, if the break is on the right side, that you put your index finger in the patient's mouth; and if the break is on the left jaw, then put your index finger of the right hand, and push the break in gently, and adjust it with the other hand by force, and make it equal.
And if the fracture of the jaw is separated into two, it is necessary that you administer extension from both parts until they are equal.
And if movement of the teeth occurs, or a tear, then extract them with a gold or silver or silk thread, then put on the broken jaw a plaster, and place over it a double cloth; and place on the cloth a well-made thick needle or a piece of equal leather, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it as high on the cheek as you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
and if you see that the face changes, then untie it on the third day, and then properly adjust what has changed; and apply a poultice of mill powder with egg white or sesame flour after you have removed the plaster;
and place a light wool poultice on it, and if the poultice dries out and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until they are healed; many times it is healed in three weeks.
And if hot abscesses come, then apply what we have said many times.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, heal it if no piece of the bone has been removed; so carefully attach the fragments to the appropriate instruments for this.
And if the wound is narrow, then widen it with fire according to your necessity.
And when you have removed all these pieces, and none remain, sew the wound if it is wide, and apply appropriate poultices to promote flesh growth until it is healed.
The forearm breaks often in front, towards the shoulder, and the fracture is according to three manners:
or it is broken and separated into two parts, and there are fragments, and it is the easiest to restore;
or there is a fracture with a wound.
And the work is when the fracture is without a wound, that you have two assistants, so that one holds the shoulder next to the broken forearm; and the other stretches the neck towards the part;
then place the fracture equally in your hands, so that the form is as it should be, and there be no appearance or misalignment.
And if you need to stretch more, then place under the patient's shoulder a round ball of cloth, or of wool, and let it be large according to your necessity; and stretch and lift the forceps, and press the ball with your hand, so that you place the fracture equally as it should be.
And if you cannot pull the head of the forearm from its socket because it is embedded deeply, then the patient must lie often on his back, and place a medium pillow under the shoulder, and the attendants push the shoulder down until the bone of the forearm is lifted.
and then align the fracture with your hands, and if you find it fragmented, then you must cut into it;
and pull out the fragments gently, and if the bone cannot join due to some obstruction, then cut it with one of the incisors that you have; but place under the forceps this instrument, to protect the surface:
and it resembles a spoon, and is not closed, and should be as wide as necessary, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work;
and let it have two ends, as you see, and let one be wide, and the other narrow, as is the tear of the wound that you made when you pulled out the bones;
and when you are sure of a hot abscess, cut the wound open, and if the tear is small, or if you doubt it is a hot abscess, then apply the wound with cloths and bandages, according to its quantity.
And if hot abscesses come, wet the cloth with rose oil and lard and wine, and apply it.
The squeezing of the bone, when it is without wounds and without cutting, is that you put on the bone the plaster of the powder from the mill and egg white, and put light bandages on top, and place a sphere under the splint if you need it; then take a very wide bandage of a palm in width, then put the cloth double over the bandages, and the plaster; then take a thin strip of three digits wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage, so that the ends of the bandage are hanging; and place the strip on the fracture, and wrap the bandage around the neck, and under the healthy splint, and under the diseased splint; and reset each part, and when you see that the joint holds the breaker properly, and you clearly see that the needle does not move over the broken bone, then reward it every day, and when the bindings loosen, then restrain it;
and make the patient lie on his back, and put a small pillow under the mattress when he sleeps, to lift the shoulder up; thus lighten the fracture of the clavicle by lifting the shoulder, where you tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it unless bad accidents occur, until twenty days;
then restart the plaster, if you see that it is needed, and bind it tightly and leave it that way until it is restored;
and it is restored in as many as twenty-eight days, and in fewer for some men.
of the break of the shoulder
It often happens that the shoulder is broken at its edge or not in the middle, and one does not know it except by touching it;
set it according to the shape of the fracture, and reset it according to its natural form, in every way that you can;
then apply powder from the mill with egg whites and light bandages, and place a double cloth on top; then place a wide and thin board slightly larger than the shoulder, and if beneath the board there are any uneven areas on the shoulder, use flaxen bandages to fill in those areas so that the board lies evenly;
and then it is bound with a large bandage firmly, so that the stone does not move from its place, and the binding is examined each day;
and every time it softens, it is bound, and the stone is placed back if it has moved from its place, and the patient lies on their side;
and the shoulder is restored in twenty days or twenty-five.
And when this number is completed, then it is untied, and be sure, for it is not bone that moves out of place easily.
And if a piece of the bone sticks out and points below the heart, cut up above it, remove the bone, and do what we have said in the fracture of the finger to soothe an abscess when hot.
of the breast fracture
The bone is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; but it often breaks at the weaker point.
And when it is broken in the middle, it droops downward, and the patient feels great pain, and lacks strength, and immediately, and perhaps vomits blood, and the marrow appears in the broken bone, and one can see it clearly.
And the restoration is such that the patient lies on his back, and you place a cushion between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and align the ribs from both sides with your hands, and delicately apply equal pressure in all ways that you can, until the shape of the bone is as it should be;
then apply poultices and bandages over the splint with fine salt, or another light wood, and wrap it in a cloth, and bind it over the broken bone so that it does not move; and turn the bandage around to the back, and bind it tightly, and check the bandage every hour, and if it loosens, then tighten it;
and if it needs to be unbound due to corrosion or itching that comes in the place, or pain or abscess, then hurry, and unbind it, and scrape off the plaster, and address what has come there with methods of treatment;
then reapply the plaster, and keep it tight until it heals.
Of the breaking of the ribs
Know that the breaking of the ribs only occurs in their thick parts behind the back, and at the head inside, and they do not bend except because they are slippery; and one can feel it well upon examination with the hands.
And the restoration is that you set the break evenly, as it should be. And then apply the plaster, and bind it with a splint if necessary.
And if the breaking of the ribs is inclining inward, then the patient feels great pain and pricking, like from pleurisy, for the bone pricks the membrane; and has pointed pains, and quickly vomits great quantities of blood, and this is from severe illness, and the ancients have applied much ingenuity to it.
And there are some who say that it is necessary to administer foods that swell the belly, to push the breech towards the lower part.
We do not allow an abscess to become hot if it has not already done so. And if it has come to be there, then we treat it.
and some say to put leeches on the spot, to suction thoroughly, and this seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the leech may draw the excess to the spot due to the weakness of the location.
And some say that we should cover the spot with wool soaked in hot oil, and place bandages between the ribs to evenly distribute the heat around, then treat it with the treatment for phlegm, food, and medicine.
and if the patient feels great pain that they cannot endure from the bone piercing the tissue, and there is doubt for the patient, then it is necessary to cut over the site of the broken rib, and it is necessary to place an instrument underneath to support the surface;
and then one must cut the bone, and pull gently, and then sew the two edges of the wound, if it is large, and treat it with plasters until it heals.
And if hot abscesses come, then put cloths soaked in rose oil on them, and place them on the area;
and treat the area as is appropriate for an abscess, and let the patient lie on their side where it should be, until it heals.
and similarly to the spine of the back.
And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then beware if you see their hands softened and swollen and numb, and cannot move or extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Know that it is deadly in many conditions, and if they move and feel well when you press and prick them, know that the bone joint is saved, and that the patient will be cured, if care is applied.
And if similar things happen to the spine of the back, and you wish to know if it will be healed or not, then beware if the feet are softened, and if the symptoms are present which are in the hands, and on the back there is flatulence and involuntary discharge;
and when it is treated on its stomach, there is involuntary discharge. And when he is lying on his back and he wants to saddle up, he cannot. Know that it is mortal: do not labor over its treatment.
And if this accident does not occur, then the condition is lighter.
And the treatment is that you apply, if there is a hot abscess, rose oil or egg yolk oil on the spine until it is calmed;
then put on one of the comforting and drying plasters, and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where he feels the pain until he is healed.
And if any bone disjoints, it is necessary to cut on the joint; and remove the bone, then sew together the two edges of the wound if it is large, then treat it with salve to promote healing until he is healed;
and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the «head of the skull», place your pouched hand (left), and make it equal to the other hand as much as possible, then apply the plaster and the splint on top if needed;
then he restrains it, and if there is a loose bone, he cuts into it, removes it, and treats the wound until it is healed.
of the break of the hip bone
It rarely happens that the bone of the hip is broken, and if it does happen, there is only a slight reduction at the top; and it extends from the length, and inclines outward, and causes pain to the patient at the site, and punctures, and swells where it is broken.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand over it until you are above the fracture; and understand what the nature and shape of the fracture are;
And if the break is only at the top, then make equal that break, until it has a natural shape.
And if the fracture is long or it inclines inward, then make the patient lie on his stomach until the restoration of this fracture is aligned for you. And when you have made it equal, then put on the plaster, then put on a splint of wood or horn, and bind the fracture so that it does not move;
and fill the area below the ribs until the level is equalized. And instructs the patient to sleep on his healthy side, or on his back.
And if hot abscesses come, do not touch them until the hot abscesses are calmed, and put on what we have said before; and then return to the restoration, and bind it as appropriate, if there is no harmful accident;
of the shoulder fracture
The shoulder joint is what is between the arm and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, it should be restored according to one of the two methods:
one of which is that you take a stick of moderate thickness, according to this form:
And tie the two ends with two ties, and pull them upwards, and have the patient sit on a seat;
then lay the broken arm on the stick until it reaches the shoulder, and have a wooden support in the middle, then pull upwards with some weight or have an assistant stretch it down;
Then the doctor places the splint equally with both hands together, until the splint returns as it should.
And another method is to place the patient on his back, and tie his hand to his neck, then command two assistants that one holds what is above the splint with his hands, and the other holds below at all sides, and each stretches their part.
And if you want the extraction to be stronger, then remove the tie below the splint, and above the splint, and each of the assistants stretches their part.
And if the splint is near the top of the shoulder, then you must place one strap in the middle under the axilla, and the other towards the side, under the splint.
and likewise if the splint is on the side, then you must place the strap gently, without force, until the splint is even in its place, and on the side;
then place the fracture evenly as it should be, and bind it, unless hot abscesses come.
And if hot abscesses come, then do not bind it for seven days, and put on wool moistened in oil of iris and rose oil until the hot abscesses are calmed;
then you constrain it, and the method of constraining is that you put the plaster on the fracture, then bring the arm to the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the chest;
and put the bandage, and constrain on the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm is in its proper place, unless something prevents it, or if the bone has not moved.
And if you fear that the bone may move, then use splints, and put on the fracture a splint wider and stronger than the others, and have between each splint one inch of space, and let each splint be so large that it passes the fracture three inches on each side;
then cut into the stones, as I have said at the beginning of the chapter on fractures, more strongly and less in moving away.
And if you see the setting of the stones and the pressure, as we have said, at the time when you restore the broken limb, and you fear an abscess is hot, then leave it to bind until the seventh day, as we have said;
then examine the bandage every three days to ensure that itching or swelling does not occur at the site, or that nourishment cannot reach the limb because it is too tight. If it is directed, as we have said.
And if no such accidents occur, then do not untie it until after three days or more, and have the patient sleep on his back, with his hands on his stomach;
and put under the shoulder a cushion full of wool evenly, and look at each hour of the day or night, that the shape of the broken limb does not move, or the ligaments do not soften;
and direct it through the power of medicine, and give him the meat that we have mentioned before, in such a way that the meat is initially subtle; and when he begins to recover, let it be coarse.
And it is customary that the shoulder and the leg should be fully recovered in forty days; and then one should untie it and administer baths and medicinal ointments to properly direct the area.
And if the constriction is tight and embedded, it remains to untie for one day or two months.
of the breaking of the arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the two "humerus", of which one is smaller, and it is the one that follows the elbow;
and the other is larger, and it is the one that is below, towards the small finger;
perchance only the large humerus is broken, or the small one, and perchance both together.
When the small humerus is broken, the restoration is light, and the healing;
and when the large one is broken, the healing is bad, and more grievous than when they are broken together.
If it is the small splint that is merely broken, then it should be slightly extended and made even.
And if it is the large splint, then it must be pulled tighter;
and stretch it on the cushion, and hold the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and the small fingers lower than the other fingers, and let the patient be crossed over himself, and the cushion in front of him higher, so that the patient does not suffer any strain;
then extend the minister's arm below to his hand, or to the joint, and another minister above.
And then the doctor makes it even, according to its best form.
And if in the fracture there are pieces, then place each one in its place, and if any detached piece pricks the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then cut over it and remove it, as we have said before.
And if with the forceps to the wound, I have spoken of it in a specific chapter; then take care of it.
And if at the beginning of the treatment abscesses occur hot, then apply a cloth of ointment made of rose oil and white wax, which should not be too hard nor too soft; and bind the cloth gently on top until the hot abscesses are calmed.
And then remove the ointment, and apply a poultice of mill powder with egg white, then place the plasters, and let the plaster for the breaker be stronger, and a bit wider than the others;
and know that there must be six plasters on the arm in various arrangements: whether the fracture is in one of the bones, or in two;
and holds more on the fracture than elsewhere, and always less as it moves away, just as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the bandages that are on the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard nor rough;
and let the bandages that are on the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard nor rough; and let the thread, with which it is bound, be of flax, not too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
And reward the member and the joint after some days. And if any bad accidents come to the member, such as itching that comes to the member, then you must sprinkle the member with warm water until the itchings are calmed;
and let the member rest without being too tight.
And then restart the binding, and if the joint is softened and the bones separated, and similar things, then address it.
And take care if the nourishment cannot reach the member because it is too constricted, then you must soften it a bit, and leave it this way for some days until the nourishment flows, and then bind it tight.
And if none of these things that we have mentioned come to the patient, then do not release him until twenty days.
for around it, then he can place his hands on his neck, and let his necks be equal, and beware of movement and jolting, and sleep on his back;
and know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or in thirty-five, and by chance in twenty days, according to the compositions and the complexities of the virtues.
of the break of the hand
Know that on the back of the hand and the joints of the fingers there are few breaks, and they do not come except with much bending many times.
And when the palm of the hand is broken or bent, then it is necessary that the patient sits crossed, and sits straight in front of him equally;
then place his hand on the stretched cloth, and the minister extends the broken bones, and the doctors set them equal until they are well joined;
and apply the plaster and the bandages, if abscesses do not come, then place a splint according to the size of the area; and be wrapped in a linen cloth.
And if the fracture is inside around the belly of the foot, make a sphere of cloths, and instruct the patient to press it to their fractured foot; and then bind it with a long cloth, and let the splint be as large as the palm of the hand, and bind it tightly as is appropriate.
And if the break is on the top, you must put a stick on top and another underneath in the sole, so that the hand is open and straight, then bind it all around the hand, and stop the binding between the fingers.
And if the fracture occurs in any of the joints of the fingers, if it is swollen, then set it straight as appropriate; and you hold it with the palm, and if you want to put a small straight splinter to lift the fracture, and do not move;
and if the fracture is on the other fingers, such as in the index or one of the others, make it even, and bind it with the healthy finger that follows; or you bind them all together in one hold, which is better, or you put on a splint, just like in a pouched manner;
and take care in the restoration and positioning of a hot abscess, and support what comes from it, just as I have said.
The bone of the thigh is often broken, and it is well seen when it turns forward and backward;
and the restoration is such that one ties above the break, and the other below. and the patient lies on his back, then each minister stretches his band on his side equally;
and this is when the break is in the middle of the bone.
And if the break is close to the root of the thigh, then one of the bandages should be towards the hip, and the other bandage below the break.
and also if it is near the knee, then let the band be close to the knee, and let the stretching be downward;
then the physician places the bone straight with his two hands until it is according to its natural form, and then he applies the plaster, and binds it, provided no abscesses come.
And if there is a hot abscess, let it calm down then return to your work and your treatment; The book is made in such a manner.
You must wrap over the fracture with a thick bandage doubled in II or III layers, and leave the excess, then turn the leg until the heel comes to the root of the knee, and insert one long thread between the thigh and the leg, below the knee, and let the end of the thread come above;
then wrap the bandage over the leg and thigh, then place splints on the fracture, and put a splint on the bone of the leg;
then use the soft cloth between the leg and the thigh to evenly apply pressure, then begin to firmly tie three or four knots above the break; and as you go higher up from the break, apply less pressure;
then tighten the two ends of the thread that you have placed between the leg and the thigh, and tie three knots on top, then go back down along the head of the thread until you come near the foot;
and apply pressure so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, provided that no abscess or swelling or similar occurs. And if it does occur, untie it, and address what happens, as we have said many times;
and if there are bone fragments that prick, they must be removed, if one can; and if one cannot, then the area must be split open, and force extracted; and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
And sometimes the thigh is broken in such a way that splints must be placed on it, as in the shoulder and arm;
nevertheless, with the restoration done this way, the patient does not limp.
And know that the thigh is restored in 50 days, or a little less or a little more, according to the differences of temperaments.
Know that in the region of the knee there is little breakage, but it bends many times.
And if it breaks, it is no more than a split, or a perforation, and this happens to open wounds and without open wounds, and this is well felt.
And the restoration is such that one places equal pressure on the rounded part with both hands until it is properly aligned as much as possible;
then apply the plaster, and place a round stone if you need it, and bind it as appropriate, then treat all the conditions we have mentioned in other fractures, such as hot abscesses and similar ones; then apply to each injury what it requires until it is healed.
of the breaking of the leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is properly called "tibia," and the other is called "fibula";
and all types of fractures occur as they do in the arm, and therefore the restoration is the same as that of the arm, and the treatment is entirely similar. And if both bones are broken together, then the leg turns in all directions.
And if the delicate bone is broken, it turns forward.
And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it is clearly seen; and turns beneath.
Then apply extension, and make it even, and bind the splints evenly;
but nevertheless, if the fracture is bad and there are several pieces, the extension should be smaller and lighter; and lighten it according to your skill.
And when you have completed your work, take two strips of wood that span the leg on both sides, and let them be as long as the leg from the knee down;
then wrap in two places one bandage above and below, and tie it in the middle as well, and at this binding the leg will not be able to bend to the right or left, and thus it is good;
and some administer one bandage along the length of the leg, and if it is wood, the leg is placed there to prevent movement, and this is properly done in the fracture where there is a wound;
and move the leg each day to see if there is a hot abscess or other accident; treat it until it is healed.
of the fracture of the bones of the foot
At the ankle there comes no break, but in the bones of the foot sometimes there is a break and in the toes a bit, and there is force that breaks in many positions.
And if the bones of the foot are fractured and you see these bones protruding over each other, then place the patient's foot on the ground as if they were about to walk, then put your foot on top of theirs where the bones are raised, then press until they return to their places;
then put the poultice and wads on, and place under the belly of the foot a small board two inches thick, then bind to the foot appropriately, after you have wrapped cloths around, and other things that you need.
And when three or four days have passed, then loosen the binding, for you will find the bones aligned, whether they are broken or dislocated.
And if any of the toes are broken, then restore them, just as we have said for the fingers of the hand; then put a splint on the broken toe according to the length of the toe, and let it be a bit wider, then place under the foot that board I have mentioned, and bind appropriately;
and if there are two or three, or more, broken, then put a splint on each toe according to its size, wrapped in one linen cloth, and bind the board under the foot; and let it being on the head of the table deflate the belly of the pie, so that it is well colored.
and you must not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, which we have mentioned; and attend to each incident as is appropriate.
of the fracture of the bone of the wrist
When the bone of the female genitalia is broken, have her sit spread out, then incline her toward the back part, and let her be held from behind;
then have the practitioner fill the female genitalia of the patient with cotton, and put as much in there as a thumb;
then stand the woman up, and lift her back little by little, and then the cotton comes out, until it reaches the entrance of the genitalia, and the bone returns with the cotton;
and when she wants to urinate, she removes the cotton, and after she has urinated, she puts it back, and thus she does for seven days or around: the fracture will be restored, and if you wish, take a bladder of a deer, and tie a reed to the opening, and insert the whole bladder into the natural orifice; then blow into the reed strongly until the bladder is inflated inside: the natural position will return to the fracture;
then it should be filled with cotton, and leave it this way for several days until it is healed.
And when the bone of the wrist of a man or a woman is broken, it should be restored as we have said for the bone of the hip;
and these fractures are not hidden to those who apply their study and practice to it, and understand my book.
For the fractures indicate in various positions the right way of restoration: understand it then.
In the penis, when it is fractured, take a goose’s throat and insert the penis; then wrap cloths around it, and leave it for three days or so, and it will be healed quickly.
of fracture with wound
It is necessary for one who has a fracture with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the bone of the thigh or the shoulder or similar, that he be bled now, so that the bleedings we have mentioned testify to it.
And if the wound heals, then stop it with vitriol, if you have nothing else, then restart restoring the broken area in that same hour, or on that day, if no warm abscesses come.
And if warm abscesses come, then delay the restoration until the ninth day, until the abscesses are calmed, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would cause a harmful accident.
And if the broken bone is visible on the open chest, then you must set it lightly with your hands, with slight stretching.
And if the extension is not suitable for you to hold equally in your hands, then reset it with this instrument which is made of iron, which is seven or eight inches long, and its width is according to the size of the wound; and for this reason it is necessary for the physician to apply three or four, according to what he needs in each case of fracture;
and let it be round and somewhat thick, so that it does not bend when compressed on the limb during your work, and let it be sharp at the front, and thick from the middle forward, thus:
And it is called "pale," for which the curved head should be placed on the exposed bone; and strike it at once until it straightens, and let them be equal to each other. And if the fracture is delicate, and the instruments cannot grasp the bone well, then you must chop off the end of the bone until the instruments have power over it.
and if you cannot bring back the bone, as we have said, then cut it with an appropriate instrument, whether an incisor or saw, to your ability;
then scrape what remains in the bone of roughness and small shards.
And when the bone is returned, and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural place.
So do so until it is in its place, then moisten the cloth with black styptic wine, and clean properly if it is necessary; and do not put on the wound any plaster or other thing that contains oil, so that it does not cause putrefaction and corruption;
then apply compresses when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cut the covering all around according to the size of the wound, and be careful that the wound is not constrained with the fracture;
and many times foolish doctors have done this, and it has brought death to the patient or caused corruption sometimes; and let the bindings be softer and more supple than other fractures.
and if the wound is bad or large, and you fear that adverse accidents may come, as we have said, and you find pain in the place, then you should not put a stone on it; but wrap around, instead of stones, hard cloths, and bind them.
And when you see after one day or two that the wound is beginning to heal around the wound, remove what you have put on with pure wine, and apply a healing salve, such as an ointment like tetrafarmacon and similar.
And you must loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and in the evening, until it is healed and sound.
And it is necessary that the limb be arranged in such a way that the wound heals downward gently.
And if many days pass and it cannot heal but keeps coming back wounded, know that there are small pieces of bone, for which you must probe the wound with a tent, and remove all these loose pieces that cause the pain.
And if a fistula comes to the site, or any other form of corruption, then you must cure it, according to what he says in his chapter above.
And when the bone is broken and open on the limb, such as the bone of the thigh or the shoulder, and other similar large limbs, do not treat it, for many times death results, but leave it until it putrefies;
perchance it will fall off by itself after twenty days or thirty, then treat the wound if you can;
and if you cannot, then leave it.
We often come across the health of the fracture, especially when it is near the joint, and it is a terrible thing to see the shape of the limb; and perhaps the limb cannot perform its natural functions.
Be careful then if the wound is fresh: administer astringent medicines to it, such as aloes, frankincense, and myrrh, and sarcocolle, acacia, and similar others, so that you take any of these things, or all together, and mix them with an astringent wine or with egg white or with oil; and places them on the knot in bundles, and binds them tightly, and does not loosen them for many days;
and places them on the knot in bundles, and binds them tightly, and does not loosen them for many days; and then dislocates it, and begins another one, until the nodulations are removed;
where you extract with a properly made piece of iron; for the property of the iron is that it removes all swellings on the limbs;
and if the nodulation has already hardened like stone and needs to be removed, then cut on its surface and incise the apparent excess; where you shave it with a razor until it is removed, and care for it until it heals.
of the member which is weak after the healing
When the break of the bone is restored, and remains after the limbs weak and subtle, it happens for many reasons: for one of the reasons is that it was bound too tightly, and was not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many bindings, and the nourishment could not reach the limb; or due to an abundance of bleeding; or due to excessive movements, not at the right time; or because he has little blood in his body, thus is weak.
And the treatment is that you make the patient eat, and make the body soft, so that the blood be multiplied in him; and the administrator gives a bath, and gives joy and leisure;
then put pitch on the limb, so that the pitch attracts the great nourishment, and frequently moisten it with warm water, until the nourishment flows to the limb; and it returns to its natural form.
of the limb twisted after the health When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bone is visible, and the form of the limb is ugly, nonetheless it does not lose its natural function:
so do not believe the fools who say one must break the limb all anew, and many foolish doctors have done this in our land;
and these works are blamed, and great evils come from them, and perhaps death;
nevertheless, if the nodules and the swellings are fresh, then they should be soaked in hot water, or herbs that soften should be boiled, such as mallows leaves, and roots, and sweet marjoram, and similar things;
and make a softening plaster, as diaquinon does well, and take the mallow mucilage, and mix it with chicken fat or linseed oil, and apply the plaster on top;
where you take fat figs, and grind them with chicken droppings, and similar medicines that reduce the swelling.
And sometimes the knot is removed by rubbing continuously and for a long time with wet hands. And let the limb be moved every hour.
and if the tortuosity is awakened and hardened, like stone, and it is necessary to remove it with iron, then it must be cut down to the bone, with a subtle light incision; and apply care and study in the treatment.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation comes to anyone, then he must now bring it back without delay.
For if one delays, the wound swells, and perhaps it is reset with pins in its place;
for that reason, one should not move it when it is swollen: it often causes spasms and other pains;
However, when this happens, have the patient bled, then leave it, until all the abscesses are calmed;
then bathe the limb with warm water and oil, then reset it gently, and treat each limb as needed until it returns to its place.
And I have ordered the chapters of the dislocations from the head to the feet.
It often happens that the jaw is dislocated here, and the dislocation of both occurs in two ways: or they are slightly displaced from their places and somewhat loosened; or they are completely dislocated and hang downward, causing saliva to drool from the mouth which he cannot hold, nor can he close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped in speech.
When the dislocation is small, it returns by itself through various arrangements.
And if it is whole and complete, then you must reset it quickly, and do not delay at all;
and in such a manner that the servant holds the head of the patient, and the doctor puts his thumb in one of his hands at the root of the dislocated jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is in two parts; and the other fingers of the hands should be apart, to make equal;
and instruct the patient to soften his jaws and move them in all directions. And the physician puts it equally, until it returns to its place.
And if the resetting is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated together, then wash them with warm water and oil until you reset them gently;
do not hesitate to bring back, as we have said.
And when they are brought back evenly, and the mouth of the patient closes well without softening, then put on cloths moistened in an ointment made of rose oil and wax, then lightly bind it with soft bandages;
and let the patient sleep on his back, with his shoulders between two cushions, so that he does not move it to the right or left, nor strain to chew, but take light food until the pains are removed, and the jaws are healed;
and then let him eat what he wishes lightly, and do not strain to open the mouth while eating and drinking until the jaw is well healed and healthy.
And if the two jawbones cannot be perfectly reset within an hour and are not returned to their places, then fevers and customary sores result, and perhaps diarrhea, and perhaps vomiting of bile.
And when you see this, then know that it is destruction; and many times the one to whom it happens dies within nine days.
The forceps cannot dislocate from the side within the continuity of it and the breast, and it is sometimes dislocated outward, and this is well felt.
And the restoration is such that the patient lies alone on his back, and extends his arms; and then press the area firmly with your palm, and it will return;
then apply the plaster and bandage it, and bind it tightly;
and the joint that is towards the side cannot dislocate; if not, and if it dislocates at any time, then reset it to its place, as we have said;
then put on the poultice and bind it, and compress it, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed;
and in the same way is returned the head of the spine when it is dislodged from its place.
Of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is not dislocated except according to three manners:
one of which is that it dislocates on the side of the axilla below; and the second is on the side of the breast; and occasionally it dislocates on the upper side, and this happens rarely;
and does not dislocate behind towards the shoulder, and does not dislocate inward towards the nerves;
and often dislocates downward towards the axilla, especially in those who have little flesh, for it moves quickly out of place;
in those who have enough flesh, it moves with difficulty, and returns with difficulty.
And sometimes it happens to some men that there is a blow or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of this.
Then you must test it until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
And the dislocation is recognized when it moves downward towards the axilla, and there is a difference between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a noticeable difference between them; and you will find at the head of the shoulder a hollow, and beneath the collarbone by touching the head of the shoulder, just as if it were a bird's eye; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose, nor move it in any way;
and likewise, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you find it clearly by touching;
and this kind of dislocation is not difficult to reset when it is new, or if the patient is young.
And the method is that the assistant lifts the patient's hand upwards, then places his thumbs beneath the collarbone, and raises the joint forcefully upwards to its place; and the minister lifts the hand, and extends it upwards, then places it below; then it will come swiftly.
And if it does not come as we have said within a few days, then the patient should be bathed in warm water; and the administrator uses a gentle and soothing ointment, such as a decoction of elecampane and fenugreek and melilot in water, and let it be applied;
then the patient should be placed on their back, and place under the board a wool cushion even, not too soft nor too hard, then the physician places his heel on the cushion, and lifts the head of the shoulder forcefully, and pulls the patient's arm;
and another minister holds the head of the patient so it does not move down; the shoulder returns completely now, and if you wish to reset it in this manner:
and it is that you have a man present who is taller than the patient; and be straight against the side, and place his shoulder under the armpit of the patient, and lift the armpit up so that the patient hangs in the air; and another minister pulls the patient's hand down towards the stomach. And if the patient is too light, then with him some heavy thing may help, and the dislocation returns now.
And it is also reset in another manner:
and it is such that one sticks the long rod into the ground, so that the shoulder may be as round as a pistol, and neither too thick nor too thin; then it should be placed under the patient, but let there be cloth above, and the patient should be lying along the long part of the rod;
then extend his hand downwards on the other side forcefully, and the joint will return to its place quickly;
and if it does not want to return despite all these things that we have said, then do this treatment: take a rod two arms in length and four fingers in width, which has the head rounded to easily enter under the armpit, according to this form:
then tie above the head of the wooden stake a soft cloth, so that the wood does not wound the patient, then place it under the armpit of the patient;
and extend his arm over the long stake, and tie the shoulder to the stake, and the arm to the hand, then place the arm on a step of a wide ladder, and let the hand be stretched downward, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint will now return to its place.
And when it is in place, in whatever manner that may be, you must put under the armpit a sphere of equal wool, then apply a poultice mixed with mill powder, along with incense and egg yolk, over the entire shoulder and around it, then strain under the armpit appropriately, and turn the bandage over the poultice, and bind the hand to its neck, and let the hand remain thus.
And it is necessary that he eat little, until the limbs are strengthened, for it will heal faster;
and then eat more after five or seven days, and move it; and if it is firm and not softened, then it is healed.
And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has come in, or for any other reason, then you must apply cauterizations at three points, as it is set forth in the chapter on cauterizations.
and if you do all this, and it loosens after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and he cannot lift his arm up, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or weakened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
The dislocation that is towards the breast or behind is caused by impact and stretching of the hands, and another place is administered.
and treat until it is healed.
And if after the healing cracks appear in the limb, and there are delays in movement, then the patient should bathe many times, until those cracks are alleviated, and return to their original state.
of the dislocation of the jaw
Know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated by degrees, and returns by degrees;
and if it has dislocated entirely, especially in front and back, and the dislocation is not replaced, because one sees it well and feels it well; and dislocates according to each figure. And when you join the sick limb with the sound one, then you can see it clearly. For the joint is fixed, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch his shoulder at all.
And you must reset it before hot abscesses develop, for if hot abscesses were to come, it would be difficult to reset;
and perhaps it cannot be entirely reset, especially when it is at the back; it is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and perhaps death may come from it.
And the restoration is such when it can be brought back that you extend his hand with your two hands; and his arms be spread out, and the hands of the doctor according to the cut around, above and below, and put the joint at its edges together, or at the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is at the front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and trust in the root of the palm the cut which is dislocated.
And if it does not want to return to its place, then apply strong extension;
and it is that two assistants extend the arm, and hold it tight so that it does not move during the extension;
then turn the arm on each side, after you have wrapped a long and wide doubled cloth;
and when the physician touches the joint with his hand, he anoints it with some oil to soften the joint, then forcefully pushes the joint back, until it returns;
and when it is in place, he puts on a dry plaster with egg white, then tightly straps it, binds the arm to the patient's neck, and leaves it for several days, then unbinds it.
and if the joint is firmly in place, then unbind the tie, and leave it;
and if you see that the joint does not hold well, then reapply the plaster and the binding, and leave it this way for several days, until it is firmly set; then untie it.
and if he feels a crack after the joint is reset, and it moves, then bathe and gently rub it, and press until it is smoothed out; where you place on the joint a piece of fat sheep's wool, then leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and have him enter the bath; and when he sweats, gently rub the joint, then put the wool back on, and then enter the bath; and do this two or three times until he is healed;
and if you wish, put moist cow manure heated with butter on it and apply it;
it will return to its proper position.
the dislocation of the hand
The joint of the hand dislocates, and the return is light, more than the other joints. Nevertheless, it must be returned to its place quickly, in the same hour that it dislocates, before the area swells or a hot abscess develops.
And the resetting is such that you place the diseased hand on a table, and the minister extends the hand, and the doctor places it evenly, so that he puts his palm on the surface of the joint, and pushes until it returns.
Nevertheless, you must check if it is properly in place; then place the patient's back of his hand on a table during extension and retraction. And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, then place the patient’s back of their hand on the table, and the physician places their hand on that part of the joint.
If it comes back now, it is good. If not, then apply warm poultices to soothe the abscesses and leave it this way without restarting.
And if he cannot tolerate it, and you cannot place it back in position after some days, then the joint will remain distorted;
and it does not harm the patient's strength as long as the hand is weakened, and cannot grasp anything at all: then you know that the nerves are cut, or the arteries;
so there is no other device better than to constrict with cautery near the case, and by chance there may be nothing else worth using.
And when the hand is in place, then put on the plaster that we have said, then bind it tightly and leave it for five days, then untie it and leave it thus.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is any cracking, then soak it in hot water, and rub it until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated on each side, sometimes on the back of the palm or on the front;
then extend the finger, and push the dislocation with your pouched area until it returns, then hold the tip of the finger, and bend it towards the part where it is separated;
and leave it for two days, and then set it straight on the third day;
and at night bind it as we have said, and untie it during the day, and make it move, and bind it again at night;
and do this often, until it is tight, and just the same do so, if it is dislocated at the palm of the hand, and do as you have done here before, until it is healed;
and just the same do so, when it is dislocated from another side.
Of the dislocation of the spine fracture
When the spine or neck is dislocated, or there are several dislocations, there is no treatment, for death quickly follows the patient.
And the sign is that the excretions jump out without will, and cannot be held back, and many times a limb is weakened, or both thighs or the two arms or one.
And many times the shadow changes to four parts;
that which changes at the back is called "gilbositez":
The treatment is to reward if the lameness has come from childhood: there should be no treatment or healing at all.
And for that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient methods of treatment speak in great words, but they do not have much benefit at all;
but I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the lameness which comes to the front foot, there is no remedy nor health;
and similarly that which comes directly to both sides, and one cannot treat it except properly which comes to the back, as I say;
and it is that the patient be stretched out on his face in an equal place, and have some padding underneath him, so he does not hurt himself;
then stick one stake firmly in the ground at the head and the other at the feet, and tie one rope underneath the arms of the patient, and the other at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles;
and two assistants hold the ropes, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two stakes;
and they should be well secured, the stakes as we have said, and the doctor places his palms on the spine firmly, until it returns.
And if it does not return by this cure, take a board of three arms long, and place it under the wall, and let the patient lie on their side, and put the end of the board under the wall, then place the middle of the board on the spine; and let the physician place his feet on the other end of the board, and press firmly until it returns to its place;
and if you wish, do it with a wrench that turns by hand. And you should drive in two pegs at the head of the patient's large board, and two others towards the feet, and have between each peg, above and below, a palm's space in length;
and have in each stake a hole, where the drill turns, and let the stakes be firmly in the ground so that they do not move;
and between each two stakes have one rotating stake, on which the ropes turn, and in two rotations have two small stakes of one palm in length, to turn the drill;
and then tie the rope that is among the boards to the drill towards the head, and the other rope towards the feet to the other drill, and each of the assistants turns their drill along the entire rope, and the master places the spike evenly as we have said.
And when it is even, then put on a drying poultice with an abundance of egg, and then the wicks, and then the stick from a tablet three inches long, which should cover the area of swelling and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with a rope as we have said, and let the patient use subtle nourishment until they are healed;
and if anything comes at the end of the health, then it is necessary to administer softening and relaxing medicines, with the star that we have said before; and sometimes a piece of plaster is administered, and sometimes the appearance comes in the last vertebra of the back, and one thinks it is dislocation; and it is the bone that appears, for which one should not be presumptuous; for it might bring about death.
Know that in the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder, only dislocations occur, and it does not happen as in other joints;
and the hip joint is dislocated according to four parts: inside and outside, and in front and behind;
and more inside than others, and less dislocated in front and behind.
And the knowledge of its dislocation inside is that when you join the sick leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and the sick knee is more open than the healthy one, and the sick person cannot bend their knee to the ground; and the area which is nearby is swollen with an abscess and hot, because the head of the thigh comes there.
And the sign of those to whom it comes to deform, is that these accidents are contrary to those before.
and the signs of that which happens in front is that he stretches his leg according to the alignment; however, the knee does not bend without pain, and if one wants to make it go forward, it cannot move ahead, and it retains its urine, and the ankle swells, and when it goes, it passes over the heel.
And the sign of those to whom it happens behind is that they cannot straighten their knee nor bend it, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the hip joint is in a lower position under the ribs.
The remedy for this kind of dislocation is that you reward if the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its position, there is no treatment; and it does not require any presumption.
And in the case where the dislocation is fresh, and this is of the four types of dislocation, you must hurry to return the joint, stretch it inside and outside, and move it to the right and left; by chance it may return, and does not need other treatment.
And if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare the minister strongly, and stretch the leg strongly with two hands, or with one ligature that is tied above the knee; and another minister extends his hand above in such a way that he places his hands under the bones, then tightens with a strong ligature on the thigh; and another holds the end of the ligature;
and they stretch up and down all at once, until the patient is lifted off the ground at once, and remains hanging.
This method of extension is common to the four similar cases, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
If this is not so, then one must attend to its similarity.
When the dislocation is on the outer side, then you must place the patient on his healthy side, then put the bandage at the root of the thigh, and the spot that is below the angle, then stretch the bandage up towards the angle, and towards the kneecap;
then let another minister take his arms, and embrace the thick part of the diseased thigh, and stretch it out fully: it will return to its place now;
and this manner of dislocation is lighter than the others.
And if you cannot bind it in this way that we have said, then you must tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong bond above the two heels, and above the two knees, and let the sick leg be stretched out two times more than the other;
then let it be hung from the top of a post, and let it be two arms' length above the ground;
then command the minister to grasp the head of the thigh, and let another minister hang with the patient, who grasps the thigh firmly, for the joint now returns swiftly.
And when the dislocation is above, the patient lies down, as we have said in the case of one who has a swelling, and bind the bandage tightly on the sick leg properly, and on the weight also;
then place two torches, one at the head and the other at the feet, then insert one torch between the patient’s thighs in the form; and have placed damp cloths around to prevent the patient from being burned, then extend each minister towards him, and the doctor places equally in his hand the dislocation.
If it returns, it is good.
If not, put it on a table, and press it as we have said in the case of gilbositeit, and lay the patient on the healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the affected leg quickly, and according to what I have said; and the doctor places his palm on the affected joint, then presses with the other hand, and stretches it downwards towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is behind, it is not necessary to stretch the patient downward, nor lift him up from the ground, but he should be positioned as if the hip were dislocated behind, just as we have said about lying on both hips; and let it be on his face, and the bandage extended as we have said above, and one must press on the joint at the table; and it will be right when the patient stretches his legs, and they will be equal; then align the thighs, apply the plaster, and bind it with a bandage so that the hip does not move; and let him rest for three or four days, then untie it, and apply the plaster again;
and if you see that they are equal, then bind them as before, and leave it for three days;
then he unties it, and makes it move gently, until the limb is strengthened.
of the dislocation of the knee
The knee is dislocated in three ways: that is to say, inward and outward, and backward;
and does not dislocate forward.
And the sign is that you instruct the patient to bend his leg at the thigh, and if it does not straighten at the thigh, know that it is dislocated;
and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and stretch his leg if he can, and place your back against his face, and put his foot on your feet;
then take his knee in your palms, and pull between your fingers, then bend the two sides of the knee properly; and another minister extends his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he holds his leg lightly to his thigh;
and put the plaster on, and make the leg adhere to the thigh, and bind them together tightly for three or four days, then unbind it;
and the patient does not attempt to walk until the limb is strengthened.
And if the limb is not completely healed, apply strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the heel
The heel is sometimes displaced, and sometimes completely dislocated, inside and out.
and the sign of it is that the ankle is swollen, and you feel forward at the part where it is dislocated:
The manipulation is light, and it should be extended lightly with his hands when he is merely excited.
And when it is entirely dislocated, then you must seat the patient upright, and have one minister hold the leg by the ankle;
then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with the left twice, then stretch it upwards, and gently place the foot upwards;
and do this twice, as we have said, by placing and pulling the foot;
if it returns, that is good;
if not, then repeat the procedure, for it will return;
and if it cannot return thus, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and firmly place a peg in the ground between his thighs, and bind cloths around so that they do not harm the patient;
then have one minister hold the thigh, and another minister extend the foot with his hands or at the ligament that is tied above the ankle; then extend each minister equally, and the peg should be firmly between the thighs of the patient to hold the patient when they are being stretched;
then the physician should equally place his hands on the dislocation, and another minister hold the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it is at the right point, then put the plaster and bandages on, and bind tightly, and tie the foot to the leg, and watch the nerves that are above the heel behind, so that the binding is not too tight;
then leave it for two days or three, and if the binding softens, then bind tightly again;
then untie it on the third day or the fourth, and forbid the patient to walk for four days; and if he walks before that time, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
And if hot abscesses come, you must soothe them, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healed.
of the two When both are dislocated, they must be gently extended without effort, and this is an easy thing to do.
And if the dislocation is in any joint of the arch of the foot, then it is necessary that you make the patient sit on a flat place or on a table straight up, and put your foot on what appears to be his joints, then press hard with your foot until it returns;
and when it is even, and nothing appears, then put under the sole of the foot a board at two feet, then hold it firmly, and leave it for three days, then unbind it; and have it rest until it is healed.
of wound and dislocation together
When a wound comes with the dislocation, and one wants to restore it, often it happens that the patient dies:
do not be presumptuous in the care, if you are not wise in the art and have not practiced it long, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and cautious, not bold;
and begin with soothing remedies for a hot abscess, and leave the patient in God's hands if you see no hope of health; and when you see hope there, reset now the limb to its place, unless the abscess becomes hot there;
and when the limb is in place, administer soothing things for a hot abscess, and treat the wound with drying ointments as appropriate;
and if with the dislocation there is a fracture and small bones are dislodged, remove them, and do what we have said in simple diseases;
and beware of entering a path of fear, according to what I have said, for it is worth less according to your Creator, and for the wisdom of your arm and your body.
