To you, my dear son, I have completed this book which is the last of the medical science together with its fulfillment, and I have made an end through its explanations and by its declarations. And it came to me in vision that I complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery.
And because the work of hands is strong in our region and entirely foreign everywhere else, the science has perished and been cut off, and nothing remains of it except the small descriptions in the books of the ancients that hands have moved. And from this have come the errors and the vanities, and closed are the attentions and alienated is the science.
It seems to me that I want to revitalize together the arrangement of this treatise according to the method of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and will come together the forms of the cautery irons, and of the other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the explanation and preparation of them, as is necessary.
And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is distant. And it is necessary for one who interferes to excel in the science of anatomy, as Galens says, so that he knows the judgment of the members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations, and have knowledge of the bones and nerves and brains and their number, and the movement and the moving veins and the resting ones, and the place of their origin.
And for this reason Hippocrates says that the name with the name is much, and with the work is little; and especially in the art of manual skills.
We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things previously mentioned should beware lest he fall into error and harm people;
Thus, I have seen many times those who are involved in this science and abandon their knowledge and experience.
For I saw a foolish doctor who cut an abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and cut the arteries of the neck; for which so much blood gushed out that the woman fell dead in his hands.
And I saw another doctor extracting a stone from a man's eye, and the stone was large; he carried away with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
And I had already been called to treat him, and saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and knew well that if it were cut out he would die.
And I saw another doctor who took under his care a duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the break there was a wound;
and the doctors full of ignorance bind the fracture on the wound with splints by strong force, and leave no salve to the wound at all, and so they leave it thus terminated;
and he commands that he does not loosen it;
and leaves it thus until the leg was entirely swollen and the foot came to destruction.
I was called to come to him, and I hurried to come to loosen the leg; and when I untied it, he was at ease and felt no pain.
But in any case, the corruption was already confirmed in the member, and could not be healed;
and the corruption did not stop traveling through the limb until the limb was entirely lost.
And see another doctor who bursts the infected abscess and then inflames it due to the malice of his rule.
For a chancre, when it is pure of melancholic humor, should not be touched with iron unless it is in such a place where one can entirely remove what is corrupted.
And for that reason, dear son, you must know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: that is, work where there is danger in various positions;
and I will show in each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
For that reason, it is necessary that you be careful so that foolish physicians cannot speak ill of you.
So take up your weapons in self-defense, and undertake your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best method so that by the grace of God you may come to salvation and be praised;
and leave the appalling diseases of severe sickness;
and remove your doubts from what makes you fear, and have faith in yourself so that you may come from this world to the next of glory.
Galens says in some of his admonishments: Do not take on a bad disease, lest you be called a mad doctor.
I have divided this treatise into three chapters.
The first chapter is about fire cauterizations and medicinal cauterizations, and the chapters are ordered from head to foot;
and of the forms of ointments, and the instruments for cauterization, and everything that is necessary for the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about suction cups and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things;
and the chapter is organized and the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and torsions, and similar things;
and it is ordered from the head to the feet, and the forms of the instruments.
In order for us to remember the work, it is necessary that I speak of the quality of the aid and the harm of each temperament.
I say that the qualities of aid and harm are the longest discourse and most subtle science and the secret responses;
and about this many wise people have spoken and agreed upon it;
and they soothe a bit with their words, for I fear the length.
I say that cautery universally helps all complexions where there is matter, except for two complexions: that is to say, a hot complexion without matter, and a dry complexion without matter.
In a complexion that is both hot and dry with matter, some have argued that cautery provides great help; and others said the opposite: that cautery is not useful for diseases that come from heat and dryness. For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be treated with heat for a hot disease, nor with dryness;
and says he who says the opposite that cautery provides great help to hot and dry disease that comes into the bodies of men. For when you compare the body of man and its moisture to the temperament of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this statement. For I have found it to be true by experience.
And in any case, let no one interfere except those who have experienced it and who understand through long use the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of human temperaments, and the conditions and causes of their diseases, and the occurrences and the span of time;
we have no fear of other temperaments, especially in cold and wet diseases. And all the physicians assembled and agreed on the cautery.
And know, son, that cautery together with fire is among the secrets of treatments, and of greater goodness than burning medical cautery.
For the fire is simple, and does not affect any other part except the member that is burned, and does no harm to another member if it be small.
Burning medications come from one member to another in distancing and cause serious ailments in the member that require severe treatment; and perchance kills the patient.
Fire because of its height and because of the goodness of its substance does not do this, if there is no excess.
And this have I found by experience and by the length of service and the study that I have put into the art, and it was on the truth of things;
and for this I excuse myself for the length of the speech, for it does not please me to take away the secret that is contained in the fire, and the quality of the work, how it cures the diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; or receive it in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agreed on when the cauterizations should be done, and chose propitious times.
And I say that cautery is appropriate at all times, because the harmful things coming underneath are placed by the help of the cautery; and especially if the cauterization is for pains necessary outside and urgent that cannot wait the time until greater damage comes to the member.
And never think, dear son, as foolish doctors do; for the disease that is healed by cauterization has no return; and they say it thus;
and they say it thus; but it is not as they believe, for cauterization is merely a medicine that changes the temperament, and dries the humors which are the cause of the pain, and it is more effective than other medicines because of its quick action, and for the power of its effect and its sovereignty.
And it is possible that the disease may come sometimes according to the temperament of the patient and the site of the disease and its power;
and the excesses are gathered in him through the acquisition of foods and similar things, unless cauterizations are administered at the site where there is little excess and moisture, such as dental cauterizations for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why cauterization is called the last resort of medicine, and it is true;
but they do not believe that cauterization is effective after medicine, but their understanding is false, and cauterization is the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of treatment in any disease and they are ineffective, then we apply the cauterization, and it works.
Then it is clear that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish doctors.
The ancient said that cauterization with a gold instrument is better than with iron, and they said this only because of the quality of gold and the excellence of its substance;
and they said that the fire of the cauterization does not cause putrefaction, but this is not true because I have experienced it, and have found that it is true in some people;
and cauterization with gold is better than with iron, just as they said it is. And nevertheless, when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it cools down quickly;
and if it is heated too much; so they do with fire; and thus there is enough obstruction.
Or I have ordered this chapter from head to foot so that the way may be easier to find.
This cautery is effective for moisture and cold on the brain, and it is used twice due to a disease called "soda," and because of various humors that descend from the head to the eyes and ears, and for numerous dreams, toothache, throat pain, and especially for all diseases that come from cold such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by a dissolving medicine modifying the head for three nights or four, according to what the strength and the age and the habit of the patient can endure; and then shave the head of the patient.
And then make him sit between your hands crossed, and place his hands on something light;
afterward place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and there where your middle fingers will come, bleed from the elbow then heat the cautery which is called “olivary”, of which this is the form: and place it on the marked spot with ink, and do so by loosening and tightening your hand little by little while turning it around; then lift your hand gently, and reward the spot if you see the bone a little small; and if you do not see it, repeat the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you;
after take a little tar, and mix it with oil and moisten cotton inside, and place it on the spot, and leave it for three days;
after put upon cotton moistened in butter; and leave on until the burn is removed; after treat the wound with the ointment which is called "tetrafarmacion", until it is healed.
And the ancients said that the longer the wound remains open, the more it purges; and for this reason, it aids movement.
And some say that one should let the cautery linger until part of the bone is burned, and then remove what is burned from the bone, and it should be cleaned.
and others say that the cautery should be left on for so long and pressed so hard that it abates the bone as wide as the spindle that women put in their spindles so that the humors may move out;
and one must leave the wound open for a long time; afterwards, it must be cleaned and soaked.
And these two methods of cauterization do not seem to be entirely good in every case, except in some people where there is a need for fear;
and it seems to me that I should leave it alone;
for the shoulder is weakened by continuous natural dislocations, as we testify in other limbs;
and likewise when the shoulder of the patient is weak by nature, and the first method of cauterization is safer and better for me, and with this method I operate then to achieve salvation.
When throughout the head comes chronic pain, and lasts for a long time, then the patient should use yarrow and pills which are called "cochie", and cleansing of the head and oils and plasters; and if the cautery that we mentioned before is done to him and it does not help. Take care if the shoulder of the patient is of strong nature, and that it is not too cold; then cauterize below that cautery a bit as we have said above. After make cautery on each horn of the head up to the bone, as we have said before, and make the cautery at the place which is called "vasselz"; and there are places where leeches are applied; and hold your hand so that you do not see until the bone: the patient feels much greater pain in this cautery than the others, and I will speak of it later;
and it is necessary that the cautery needles for the horns be finer than those used to cauterize the middle of the head, and this is the form:
Of the cautery of the head When a sudden pain comes to a part of the head, and the disease spreads to the eye, and the brain is cleansed with purifying medicines, and all other treatments that I have mentioned in the division of diseases are performed, and none of this helps: then he makes cauterizations according to two methods, that is to say with medicinal fire and of fire.
The cautery of medicinal fire is such that you take an onion, and remove the skin and grate it to one part with two shoulders, and then cut into the temple where the pain lies in such a manner that you can place the grated onion under the skin;
and when it is placed, bind it tightly and keep it that way for twelve hours; and then untie it and remove the grated garlic, and leave the wound in this way for two or three days; then apply cotton soaked in butter so that the pus may come out.
After the treatment of anointing until he is healed;
and if you want to do this with some burning medicines that I have written about in the twelfth treatise on burning medicines.
The cautery with iron is according to this method. Heat the cautery of which this is the form:
And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a ball where it has a bit of curvature, and in the middle, there is a small appearance;
and place it on the painful area, and hold your hand and turn the fire slightly, so that half of the thickness of the kerb is burned;
and lift your hand so the artery does not burn, which is on the outside, and let an abundance of blood flow out.
After put cotton on awl of seal, and put on the place for three days; then put moistened cotton in butter, and then clean the place of ointment until it is healed;
and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery which is called "cultellare," at the entire tip, and beware of cutting the artery in this recent migraine.
of migraine
When you treat a migraine as we have said before in the divisions of diseases, and it does not help, and you see that the cauterizations previously mentioned of medicine and iron do not suit him, then you must heat the cautery which is called "cultellare" until it is white;
and mark beforehand on the painful place a line of half an inch long, and remove your hand once, so you do not cut the artery and do not reach the bone;
and beware of the jaw that moves when one eats, and the nerve should not be touched so that it does not cause spasms in the patient, and beware of blood flow from the artery when it is cut, for cutting has great fear especially for those who are inexperienced, and who are not scholars and experienced; and leave the work halfway;
but I will tell you how to stop blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it applies in this book.
And if you see that this cautery does not help the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him in the middle of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed;
And if you see fit, administer the cautery that we have described in the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has two blades; and this cautery is better and more helpful than the other one.
of the pain in the ears from coldness
When pain from cold comes to the ear, and one has applied solutive medicines and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division, and the pain does not subside, then heat this cautery which is called “point”, of which here is the form:
After puncture all around the affected ear, or around both if the pain is in both, and move a little above the root of the ear once you have marked the spot for insertion; and let there be ten points around each ear;
after care the place until it is healed.
of the torture of the mouth
Torture which should be treated by cauterization is none other than those that move phlegm, as we have said in the division of diseases;
and do not perform cauterization on those that come from dryness and spasms of the nerves.
When you treat this form of torture which moves phlegm with hydros and purgatives from the head and gargles, and if this does not work, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear, and the other a bit outside the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips;
and place the cautery on the part that appears healthy, and make a cautery directly at the head of the ear below the horn of the head by a bit, and another one on the temple as long as a thumb; and leave the cautery on top until the middle of the heart is burned;
and this is the form of the cautery:
And it resembles the scalpel that we have described before, but it is a bit finer and it is necessary that the blade be a bit thicker;
after treatment the place as I have said before, until it is healed.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, and it does not help, and the patient does not have fever, then make four cauterizations: two on the two horns of the head, and one in the middle of the head, and one at the place called "vasselz" as we have said before, and the last cauterization on the mouth of the stomach;
and let it be treated as we have said before.
of lethargy
For this disease, it is necessary to give the patient large herbs and purifying pills for the brain;
after raising the head of the patient all, and place on the occiput the mustard plaster which is written in the treatise on plasters;
and this is the method of the cautery: do it as I have said.
if he is healed thus, it is good; and if he is not, make three cauteries on the head descending to the neck, and have one inch of space between each cautery;
and treat it as the others, and if you see to add, and the patient is enduring, make one cautery in the middle; and if necessary, two others on the two corners, and treat until it is healed;
and let the cautery which is called "olivary" be as I have said before.
It is necessary that the head be cleansed of sores and what we have said before;
afterwards raise the head of the patient, then make a cautery in the middle of the head and on each corner, and one at the back and three on the spine of the neck;
and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is enduring, and the disease is strong, make four cauteries on the spine of the back; and he leaves it until the most of the heart is burned, and lifts your hand; after the treatment until it is healed, and let the cauterization which is called "olivary" that we have mentioned before be done.
of the epilepsy
The epiletics should not use fire cautery except those who are phlegmatic, and one must first modify the brain with herbs and other treatments that we have mentioned in the section when the patient is large and suffering from a need for medical treatment.
And if it is a child who cannot withstand it, give him gargles and chewing, modifying the diet frequently with good foods;
afterwards, cut the head in the middle, and make the cauterization according to what we have said before, and the cauterization on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is strong and enduring, give him cauterization as I have said for one who has paralysis and weakening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauterization be olivary according to the method that I have described.
If the patient is inflamed, then apply a fine cautery according to this method:
When by the cause of melancholy the excesses or the moisture is corrupted and phlegm becomes thick, then cauterize with such cauters as we have said to him who has paralysis.
And if by the cause of melancholy the excesses are declining into melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him to drink something by which the brain may be purified, according to what is stated previously in the division.
After raise the head of the patient; after make the linen bandage well done, just like the circle, and put it around the head;
and the patient is crossed, and be well held on all sides;
after present the liniment, and it is worth using wool of old barberry; and heat it at a moderate fire, so that when the hand is placed on it, it can be tolerated; after empty the circle inside around the head, and let it cool;
and do this for the patient once each week with other good treatment, until he is healed.
For if you wish to cauterize it, make multiple points all over the cautery.
This method of cautery moistens the brain equally;
and then put on wet cotton in butter and in goose fat.
of the eye lid When awe comes to the eyes first by the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and give the patient something purifying for the head, and protect it from all moisture, and make him sweat in the bath multiple times on an empty stomach.
Afterward, instruct them to lie with their head backward, and perform cautery within the head, and make two cauterizations on both temples if the dripping of the fluid is to both eyes together, or one if it is to one eye;
and cut all the veins and arteries that are beneath the heart completely, and let the cauterizations be long according to the width of the temple;
and beware of the flow of blood, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stop it with whatever power you have.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision how you will widen it;
And sometimes a cautery or hot iron is used under the two rear bones.
and one sees that they are cold, phlegmatic excesses, then he makes the cautery that I have mentioned at the beginning of this chapter below the eyes: One cautery in the middle of the head, and two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries with a hot iron under the two bones; and if there is need for more, then cautery it wisely above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
When you treat it according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give the patient to drink three nights of decoction; after the king's head, and make a cautery in the middle of the olive-shaped cautery; and make two cauteries of the cautery which is called "clavilis" on the two eyebrows, a little below the hair.
and be careful of the artery that you do not cut it.
And this is the form of the cautery which is called "clavilis":
When the membrane of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery which is called "olivary". of which here is the form:
And if you want to make two cauteries on the two eyebrows as long as the eyebrows are;
and do not leave your hand there except until a third part of the paper is burned, according to the method I have said.
of the hair that pricks the eye Sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyes turn inward and prick the eye, and a cautery is performed according to two methods: that is, with fire, or with burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they have grown and are even, then put the patient in your care; after apply on the eyelids a figure that is like the leaf of myrtle, and let the beginning of the sign be near the hairs;
then put moist cotton in egg white and marjoram ointment on the eye, then heat the cautery of which this is the form:
after cautery on the figure that you have marked little by little many times, so that the burn be there in the place;
and the signs of the health of the work are that you see the eyelid retracted, and the hairs raised at the corner of the eye;
then lift your hand, and leave it this way for three days, then put moist cotton in butter until the burn is removed; after the treatment of ointment until he is healed.
and if afterwards the hairs come back and the scab softens then restart the cautery on the same place just as you did first;
and if the hairs are weaker, then cauterize until the scab is lifted to its natural place and is even, and the hairs do not prick the eye.
The fire cauterization is when you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow until they are long and even, then make a shape of mirtle leaf from parchment;
then take French soap and fresh calf's fat, of each one third, and grind them together well; and do it quickly so that it does not cool down, then stretch over the form that you have made like a myrtle leaf, and place over the eyelids; and if the illness is in one eye only, then it should be treated in that one, and if in both equally; and place under the eye cotton moistened in egg white;
and the head of the patient should be in your hand and place your finger showing on the medicine, and press the pouch and the lump every time the patient feels a bite from the medicine, for it feels like a bite from fire.
When you have done this for a long time, remove the medicine at the appropriate time. And when the bite has passed, then lift the area with water, and check if you see the paper lifted as though it were lifted by the constraint of fire or by an incision; and if it is thus, then it is well.
and if it does not, then apply more medicine to the place where the medicine has not worked, until your work is equal and your eyes are set properly;
then apply moistened cotton in butter until the burnt area falls off, after which treat the ointment site called "dyafenis" and others until it is healed.
And if it is necessary that you guard well your work with great care so that no part of the medicine falls into the eyes.
And if the parchment becomes soft afterward, and the hair pricks the eye, then reapply the medicine to that area which has been softened by the parchment properly, just as you did before; then treat it until it is healed;
and this is the form of the leaf of myrtle:
and know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and according to this be your constraints;
and the right way should not be revealed to one who is not dedicated to this art.
of the treatment of fistulas by cautery
When you treat fistulas as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not help, then it is necessary that you perform cautery on them according to this method.
Instruct the patient to place his head on your thigh; and hold the patient's head between your hands in such a manner that it does not move, nor does he remove his head;
afterwards, put moist cotton in egg white or in celery juice on the eye;
after heat the cautery which is blue:
and it is shaped at the head like the form of an eagle's feather, together with which should be the cautery;
if you wish, it should be pointed from one end to the other, and if you wish, it should also be like a tent;
but nonetheless, this one that is shaped is much better for your work.
after press the fistula if it is open, and draw out the pus, and dry it; and if it is closed, then open it, and draw out the bowe forcefully;
after put on the cautery very hot, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part of the nose below the eye, so that your hand does not do folly; and put the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
If you come to the beginning of the cautery until the bone, it would be well. If not, then repeat the cautery once more, and another if you need it, and leave it for three days;
after put on moist cotton in butter, and treat it with the drying ointment until it is healed, and if forty days pass and it is not healed, then apply a strongly corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and treat it according to what would come in his chapter.
And there is a method of cautery for fistulas that some of the ancients mentioned. Understand about fistula, and open the area; after put in the slit some subtle camphor of which here is the form: and apply an amount equal to three spoonfuls; and hold your hand on the camphor firmly, and the patient should not move at all, so that the melted substance does not run into their eye;
and it is necessary to put on the patient's eye cotton moistened with egg white or with oil;
the plaster thus heals the area of the fistula, and it heals with wonderful health.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have mentioned, it is good. If not, it is necessary to administer a probe to the wound, and to bring the fistula back to its proper place in the body according to what is appropriate.
cracks in the lips Very often cracks appear on the lips which are called "hair", and especially on the lips of children.
When you treat these cracks that we have mentioned in divisions, and the treatment does not help, then heat the small knife-shaped cautery according to this form:
And he quickly puts them into those cracks until they reach the bottom;
after treat the area with cerote until it is healed.
When an abscess comes to the root of the tongue or in the throat, or in the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it becomes putrefied and rotten and is corrupted and becomes a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, and it does not help: then you must have the cautery according to the size of the fistula; after you apply it to the opening of the fistula, and hold your hand until the hot iron reaches the bottom of it, and at the deepest part;
and do thus once or twice after the treatment of what we have said in treatments, until he is healed;
and if it is treated thus, it is good; and if not, it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines and that does not work, then place the head of the patient on your knee; after heat the cautery in such a way that you place a cane on the tooth;
and put inside the hot cautery quickly, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth;
after lift your hand and restart the cautery according to your will;
after the patient fills his mouth with salty water, and keep it for an hour and spit out.
And in such a way the tooth that was moving is confirmed, and the softened gums are restrained, and the corrupted moisture is dried.
of the pain of the teeth
When tooth pain comes from cold, or there is cold in the gum, and medical treatments do not work, then it is necessary to use cautery according to two methods: and butter cautery and fire cautery.
Butter cautery is such that you take cow's butter, and put it in a iron or bronze spoon; after take cotton and wrap on the tip of a tent, and dip in bull butter, and put on the painful tooth quickly and hold until it is cooled;
and thus do often until its virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and if you want, dip wool and cotton in cold butter, and put on the painful tooth, and put hot iron on top until the fire reaches the edge of the tooth.
The cautery with fire is such that you take a pipe of iron or brass, and it should be thick so the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient;
after heat the cautery, of which the form will come afterward, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled;
Do this often, for the pain will be removed on that very day or the next.
And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good butter during the urgency of this cautery, and then rinse forcefully;
and this is the form of the cautery:
And make a cautery of the head as you desire, and according to what you are able;
and this is the form of the probe:
Of the scrofula When the scrophules are of phlegm and cold moisture, and do not respond to digestion through medicines, then heat the cautery as described hereafter comes the form, and have two openings for the smoke to exit from the other side of the cautery;
and put the hot cauterize once on the abscess, or twice if necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess;
and if the abscess is small then put the cauterize according to the size of the abscess, and leave it like this for three days; and put on cotton moistened in butter until the burn is removed;
aftercare the area with ointments and bandages until it is healed.
When the moisture overcomes the channels of the phlegm, and especially when this comes from a cold temperament, then it is necessary that the patient be purged first with solutive medications;
After you make the cautery at the root of the throat, and take care that you do not go as far as the throat itself, and do not burn the heart but a little.
After you make another cautery at the joint of the neck to the top of the spine, and let the cautery which is called "clavile" be as we have the form before;
and treat the area as we have said before until it is healed.
When all the diseases of phlegmon are from cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and the disease is old, then you make two cauteries on the forearm in their places; and the other cautery between the two breasts;
and let the cautery which is called "clavile" be according to the form that was previously described.
And if you wish, make a cautery by pricking with the entire cautery which is called "poins" of which the form is mentioned earlier in the disease of the ears;
and let there be up to thirty pricks, or around that number.
After treating the place according to what was previously said, let the cauteries be three inches in accordance with this form:
And for that reason, the cauterizations are lighter, because you do three at once.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot remain in place, instead returning and dislocating again with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first treat the dislocation repeatedly. After, let the patient be placed on their back and on their side; then lift the heart that is inside the titillite with the fingers of your left hand;
and if the joint is dislocated inside, heat the cautery which has two horns like this is the form:
and cauterize the wound until it penetrates to the bone, and the figure of the cautery comes together with four cauters;
and for this reason, the cautery is made with the cautery that has three horns, so the figures of cauterization are six cauters;
and the nerves are according to the subtlety of a tent and this is the form of the cautery that has three horns:
And sometimes it is placed on this one nerve so there are eight cauters.
After put on the cautery poultice ground with oil; after make rest the patient, and not be moved the limbs for long time until it is well strengthened.
And if it is dislocated above, which rarely happens, then make a cautery on the thick part of the collarbone, or many cauterizations at the base.
For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
When in the stomach come cold and much moisture that it changes its temperament, and are multiplied the catarrhs to him, and in the usual ways of treatment it does not benefit, then it is necessary that the patient be placed on his back, and extend his legs and hands. from this on you make three cauterizations one below the nipple of the breast for the quantity of a doe, to all the cautery clavicle, and two cauterizations outside the two sides so that the figure of the cauterizations be at three angles, and have such space between one and the other that they are not joined together when they will putrefy;
and let the cauterizations be so deep that they reach the two parts of the heart, and let the figure of the cauterizations be according to this form without adjustment:
And if you wish to cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form;
and he who will have fear of this cautery, cauterize by pricking and bleeding on the stomach one spot according to the quantity that you wish to release; then cauterize with the entire cautery which is called "point".
After the treatment of the care that we had before, until he is healed.
When the liver suffers pain from cold and moisture and excessive windiness, to the point that it is forcefully displaced from its natural temperament due to excesses; and the patient is treated with what we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit him, then the patient must be bled on his hepatic vein; and bleed from three cauteries according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, outside the hypochondria, where the ribs of the person come;
and there should be the thickness of a finger between each cautery; and let the cauteries be along the length of the body, and do not press too hard with your hand over the entire cautery;
and let only half of the heart be burned, and let the patient stand straight on his feet;
and if he cannot, let him lie down, extend his legs, and raise his arms;
And if your will is to cauterize these cauteries of the cutellaire, if you are subtle and wise in the art, beware that you do not burn the entire heart, for you would cause the whole body to wither; and that it does not reach to the eyelid, for the skin is very thin there, and you know this to be true.
When it has an abscess in the liver, and you want to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: if it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain but not too severe;
and if it is in the membrane, then the patient feels intense pain.
And when this treatment is needed by the physicians, it is necessary that the patient be shaved on their head;
and then apply a poultice to the place where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which resembles the sun, of which this is the form: And cauterize with the cautery until the pus is burned, and it comes down to the siphon, until all the corruption is completely out;
after the treatment according to the treatment of the cloths until he is healed;
and it is not appropriate that anyone but those who have studied long in the art of medicine should use this cautery, and by whose hands these diseases have sometimes run their course.
Then he may boldly operate, and nevertheless it seems better to leave them alone.
of the cautery for pleurisy
The ancients said that one should make plasters of cautery from the roots of aristolochia, and in such a manner: take a root of aristolochia, the longest that you can find, and let it be dry, and as thick and as long as your thumb; and the mole in oil, and apply it to the fire, and cauterize the cautery between the shoulder and the neck, and two small cauterizations a bit downward in the part which is under the beard;
and two cauterizations between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining backward a bit; and one cautery in the breast, and another on the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two on the sides of the breast outside the cautery which is between the two shoulders;
and do not press your hand, but do it openly as in an unguent.
And some ancient ones say that some people use a fire cautery resembling a razor, and they heat it and place it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess; and the pain jumps out, just as we have said about the abscess of the liver.
But in this work, there is fear that the patient may die immediately, or an ulcer may come which cannot be healed.
about the mouse
When you treat the disease of the mouse in the ways we have described for the treatments and it does not help, then there are three types of cautery that are all good.
and one method is that you make three cauteries, or four, along the length of the mole, according to the shape of the liver cautery that we have mentioned before;
and do not press your hand over the entire cautery, and let the patient lie on their back;
and another method of cautery is that you heat the cautery which has two prongs, just as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder;
and lift the area where the mole is located, or where the side of the patient comes towards the left, and let the elevations by which you lift the area be according to the shape, according to the length of the body, and the cautery should be according to the width of the body.
After you put the two burning nerves until the heat penetrces through to the other side, and then pull out the cautery, and thus there will be four.
And if you wish, then cauterize the entire cautery to three burns.
After the treatment when it has discharged pus for a long time, and this is worth more than the other treatments mentioned before.
Cautery is not useful for dropsy, except in the method which is called "asclytes.
When you treat it according to the methods we have described in divisions, and your treatment does not help, then you must make four cauteries around the boil, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one at the armpit. and let the cautery be close to the surface of the heat.
After leave the cautery open to expel pus for a long time, and do not neglect the patient’s treatment after the cautery; and healing would be hastened, and the two intentions will be together with the help of God.
The form of the cautery for the belly should be the key that we have shown before; and the one for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what is set forth above.
When the feet are swollen in one who is dropsical, and are full of yellow water, you should cautery on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring toe; and lift your hand with the cautery without turning.
And do not enter too deeply with the point, so as not to go beyond the yellow bile, and let the cauterization be according to this form:
After make on both legs two cauteries in each leg at the point of the kneecap; and let the cautery be long, one below the knee in front and the other on the outside, in the middle of the leg;
and leave the cauteries open for a long time without healing, until the pus comes out;
afterwards heal with the other treatments that we have mentioned.
When the evacuation of the bowels comes from cold and moisture, such that the retentive and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by means of treatments; and you see the patient well suffering and of great virtue, then make a large cautery on the stomach according to what has been spoken here before about the stomach cautery, at the circular cautery; and four subtle cauteries around the buttock to every subtle claw cautery, and two cauteries on the hips.
And if you see the moisture abundant and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the wrist, and one cautery on each thigh, and two small cauterizations on the stomach near the large one, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good assistance.
For the treatment of hemorrhoids
When the hemorrhoids are in the anus, one or more, and they are old and consist of large cold and moist corrupted humors, and they are treated as we have said in the divisions, and it does not help, then make cauteries: three on the spine of the back, those which are entirely outside under the almedate little by little in a triangular shape, and one cautery under the buttock two fingers;
and if you think that his stomach is chilled, and the meat does not cook, and swelling appears on the face, then apply a large cautery on the stomach as was said before, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen with the entire key-shaped cautery; and leave the cautery open for a long time. After treating, heal the place until it is healed.
When you cut an abscess, heat the cautery that resembles a razor, and then place it fully ablaze on the cut abscess; and keep your hand there until the cautery reaches the origin of the vein, from which the blood flows;
do this once or twice, and if there is much abscess, cauterize each one as we have said; after the treatment of beneficial ointments until they are healed;
and if you cauterize with a large cautery on an ulcer, it will have greater help.
When the patient cannot endure surgery or incision, which we will discuss in its place, such a disease comes that cannot be healed other than by cautery.
When an abscess occurs in someone and it is open and discharges pus and corrupted moisture, you should probe it thoroughly with a slender tent, and be sure to know the full extent of its depth with the tent.
after heat the cautery that resembles a razor, and insert it into the fistula according to the amount of pus that has entered, and repeat the cautery until the corrupt and putrid flesh is burned, once, or twice or three times, according to the quantity needed;
and beware of burning the nerves that are inside, and the large veins.
if the fistula extends to the bladder and the intestines, then beware of these areas, and do not perform this outside the flesh, and consider that it is not penetrable;
after treatment the wound until it is healed, and if the wound is sealed, and the materials are removed for a long time, then know that the wound is completely healed;
and if the materials are not removed, know that the wound is deep, and the bone is corrupted at its source; and thus as one of those we will mention in its place.
When cold pain comes to the testicles, and from great windiness, and he shows no interest in women, then you must make a cautery on the testicles on one side and the other with the key-shaped cautery that we have mentioned before;
and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauters in a line, and they will provide greater aid.
of the bladder When the bladder is weak and thin from cold and moisture, so that the patient holds urine, then make a cautery on the outer part above the bladder, where the hairs of the groin begin, and one to the right and one to the left, and let each cautery be as long as the width of a thumb;
and make one cautery on the back, or two if you need them;
and let the cauteries be key-shaped according to the form previously described.
When the matrix is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception because of this, and the flowers are corrupted and their periods are delayed; and when they do come, she feels great pain: then it is necessary to make three cauteries around the boil, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries outside the back;
and let the cauteries be made like a key, as we have said.
When the viscous moisture descends into the hip joint, and for this reason it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together;
and the place of the separation is found to be wide, then you should cauterize the patient on the hip joint with a cautery resembling a circle, and mark in front of the place around the joint as it turns, so that the joint is inside the circle;
and let the cauterization be such as those with which one has cauterized the stomach.
and if this cauterization is not available to you, make three large cauters from the olive oil, and let the cauterization be as perfect as all the others;
and treat it until it is healed.
of the pain of the hip When pain comes to the joint of the hip, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is treated with what we have said in the division and the treatment does not work, and the disease is old: then you must purge the patient of the thick humors with foul pills, or other good similar pills. After you make a cautery;
and the manner of the cautery is according to two ways: that is to know together burning medicines, and fire cautery.
Fire cautery is according to many ways, of which one is as follows:
that you cauterize on the joint of the hip three triangular cauteries according to this form, and make good depth and large, and leave between each cautery a space the size of a thumb, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped;
sometimes one makes a cautery in the middle on top of the head of the hip, which is why there are four according to this form:
And if you wish, then cauterize it with the circular cautery that we have mentioned before in the dislocation of the hip;
but do it in such a manner that the circle contains the entire hip, and all the thickness of the flesh be burned.
And this is the method used for sciatica, when the pain is in the hip and does not extend to the thigh or the leg.
And if it extends to the thigh and the leg, then make two cauteries there where the patient says the pain holds them, and one cautery above the ankle four times, on the left side a bit;
and let the cautery be knife-shaped, and let the thickness of the flesh be burned;
and if the patient feels that the pain extends to the toes of the foot or close by, then cauterize where they feel the pain three points or four with the cautery which is called "point. And if necessary, do more to them;
And if he knows that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, do a cautery with a knife-shaped or circular cautery, and be careful in all your cauterizations that you do not leave the cautery so long that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause more harm and constriction to the patient.
And myself have seen many who made a cautery on the ankle of the foot, and left it so long that the leg was entirely swollen, and the foot as well, and all the foot was perforated and corrupted. After a purgation of the belly from which he received death.
And if the pains are in two parts together, make a cautery in one and in the other, according to this manner.
And the wise ones say about the cautery of the hip, here is the method: make such an iron and let it be at the head as thick as a date stone, or a bit less, and let it be with indentations, and let there be between each indentation the space of a knuckle.
and let the splints be covered with two parts, and also like knots, and there be one well-made iron strap;
and this is the form:
and let it be heated until it is all red and gives off sparks, and then place it on the hip joint of the diseased side, and turn it towards the healthy side;
and cauterize it once with a red-hot cautery and leave it for three days; and then make a poultice of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; after the treatment of anointing until it is healed.
Albucasis says that we use little of this cautery because of the fear of its regard, and we see few who use it;
and nonetheless this is one of the good cauterizations, which he can endure, and where it is necessary.
The cautery of burning medicine is that you make the instrument to be interwoven in which descends the margin of the door, and it should be of brass or iron with one side long, and in the height have two fingers, and between each have the quantity of the thickness of a thumb; and they should be open below and above, and join together according to this form:
After put on the box of the hip of the patient lying on his healthy side, and press your hand very much on the box of the hip; After throw between the two circles of the warm awl which is heated by fire one pot, and let it stay for one hour of time, and allow the patient the heat and the dryness of it.
For there he finds a burning as if from fire;
and when the burning has passed, lift your hand with the instrument and lift the hip with a gentle awl, and leave it this way for three days, and put butter on it until what is black from the scalding is removed; and leave it for three days so that putrefaction may come out;
and this would be the last aid after the treatment of ointments until he is healed.
And if the pain has spread to the thigh or to the leg, make an instrument that fits well according to what you have done on the hip equally;
and this is the method of hot water, and I have written it in the treatise on the correction of medicine. Take alkali and vitriol, an equal amount of each, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot. where there is a small opening for the razor's blade to be able to enter;
where there is a small opening for the razor's blade to be able to enter; and place on top of that pot another pot well sealed, and put alkaline substances and heat and sweet water on it, until there is a thumb's length above the powders when you have thoroughly mixed it in your hand;
and leave it thus until it descends into water and falls into the pot, then take all that water, and throw it on heat and on alkali as before.
And then it will be very diluted and is administered in many medical works and in cauterizations of other limbs.
For it performs similar work as fire, and it has other medicines with which one cauterizes the hip well like sesame and anacardium juice and heat with soap, all these things mixed together.
And Galien tells us of a treatment where a man was cured of the pain in his hip and sciatic nerve, and he praises it greatly, and says that no other treatment was done, and that he was healed at once when this treatment was performed, and he bathed himself as he teaches hereafter.
And it says that you should take green litharge fresh and dry, and grind it well with a little fat, and apply it on the hip and thigh and leg where the pain is, and leave it;
and he leaves for three hours, and by the quantity that the patient no longer feels the burning.
And then have him enter the bath until his body is somewhat warmed, and have him enter the bed, and the pain will completely go away and he will be healed.
And know that no one should use fire cautery of such medicines, if it is not after the evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's fat, it helps greatly;
and the cauteries should be made in such manner. Take wool and anoint it with old oil, and place it on the crease that is between the big toe and the other one which is called the instep.
After take dried goat's fat, and heat it until it becomes charcoal, and put it on the wool, and leave it until it melts;
and do it again in the same way, and do not stop doing this until you think by feeling that it reaches to the hip, and that the pain has ceased;
and this kind of cautery is called "goat cautery".
of the pain of the back
When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or from impact or from too great an evacuation, or from similar cold matter spread out, none of these cases is suitable for cauterization, because it is caused by the infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary after the patient is emptied of foul pills or others similar, that one makes on his back, where the pain holds, three lines marked with ink, and in each line five cauterizations or more according to the strength and quantity that the patient can endure;
and let the cauterization be done according to the cautery which is called "point";
and if you wish, make three or four cauterizations with the medium-sized clavicula cautery according to this form:
Often this disease comes to small children, and the signs of the beginning are that they have tight sinews when they rise, and fear; and you find in the last spine of the back and in us the appearance which comes upon the other spines.
When you see this and wish to treat it, then cauterize it with the circular cautery according to this form. So that the cautery touches each part of the spine equally.
And if you wish, then cauterize around the spine with a sharp cautery two lines or three, and let the points be close to each other.
After treat the area until it is healed according to what we have said, and beware that you do not apply cautery to a swelling that is in spasm of nerve.
of the pain of the joints
When pain in the joints is from moisture that has spread to each member of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, which the physician properly calls "gout," and when it is of cold cause and treatments of medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in such manner:
make many cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped according to this form:
And if there is need for you to prick at the sole of the foot, then make a cautery on the entire area called "point. And if the pains come down to the knees and other joints, and this happens often, then make a cautery on each knee three or four cauteries on each part, all the cauteries olive-shaped;
and if you need more, do more, but do not hold your hand out any longer than it takes for the heat of the heart to be burned.
And if the pains descend to the knees and the back, then the practitioner applies the cautery that we have described in its chapter.
and if the pains are in the hands, make points around the armpit two inches;
and if any pain remains in the fingers, make points on each joint and on the palm of the hand;
and if the pains come down to the ribs or to the shoulders, then cauterize each part, and give good care to the patient and administer medicines.
For if you give him good care and you purge phlegm, he will be healed by the grace of God.
When rupture comes in the groin, and the bowels descend to the testicles and this is new, then it is necessary that when you wish to treat it, he should not eat that day; and he uses things that loosen the stomach, so that the bile descends from his stomach;
after he makes him sit on his back between your hands, and commands him to stretch his armpit until the boil stops growing, and you repeatedly move them with your hands, and mark from underneath the rupture on the bone of the wrist, and make a sign that resembles half of a circle above the body;
then heat the cautery of which this is the form:
until it is white and it gives off sparks. then repeatedly move the boils to their place; and the minister stretches his hand so that they do not return backwards;
and work well the thighs of the patient, and put under him a cushion and another on the thighs, and another on the part that holds the hands;
then place the cautery on the mark with your whole hand, and hold it straight and keep it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, then repeat again until you come to the bone; and beware carefully that the blister does not burst when you make the cautery; that you do not burn it; and that because of this the patient does not die, or suffer other evils.
And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
And it is necessary for the cauterization of children to be fine according to the measure of eggs, and for large people also large according to their measure;
After three days, treat the area of the cauterization with butter until the scald is removed;
after treating with other ointments until it is healed, and the patient lies forty days on his back until the wound is well sealed;
and it is necessary for his nourishments to be weakened for a long time, so that the scabs do not protrude when he begins to move around in rooms.
And after forty days, when he wishes to rise, have an attendant provide a well-made bandage, and wear it for another forty days;
and let him have good rest, that he works little and guards against too great a filling of drink and food, and from shouting too loudly;
and when he follows this teaching, he is entirely healed.
And I will say hereafter the treatment of cutting in his chapter.
When ruptures occur in other parts of the belly and are known, and you see that they do not grow larger, then apply fire cautery according to its size, and let a third of the area be burned; afterward, treat it according to what we have said;
and some of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized with a three-cornered cautery in this form:
but first mark the place to be cauterized and make a line across the width above the rupture, and another one outside, and hold your hand in the middle of the key-shaped cautery.
But the first cautery is lighter and gentler.
of old pain in any limb When pain comes to any limb, either from falling or being struck, and that pain lasts a long time, and medical treatment does not help, then it is necessary to cauterize it with the cautery called "point," and the cautery should be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and virtue and location of torsions and its pain.
if he is healed from the first cautery, it is good;
if that name, repeat another cautery on that spot, for such is the custom that it must change to the member that is nearest, therefore you must make the cauteries until the patient is healed.
The mixtures are sometimes cured by cautery with great help, and especially the diseases that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
When you see to cauterize, beware if the disease is in its beginning, and if it is treated according to what we have said in the division, and it does not lessen nor remain stationary, and you fear that the corruption may spread throughout the patient, then make five cauteries on the head: one in the middle of the head, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hair; and two on the two horns, and one behind on the haunch.
and leave your hand there until the cauterization reaches the bone, and until the scabs come out so that the vapors of the thick humors can escape;
and cauterize on the joint according to what is described above.
And if the mange is spread everywhere; and if it is clearly lost, then you must cauterize it with these cauters that we have mentioned at the head, and one cautery on the neck, and two cauters on the spine of the neck, and six cauters on the spine of the back, and one large one on the rump and another nearby, and two on the two shoulders; and two on the elbows, and two on the tendon of the breast, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands;
and be careful of the nerves that are on the rear heel, that you do not burn them;
and sometimes one makes a cautery on the bone of the wrist, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that when I do more cauterizations, I provide more help, and it benefits the patient;
and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as the healthy person feels it, because the body is already entirely corrupted.
And it is necessary that the cauteries be large and small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you will find in methods of the irons.
After treatment, apply the place with flour of violets and honey and other treatments until it is healed.
When swelling comes in any limb and is treated with medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healed, then make cauterizations on the limb according to the size and smallness of the limb;
and let the cauterization be slightly penetrating into the depth of the flesh; then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
And sometimes a cauterization is made on the hand and foot and back, at the point where the nerve that moves the limb issues forth, and thus the swelling is removed;
and in any case, do not let anyone interfere if they are not knowledgeable about the limbs and the points where the moving nerves issue forth from the body.
When the disease which is called "albaras" is awakened, and medical remedies are of no use, then cauterize it with a hot iron slightly, according to the thickness of the tumor, until the swelling is removed, and its color changes;
then treat it with flour of vetches and lentils with rose oil and leaves of plantain, and blood of pigeon and blood of lark, of each one part; and mix everything together, and bind it with a cloth, and apply it to the place until it is healed.
the treatment of chancres by cautery
When chancres appear at the beginning, and you wish to stop them, then cauterize them with a circular cautery all around the edge of the chancres.
And always the wise say that one should also make a cautery in the middle of the ulcer;
and nonetheless this does not seem good to me, for I fear that it may become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already seen it happen sometimes;
and a more direct thing is that it be cauterized around, with the cautery which is called "circle," as we have said much about cauters.
When someone has a disease which is called "adubelati," and it delays in healing either due to the excess it causes or due to the age of the patient when they are decrepit (that is, too old) and have little blood, or due to the time; and you want it to heal faster: then cauterize around with many small cauteries while pressing; afterwards leave it thus. For she will hasten to recover.
And if you wish to pierce it with the entire cautery, then heat the cautery in this manner which is its form:
And place your hand in the middle of that disease which is called "adubelati" until the cautery has pierced the heart, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels it externally in such a manner that the course of the corruption may be cleansed.
After the treatment until he is perfectly healed.
Another kind of disease there is which is called "corrodens," and it is nothing other than a consuming of the limb, for it eats away at the limbs as fire does to dry wood.
If you see this disease in a place that can withstand fire together with cautery, then heat the cauteries both very small and large, according to what is suitable for the place where the disease is;
afterwards cauterize all around until you reach all the corruption, and none of it remains, so that everything which is corrupted be removed.
And then leave it for three days, and put on the cauterized areas powdered frankincense with oil until the burns from the fire are removed, and all of the corruption.
Afterwards, apply ointments that promote flesh growth.
And if you see after three days that no healthy flesh grows, it is good;
and if not, then repeat the cautery on what remains of the corrupted areas.
And this mange condition has sometimes been cured by medication instead of fire cautery;
but nevertheless fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already mentioned the cure with medication in the section: take it when you need it.
of the boils that come to the feet Many times, a disease called "clos" according to our understanding arises on the feet externally, and it is a large swollen thing that hurts the foot.
And the cauterization for this disease is according to two methods. That is to say, fire cauterization, and hot water cauterization.
Fire cautery is such that you heat the cautery to the point where it resembles a goose feather, and it should be made of good iron in a size that can penetrate the nail from all sides, with fine edges;
afterwards place it entirely hot on the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until you reach the base of the nail; and leave it thus for three days until it begins to expel pus; then make a poultice of crushed wild mallows with oil, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail will fall out and be uprooted from its roots.
Then treat the ointment place greasing flesh until it is healed.
And if they are turned outward on the body, and this often happens in hands and feet, then you must apply a cauterization with hot water; and it is done in the following manner: take a cane of boxwood or iron, or a feather of an owl, and place it on the nail and the wart, that is to say, plantar warts; and put the cane on so that it wraps all around, then put a pot of warm water, and hold your hand well, and press your hand by turning so that the edge of the cane comes to the root of the nail, and may find the warm water way deep to the root;
and let the patient endure the bite of the warm water for an hour; then leave it thus, and it will be uprooted entirely from its roots.
Thus do one after another until you strengthen all those that are in the body, then treat them with ointments that generate flesh.
When someone shakes with cold or nerves, or from quartan fever or another, then you must make four cauterizations on the spine, one between each vertebra; and for the cautery on the foot, and on the stomach with the olive-shaped cautery;
let it tremble, and the health hastens from the cold disease.
Sometimes there appear on the outer part of the body bathed, or smelly pus-filled boils, which come from corrupted thick materials.
so it is necessary at first when they appear to make a cautery on each head of the pustule: a fine cautery of myrtle wood, with which the tip is grasped by fire, or of the long root of aristolochia, or a lentil-shaped cautery.
And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear, in this manner, and they cannot grow any further, but the excess from which they come is broken, and they are healed;
but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
Many times there are great flows of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the surface, or in the incision of an abscess, or in the cautery of the limb, and similar things; and it is a very difficult thing to stop.
And nevertheless, when this happens to anyone, you must quickly place your index finger on the wound of the vein and press very hard until the blood is stilled beneath your finger, and no drop comes out;
then put the olive-shaped cauters of various sizes over the fire until they are all red;
Then take hold with your finger, whether large or small according to the wound and the place where the artery is cut, and put the cautery on that vein where you keep your finger, and hold the cautery so long until the blood is stanched.
And if it jumps out when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take another of the cauterizations that are on the fire.
And do not stop doing this one after the other until the blood is stopped;
and be careful not to burn the nerve that is nearby, and that no other harm comes to the patient;
and know that when blood flows from an artery, it cannot be easily stanched, especially when the artery is large, unless it is done by one of the four methods we have mentioned: Or by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong binding with thread, or by medicines placed on it that have the power to stop blood; and let it be tied and bound appropriately.
Who will administer compression by tightly binding with cloths or placing burning things upon it, or other similar things, does not help if the pain is not reduced.
And if this happens to someone and there is no doctor or medicine present, then one must put their index finger on the vein wound as we have said, and press well until it is stopped above the wound and above the vein; and he should not move it, but apply cold moisture often that is very cold until the blood is frozen and thickened and stopped;
and make preparations in advance for what he needs of cauterization and medications.
We have told you in the first chapter all diseases in which it is necessary to use fire cautery, or burning medicine, and the indications and causes and the materials and forms of the cauterizations;
and I have placed this chapter from head to foot, and I will proceed in this chapter by the same method so that one can find more easily what one wants.
And before I begin this, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of cauterizations, and for this reason greater caution is required.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you that you do not undertake folly. For many kinds of people come to treatments. such come from those who despise so much their illness that they change easily because of the madness they find in their illness, and the greatness of its malice; and from these one must have fear.
And there are some among these who give you their opinion and say: wait, I am healed"; and the disease is deceitful.
It is not fitting that you consent to those who come to you with this manner, but place greater value in your honor than in your desire, and do not open foolishly but wisely about that which you are certain of, and from which you can gain praise;
and use prognosis and indication in the treatment of your patients to whom health is restored;
and this will help you to acquire good reputation, and glory, and praise-worthy memory.
Very dear son, May our Lord grant you good understanding and righteousness, and if he wishes to inspire you with the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Or I have ordered this chapter in dividing by chapters, according to what is before in the chapter of cauteries, that I have divided from head to foot, so that you find more easily what you will need.
Know that this disease often comes to children at birth, and when it forcefully pulls the child's head;
and sometimes this comes from an unknown cause that one does not know.
And I have never seen this disease except in children, and in all those I have seen, death was swift; and for that reason, it seems to me that I should not linger in such cases.
And I saw the child whose head was filled with water, and his head swelled each day until he could not support it;
and the moisture swelled so much that he died, and this moisture gathers under the bone on the sphenoid, between the heart and the bone;
and the work is such that if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscess is small, that you split the head in half with a wide cut;
and let it be as long as two fingers, until the moisture flows;
and here is the form of the spatula:
And if the moisture is thicker, and the abscess is larger, make two cuts in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and the signs that you see are the corners of the head open on each side, and the fluid jumps out forcefully when you press it with your hand from the inside, and this does not return to you: then you must split the head in three places according to this manner:
And after the incision, extract all the moisture out. After extracting the cloths and powders from the wounds, and put wine and oil in them, and leave it this way until the fifth day;
then untie it, and treat the wound with threads and ointments, and continue to bind the head evenly, and give the patient dried meat of little moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed.
And another method of incision is to look where the swelling of the abscess opens, and where the fluid gathers;
for sometimes it is in front; sometimes behind; sometimes on the right; and sometimes on the left.
Cut then there where the abscess opens, and the accumulation of the fluid, and make the incision according to your ability;
and beware that you do not cut the artery; and let blood flow so that the patient may die from the loss of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
When it happens to anyone a disease which is called «catarrh» in the eyes or nose, and the disease is old, and the medical treatment does not help, then the last resort is cauterization with cutting those two arteries.
Then when you cut the veins, the patient should tilt their head back; then rub the area with a coarse cloth until the arteries appear, then have the patient tighten their neck around the entire cloth; then look where the vein swells, and the areas on both sides are behind the ears, and they are positioned close;
then mark the areas to incise, then cut both sides with a sharp two-edged instrument until the cut reaches the bone, and this should be done across the width of the head.
And if you wish, place the spatula under the artery and cut above it, also cutting through as two times across.
And when the vein is cut, the blood springs up continuously outward.
And if the artery does not appear upon feeling, then you must measure the space of three fingers, then mark to incise and cut until the bone;
and the amount of blood that should be let out is six ounces, and perhaps a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the replenishment of the artery;
then look at the wound: if any of the syphac remains on the bone, cut it so that a warm abscess does not come, then drain the wound and tie it up, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
of migraines When an old migraine comes, and a sharp catarrh, due to the moisture of tears and the heat in the temples and old sordes forced out and similar things, and it is treated by methods of medical cures and all this does not help him, then we draw the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have described.
And the method of extracting them is that the patient should part the hairs on his temples and pay attention to the artery that opens in the temple, for it shows clearly by its pulsation, and it is a little farther out than in some men who are too cold;
and if it is replaced, then the patient tightens its neck with some cloths, then rubs the area with some rough cloth, and rinses the area with warm water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatula of which this is the form: then peel the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then pull it up with the tweezers, and separate it well from the tissues that are beneath it on each side;
and if the artery is thin, then turn it with the tip of the hook, then cut it from that part according to the quantity of two fingers. For if it is not cut, the sinew does not jump entirely all over.
and draw blood from six ounces down to three;
and if the artery is large, then you must tie it in two places with a strong double thread of silk, so that no putrefaction comes before the wound heals, and there be bleeding of blood;
then cut off the excess that is between the two ties at that same hour, and then, if you wish, cauterize it with a knife-shaped cautery until the head is cut off;
and it is the most difficult work if the patient does not have fever and is of a hot temperament. For cauterization is a help to finish the moisture: for that reason it is of greater help for the moisture.
For the extraction of arteries, it is necessary to fill the place with old cotton and put well-made bandages on top;
and when they are untied, be careful with dry medicines that promote flesh growth and bandages until it is healed;
and if there is bleeding from the artery as long as you work on it, hasten to cut by cautery, or use green vitriol in the place and press with your hand until the blood is stanched; and if you do not have that present, then put your thumb on the place until the blood is congealed, and wash the place with cold water until the bleeding stops, and press as necessary;
And there should be one inch of space between the two knives, and then when you have marked to insert the two places, and you place the burning iron until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in two places; and they should be separated between the two shoulders because it is not entirely sewn together by this cautery;
and this is the form of the cautery:
And what is more effective and quicker in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize this vein with a sharp cautery cut in two parts, but let the cuts be well thick to preserve their heat for longer. For when the instruments are too weak, they hold less of their heat.
tears When the tears of the eyes descend from the veins that are on top of the head due to heat, and medical treatment does not help, and you see the face of the patient redden, and feel a trembling on the forehead as if shivering; and when the eyes are inflamed and moist so that the hairs of the eyelids fall out, and the eyelids are heated, and are peeled by the ardor of tears, then this treatment is needed. And the ancients called it "contusion cure," and it is that you remove the hairs from the forehead of the patient who has this disease, then make three cuts on the forehead evenly according to the length of the forehead;
And the ancients called it "contusion cure," and it is that you remove the hairs from the forehead of the patient who has this disease, then make three cuts on the forehead evenly according to the length of the forehead; and one of the cuts should be about two inches right in the middle of the forehead going downwards to the nose, and the other two at the sides above the eyelids, and be careful not to cut the arteries that are on the two sides above the eyelids;
and keep your hand away from the joining of the two jawbones, and let each wound be the quantity of three fingers across.
and have prepared a piece of sponge and much cloth for wiping the blood, then apply the sharp spatula in two parts where this is the form:
from the incision which is above the temple to the second incision; and peel everything that is between the two cuts to the entire surface which is on the bone, then make another cut from the middle incision to the other second one, and then extract with this spatula. so put in the first cut the instrument which is called "cultellaire", and it is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is blunt, not sharp, and this is its form:
And put the sharp side towards the flesh affected by the disease, and the blunt side towards the bone, and insert it until it reaches the middle cut.
And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes so that the incision is continuous up to where it opens from the heart, and then make another one in the middle cut up to the other side;
and then draw blood evenly, and press the area for the blood taken;
then put in each cut a wick of old cotton, and place on top cloths moistened with wine and oil and assafetida, and be careful that no hot abscess comes near;
and on the third day loosen the bandage, and apply a great deal of warm water, then treat it with basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other treatments used to heal wounds until it is healed.
When a person frequently gets acute catarrh, and you see the eyes dull and small, and weakened vision, and the eyelids burned; and the hair falls out, and on the head it causes a painful headache, and the patient sneezes; then you know by these accidents that those materials and the catarrh do not come from anywhere else but from many veins, and the remedy that is best, is this one.
And you instruct the patient to lie down with his head backwards, then make a large incision in the middle of the forehead, and another on the wider side. And begin from the temple on the left to the temple on the right, and let the incision go as far as the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move during eating;
and when the bone is exposed, wipe all the blood with a sponge, and then separate the two edges of the cut and put old cotton and linen threads in between; then bind above with cloths moistened in wine and in oil, and beware of a hot abscess;
when it is removed, then you must rub the bone until cartilage begins to grow, then treat it with drying substances, which promote the hardening of the cartilage.
In such manner: take two parts of wheat flower, and four parts of colophony, and make a plaster; and administer it to these wounds to promote the hardening of cartilage throughout.
of the treatment for ear congestion
All that falls into the ears is one of the four things: or grain, or animal, or stone of mine or similar things such as iron; or seed, such as beans, peas, lentils; or fluid things such as water and oils and similar things.
When a stone or any other kind of thing that does not fit in the ear and does not grow in the ear falls in, place the ear in the sun.
If you see the stone, then distill a little violet oil or flaxseed oil, then apply extraction; and make the person sneeze with condyse, and plug the nostrils when the sneezing comes, and place around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and pull the ear upwards.
Very often force comes from this treatment;
and if force does not come, the administrator should perform extraction with fine tweezers, of which here is the form:
If force comes with the tweezers, it is good;
if not, then perform the extraction with a fine needle of small double thread;
and if it does not come out by this means, then make a tube of lead and put the end of the tube into the opening of the ear firmly, and plug what is around the tube with soft wax so that air cannot enter with the tube; then strongly draw the force, for often comes force as we have said;
and if it does not come with force in such manner, then take glue from coagulated substance used by fowlers, and place some instrument that is sharp for this purpose, and put a piece of cotton around; then press the glue on the stone or whatever it may be, and draw force.
and if it does not come out by force from all these things that we have said, then hasten to split the ear before a hot abscess and spasm comes.
and the method of the splitting is that you first bloodlet the patient from the cephalic vein, and draw blood according to the measure of his strength, then have the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear in the fat where it hangs. and let the cut be like a moon, until you come to the stone, then remove it according to your ability, and suck it hastily with your mouth;
and treat until it is healed.
And if it is grains that are inside and it swells, then administer extraction;
and if it cannot come out, then administer the spatulum gently according to this form: and to administer an incision of that grain.
But do not do this when you think the grains are moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces;
then extract with fine tweezers and the sucker, as we have said, so that the extraction is light.
In the case of water that enters the ear, it is necessary for the patient to use sneezing with preliminary condiments, and plug the ear with old cotton. And lie down on that same ear where the water is. If it jumps out through that, it is good.
If not, then take many stones according to the length of your thumb, thin and light, and warm them a bit in the fire; and place them in the patient's ear orifice, and strike with one of his feet from the other side, and hit with another stone on the stone that is in the ear; and do not stop striking stone with stone until all the pus comes out completely, and thus it will come out entirely;
and if you wish, take some reed, and put one end in the ear, and the other end press against fire until the softer part of the reed is burned;
then make another part of other incisions until all the pus comes out, just as we have said about the stone.
In the extraction of the creature, if it is of small body, such as a flea and similar things, treat it as we have said in the section;
but if it is of large body that can be felt, then apply the extraction with tweezers; and it is the easiest thing to remove that is in the ear.
In the extraction of earwigs from the ears, when you treat it as we have said in the section and in the treatment of distillations, and the treatment does not help, then you must look into the ear in the sunlight: If there are any hairs visible, pull them out with fine tweezers, and if they do not appear, then take the tube of which this is the shape:
And let it be narrow below and wide above. And put the finest end into the ear according to the extent of the patient's suffering, then suck forcefully on the entire tube; Do this often until all the worms come out.
And if they do not obey to come out, stuff around the tube with cotton as I have said in the stone;
and if they do not come out as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have tested in the excision of worms, and you will find them in the treatise on distillations;
and so distill your oils and your medicines into the ear with all this instrument, of which here is the form as you see: and whether it is made of silver or bronze, it should be wide below the small openings, and above narrower for distilling;
and to press inside the distillation, there is an instrument of bronze well made for this purpose, and if you want, take the scraper and wrap around the tip appropriately with cotton; then pour your oil or your juice, and what you want of your medicines into the tube, and the tube should be in the ear;
then push the scraper into all the cotton, and press your hand moderately until the oil is distilled into the eardrum; and the patient feels it inside, and let the distillations be slightly heated over fire before they are distilled into the ear; and beware that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be as good.
of the treatment for ear congestion
Some children are born who have no openings in their ears;
and the same thing happens to adults due to blockage from a wound, or flesh grown inside the ear, and these blockages sometimes occur deeply within the ear so that one cannot see them;
and sometimes the opening is slightly obscured, and one can see it clearly.
Then that which comes in secret, so that it cannot be seen, is of severe healing in many conditions, and in that which can be seen you must place the patient's ear to the sun; and look inside: if you see the obstruction evident, then the work has all this space where the form is:
And let it be sharp and cutting on both front and back entirely smooth, so that it does not injure the ear;
if the obstruction is of flesh or body of the ear, then hold it with fine tweezers, and cut lightly, until all the flesh is removed.
And if the obstruction is deeply in the ear, then take a fine and light scraper and warm it slightly over fire, then place it in the body of the ear.
If you feel the need to scrape where the patient feels pain in the ear, do it lightly, and be careful not to harm the nerves of the ear;
then put in the ear a plug according to the width of the opening, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment. Do this for some days until the wound is sealed, or you take a plug and moisten it in rose water, and sprinkle powdered vitriol on it;
and if you see the ear swollen, then you must remove the plug and insert another moistened with an ointment made of rose oil and wax until the swelling is gone; then treat until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs, soak a sponge and cloths in cold water, and place them on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the bleeding which are in the chapter on hemorrhages.
This eyelid that comes over the eyes when they are moist and dry, you should stretch it with tweezers and forceps, and cut it from its roots with a spatula; then apply ground vitriol to the area.
And if it does not heal, then cauterize it with a fine lenticular cautery, and the cauterizer after the incision is very useful;
and they often recur if anything remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
hail Many times come in the eye membranes things that resemble hail in their form and hardness, and for this reason is this disease called "hail", and it is a collection of moisture thickened above and below the membrane; the work is such:
the work is such: be careful if the hail moves from one side to another, and it is an easy thing to know;
then make an incision widely, then gently scrape each part, then take it with tweezers, and cut it.
if you cannot cut it without piercing a bit of the membrane, then do not worry about the patient;
and if the wound is large, then it is sewn with a stitch, and treat until it is healed;
and if it is small, then do not use any force, for the ointments restore it quickly and enhance the flesh.
And if the earwax is descending inside the ear towards the upper part, then invert the paper, and stretch the earwax with tweezers, and cut and press from both sides;
and if the paper is moved away by the incision, it does not matter;
and when the earwax is cut, then lift the salt water oil, and treat the area with something that enhances flesh until the patient is healed.
of the fat of the eyes Exinach is a fat that is tangled in the web of the eyelids above, and this happens more to children than to other people, and greatly troubles their eyes, and they get catarrh in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because tears rush to their eyes;
and because of this they lie on their faces immediately, and sleep thus, and their eyelids under their eyebrows are moist which swells up and the appearance is covered by the exinach that appears in the eye. And when you press the area with your fingers and feel the exinach between them.
And the method of the work is that the patient puts his head in your hand;
and then take a linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity of exinach contained in each part, then place it on it; and press with your hands from one side to the other, so that the protrusion is gathered within the circle;
then cut in the middle of the moisture with a sharp spatula a wide split, and let it not be larger than the wound one makes at the site of the vein;
and cut the skin thoroughly until you reach the protrusion; and in various positions, the protrusion comes out of the split, according to the form of a white fatty piece.
Then extract it with a piece of coarse cloth held between your hands to the wind, and turn your hand right and left until it is scattered;
and take care not to insert into the fissure, that you do not reach all the way to the spleen until the eye, that you do not injure it.
and if the abscess does not open at the beginning of the fissure, then slightly enlarge the fissure gently until it opens;
then extract it as we have said, then moisten cloths with oil and water, and place them on the area, and bind with bandages.
And there are such people who grind salt and put it on to corrupt the moisture that remains.
Then treat until it is healed.
And if an abscess comes to the place hot, then treat it with soothing plasters until it is healed.
the hairs of the armpits When on the eyelids hairs grow in a manner other than natural and are irritated, they harm the eyes and cause various diseases such as habitual tearing and softening of the eyelids and leukoma, to the point that it can lead to the destruction of the eyes;
and the treatment according to four methods: or by cautery with fire together, or by medicine applied according to what is mentioned before in the chapter of cautery, and it is done either by incision and suturing or by splints, according to what I will say.
It is necessary that you place the head of the patient on your lap, then turn the paper of the eye to your left hand;
if it is turned, it is good; if not, then put a needle with the whole thread on top; and let it be near the edge of the paper where the hair grows next to these hairs, and pull the thread across the entire paper, and turn it to the razor;
then cut into the part below the skin, below the attached hairs, all through the spatiumille cutting, from the large tear sheet to the small;
then extract the thread, and place below the skin a small tent of cotton and cloth, then sign on the skin a figure of enche, like the leaf of myrtle, and always it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity you wish to lift the divided skin.
And there are cases where it is necessary to cut a large quantity of the skin according to how softened the skin is;
then cut through the entire spatiumille along the two lines that you have marked, and begin from the large tear sheet to the small; and let one of the cuts be near the natural hairs with the thickness of a root, then insert the lancet into one of the two angles of the boil, then peel it all;
then bring the two lips together with a stitch of one needle and all the thread of fine wool, and wipe the blood, and make the excess of threads on both eyebrows stick with some sticky things, if you wish to do this;
and if not, then do not bother, then leave the stitch and the threads for three or four days;
then treat the wound without stitching with drying and binding substances, for the bandage raises the wound at its closure and assembly, but the stitch is weak (as the ancients say), and this is work without fear; and there is another method:
and there is another method: and it is that you mark the paper with a figure which is like the leaf of myrtle, as we have described, at three inches apart according to the form which is here:
then cut what exceeds the small forces equally according to the form which is here:
and if you are not able to hold the tweezers, and the thing is not even, then take a needle with a thread, and put it through the figure; and place one thread next to the large eyelid, and the second thread next to the small one, and gather the threads equally between your fingers;
then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin where you have marked, as we have described, then bring together the two edges of the wound by stitching, and care for it until it is healed;
and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with poultice and similar soothing ointments;
and sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyelid turn inward:
then you must use what we have said about the incision;
but the suturing in one and the other is more intricate.
The treatment of hernias is according to this method: and it is that you turn the eyelid inside and make an incision according to what I have said, and then make two hernias by art, and two subtle threads as long as the eyelid and the width of the spatula are; and cut at the two shoulders of two parts where you hold the threads;
then carefully join one and the other on top of what protrudes from the paper of the eye, and fully extract the two channels from the two parts; and leave it this way for some days, and the skin that was constricted will die, dry out, and peel off, until it falls off by itself.
If it takes too long, cut it with force, then treat it until it is healed;
and when the wound is sealed, and the paper is removed, the hairs will no longer prick;
and this is the form of the two canes that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:
the work is such that you take a fine needle, and put in it a thread of silk smooth and fine; then gather the shoulders and sew one to the other subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm long;
then arrange in the case another fine thread of silk briefly, and sew the ends of the thread;
then have the patient place his head in your hand;
and place it near the sun so that the work is illuminated, for this is subtle and minute work, then insert the needle all the way into the case at the root of the hair adjacent, and pierce quickly through the parchment until you pull it over the natural hair;
then pull out the hair up to the socket, and place that hair in the socket, if there is one or two or three or more;
then withdraw your hand until the hair comes out of the socket entirely into the paper with the natural hair.
And if the socket is pulled and the hair does not come out with it, then pull the socket downward along the thread that you have arranged there, until the socket comes out of the upper hole and you can see it with your eye;
then pull the socket and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hair burns in its place and new flesh grows over;
and if the hair is short, then accompany the long hair with natural curly hair, and lift it with that which you leave, until it is extended and then raise it.
of the pus from the eye When this disease which is called "aleacrati" or the corruption comes to the eye, it happens in two ways:
one natural, and the other unnatural.
And it happens by the suddenness of a wound, or of cutting or cautery, and by similar things.
And the method of treatment is that you split that suturing, and separate its lips, and put linen threads inside, and keep it tied until it is healed;
and it is not appropriate that you use in its treatment things that dry and constrict. For if you do this, then the illness returns worse than before;
but use things that soften, such as fenugreek; and the juice of water or alcohol and flaxseed should be cooked, and anointment of aquilon melted in any of the oils, and it is wrapped in a cloth, and it is cured with this.
And the treasure of your care is that you take heed that it does not heal in the same form as before;
and these works that we have mentioned are only precautions for this illness, so that it does not return in the same form as before.
This illness that is beneath is truly called "axacrati," and it is natural and accidental.
The accident comes from wound and cut and cautery and similar things;
and the method of the work in it is that you take a needle, in which there is double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and make it pierce from the left eyelid to the right, so that the thread comes out two fingers away from the flesh;
then stretch the flesh above all the needle, and cut it with a spatula wide. And if the shape of the paper returns according to what is necessary, it is good;
if not, then take a scraper and put it in the cut, and turn the paper, and make two cuts on the side within the paper;
and let the heads of the two fissures from the two corners of the incision you have made be such that when they are joined together, the figure is like that of a letter called "Greek I";
then remove that flesh according to the amount its sides are sharp beneath, from what lies under the skin, then join the two separated parts, and sew them with a thread of wool;
then treat it with what we have said about mollifying medicines and poultices until it is healed.
And if the disease comes from a fissure or suture or cautery, then you must make a complete incision beneath the hairs of the skin, according to what is stated above; then separate between the two sides of a tent, as I have said;
then separate between the two sides of a tent, as I have said; and one must perform the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters devise by all their power how they might restore the figure to its natural shape;
and the patient himself, according to what is required of work and instruments in various arrangements.
When this soldering happens to men in such a way that the eyelid above is welded with the white of the eye, and cannot move nor perform its natural functions, then you must put the point of a razor under the eyelid, and lift it up;
and you stretch the eyelids, until you cut that which is hard with a fine spatula, which should not be too sharp nor too cutting, so that the patient cannot bear it if the spatula too sharp does not wound the eye;
and let your incision, with which you peel that assembly, be slight, so that the paper returns to its natural form;
and the entire assembly is healed, and they sometimes use salty water in the eye, and wash it with fresh water, and with collyria;
then place between the paper and the eye a linen tent, and put on the eye wool soaked in egg white; and after the third day use the collar and of sudatory things until he is healed.
Know that the nail grows in two ways: it is nervous and similar to hard skin, and another that is not nervous, but resembles white frozen moisture, which when touched with iron and thought to be treated with tweezers, one cannot.
and both appearances begin near the large tear duct, and grow little by little until they cover the entire sight and all the light and movement of the eye.
And the method of the incision is that the patient place his head in your hand, then you operate on the eyes; and lift the paper to your hand, then bend the nail with small tweezers, and stretch it out above; then take a needle, and put horse hair, or cow hair, or ox hair, and strong thread; and double the tip of the needle a bit and insert it into the nail, and pierce through the entire nail, and tie the nail with thread and stretch it out above, and scrape all the hair along the side of the nail that faces the eyeball and sew the hair to the top, then cut the remaining part at the root of the tear duct thoroughly and with small force, and leave the natural flesh in the tear duct so that tears do not come from the usual path due to the incision;
and sometimes the nail extends only to the ounce, and to the thread, as we have said; then one peels off all the spathumille from which this form is made:
and be careful that the spathumille does not touch the flesh membrane and break it, and that the pupil is not perforated;
and after the incision, put a bit of ground collyrium in the eye, and of the collar made of litharge, and leave it until the next day; then cleanse it with what is necessary until it is healed.
and if the nail is not firm, and you cannot insert the needle, and the forceps cannot enter, this nail-like condition is often treated with medicines;
and they grow as I have described in the division, and if you wish to cut them, then work the eye of the patient, and take the spatula light point sharp according to this form: And scrape the nail above carefully, and if you see that it does not become finer and the rasp is pressed in, then drip from your mouth into the eye a mixture made of litharge and red collyrium and well ground, and plug the eye until the next day;
If anything is not contrary in the eye, such as a hot abscess, then leave it alone and first treat the hot abscess until it is healed, then resume the work as before, until it is healed.
then begin the other work according to this same method, until it is all removed.
And if the appearance of the flesh of the lacrimal apparatus harms the eye greatly, then suspend it with an awl, and cut part of it but not all, so that tears do not come from it;
then distill into the eye red collyrium which is made of litharge.
In the eyes of some men sometimes red flesh grows, and covers the pupil and rises up on the eyelids and turns them outward, and looks like a pomegranate flower;
and the procedure is that the patient puts his head in your hand, then you work on the eyes, and cut all that flesh with appropriate forceps for this, and hold it firmly;
then cut the first layer of flesh, and keep cutting down to the scraper until the end, and be careful not to injure the eye during the procedure;
and let the incision of the spatumile, which we have described in the incision of the nail and the small forceps with which the sebel is removed, be as the form after this chapter demonstrates;
and when the incision is completed and all the flesh is removed, then apply oil of selvedge ground in which you add red collyrium and similar corrosive medicines, and place on it oil-soaked cotton with egg white, so that it is secured from a hot abscess;
and if anything remains and the skin swells, and you fear a hot abscess, then leave the oil and treat the abscess with things that soothe a hot abscess;
then return to your work until it is healed, and thus do when flesh is attached by this method.
but nevertheless, you must lighten the treatment of each weak eye along the natural course; and of the accidental vein, in ironwork;
and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this limb is able to endure the work.
Films are red veins that cover the eye, and they hinder the sight's work and weaken the eye all day.
It is then necessary first that you look if the eye in which the cataract is, is protruding, and there is no other disease except the cataract; then treat it in this manner:
instruct the patient to place his head in your hand, then suspend those veins for all the ancon according to your wisdom, and let the ancons be finely doubled according to this form:
And let there be two incisions by degrees on the body according to this form:
then when you bind those veins subtly with force, and wipe the blood hour after another, until you see those veins move out of the eye;
and be careful not to injure the eye with the tips of the spatulas, and do this work at midday in front of the sun, and be very diligent in your work so that you do not cut outside those veins;
and when you have done this, distilled green and red collyrium in the eye to corrupt what remains of the bile.
And if you are not able to extract all of this in that hour, then apply a plaster on the eye made of things that soothe the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is soothed and you are sure there is no risk of a hot abscess, then restart according to this method described above until he is healed;
and this is the form of the forces:
The doctor calls a fistula "arissati":
when you treat it with cautery and hot medicine according to what I have said before, and it is not healed, then it is necessary that you cut into the abscess where it should be opened, and draw out all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and the blackness, then remove it all with this instrument of which here is the form;
and it is called "aspre chief," and it should be made of iron to the length of the head, and pointed like a file as it is in the present form:
And put on the place of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand a bit until you know that that corruption is removed;
and do this several times, then restore the place with drying medicines.
if the wound is sealed, and flesh grows, and the core of the boil is sealed, and remains thus for forty days, and it does not renew or become an abscess, and no adverse incidents occur, know that it is healed;
if not, then there is another method to bring the fistula to the opening of the nose in this manner: and it is that you uncover the bone for the second time by iron, and with aqueous medicines, and when it is uncovered then take the burin in this manner, and let the head of the iron be three-angled, and the handle be tapered to the tip as you see here:
then place it on the bone near the eyelid, and remove your hand from the eye by a little, then turn the entire drill until it penetrates the bone and the patient feels it because wind comes out if he holds his hand over his nose;
and then restore the eye with dry medications, as I have taught you, and when the flesh grows and the eyelids harden, the matter goes to the nose; it is a lighter thing for the patient.
When the eye is fully opened and nothing obstructs the nose, nor any reduction, then you must bind the patient;
then heal it, then apply cupping or a hot poultice without bleeding to suction, then place on the eye a dressing made of acacia, aloe, frankincense, and sarcocolle, and then close the eye, and cover it with bandages and cloths;
and the method of the cloths is that you take cloths sufficiently soft, and fold each in four, and then put one on top of the other according to the amount that the eye may need;
then strain it over a hard bandage firmly, and begin the suction cups to suck without pricking;
then remove the suction cups and leave the eye strained day and night, and if the swelling softens, you must strain it very tightly;
then remove the bandage after the day and night, and if you see the eye improving, it is good;
if not; so begin again the plaster and the cloths and the binding and the cupping until he is healed.
Of the rupture of green thread When disruptions come to the uvea, it opens up, and small pieces like grains of resin appear, which are astonishing to see;
then if you see to cut it, the procedure is such that you insert a needle at the root from the lower part up to the upper part, then insert another needle where there is double thread from the tear area; and have it pierced, and leave the first needle according to the position;
then cut the area of the double thread and tie a part of the uvea around it tightly, then remove the needle and put on the eye moistened wool in egg white;
and leave it until the flesh falls with the grape, then treat the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed;
and sometimes the wound is restrained by the grape all around with a circle of cloth until it is healed.
And if the eye shows great opacity, pierce it with a fine needle that comes through the pupil, and draw out the white moisture and lower the eye, and let it enter at once;
then extract it until it is healed.
This disease which is called "alcunnati" is nothing more than phlegm gathered in the eye, resembling descending water, but it is not water;
and the manner of the appearance of the work is that you make sit the patient on the prepared and straight seat, then take the head between your hands from both sides, and move it until you see the vein come up to your eyes; then let it be fixed, and do not lower and let the light be dispersed, and the patient sees things as he was accustomed;
and if it does not descend below, know that it is acute, and if the descending of the vein is not prepared as we have said.
then make the patient sit between your hands, then take the fine spatula and cut on the corneal membrane a spot by the continuity of the conjunctiva with the corneal membrane and the corona until the vein appears;
and when it is issued, then let distilled into the eye hot water mixed with honey, or water in which fenugreek has been boiled and honey, then be cleaned by another cleaning until it is healed.
of the eye waters We have seen the likenesses of waters in the division, and what is needed for piercing; then work according to the health.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from the sunlight, cover the healthy eye and press very hard;
then place the eye paper on your left hand if the eye is left, or on your right hand if the eye is right;
then take in your right hand, if the eye is left, the instrument which is called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eye is right;
then place the tip of the instrument near the crown by the thickness of a nail in that swelling of the eye at the part with fewer tears, then insert the instrument which is called "almagda" forcefully, and turn your hand until it pierces into the swelling of the eye, and feel that almagda comes to the empty space;
and it is necessary that the length of the path of almagda be exactly according to the measure of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the black part; and it is the crown of the eye;
and you will see the bone on that paper because of the clarity of the corneal membrane, then place the instrument just where the fluid is, then press under one way after another.
If the aqueous humor is now dislodged, the patient sees in front of him and the instrument in his eye.
After rest a little, and if the fluid rises through the second pathway, apply force with the instrument, and when it is fixed in and does not rise, then extract the substance gently by rotating your hand little by little;
and then put in a bit of clear gem water, and bathe the eye with it. Then apply to the eye wads or wool soaked in rose oil and egg white, and bind with a healthy eye.
We, and those of our time, apply ground cumin with egg white.
And if the almagda cannot enter into the eye because of its hardness, for there are such men who have too hard eyes, then you must take the instrument which is called "alberit", of which here is the form:
And pierce only the conjunctiva, and do not go too deep, but make the place delicate, then insert the substance as we have said;
and at the completion of the work prepare the patient so that the doctor is suitable, in which he sleeps on his back in a dark place;
and be deprived of all movements, and take light foods, and do not move his head to the right or left, and be bound according to his condition until the third day;
then untie him in that same dark house, and test his sight, and make him see some things, and then bind him again until the seventh day;
and it is not right that you do this at the hour of the treatment or after the incision now, but you must lighten this, because the fluid rises quickly.
When abscesses become hot, that you unbind the eye before the seventh day, and apply what alleviates abscesses;
and when it is calmed, then unbind the sight and place on his face a bandage to cover for some days, and let him remain in that dark room.
And then let him leave the house little by little, and he should return to his normal activities;
and know that no student should interfere in this case. And one came to us who was from Yemen, who told us that in his country they make a device pierced, to which one sucks the water, but nevertheless I have never seen any in our land, nor have I ever read about it in the books of the ancients; and by chance it is a new thing.
And these are the likenesses of the forms of almagda, for those who do not understand them see them;
and let them be properly made of bronze: And let the head of these be of the same fineness, and the back in three acute angles.
Sometimes diverse charmed objects are born or arise, some of which resemble scorpions with many legs;
and there are some in which a fox-colored charm is embedded, and it has a good-colored sow. In that case, with the charm that is in the form of a sow and not embedded, you should make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun;
In that case, with the charm that is in the form of a sow and not embedded, you should make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; and works its nostrils, and throws the incense at those cars, and pulls them away; then cut what you can support with the subtle sharp spatula on one side, until you know that the car is completely removed.
And if anything remains that cannot be cut, then open it with all the subtle light instruments, so that nothing remains; and if it swells up, or the abscess is hot, then treat it accordingly;
and if these are malignant abscesses, then hurry and cauterize it until the swelling is subsided and all the cars are removed, then apply salted water or vinegar or wine. If the nose bleeds, and moisture comes up to the palate, know that he is healed;
and if moisture does not come out as it should, know that there is new flesh in the bone above, which the instruments do not reach to cut:
then it is necessary that you put in a slightly thick linen thread, and it should be tied by skilled hands, and have between each knot a space of one inch or less; and have the patient place the end of the thread in his nose with some force, and pull it through until it comes from inside the mouth;
and often children do this in schools, and it is an easy thing for one who wants to do it;
Then hold the head that comes through the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes through the mouth with the other hand, and pull one after the other along the threads that are in the string.
Do this until you know that the gnats have corrupted that flesh, then pull out the string, wipe the blood, and moisten the thread with Egyptian ointment, and put it back in the nose as before;
do this for three days or more, until the ointments corrode all that remains of the flesh;
and then put a plug of linen in the nose for several days until it is healed, and if it needs drying medicines, use them;
and this is the form of the instrument for cleansing the head, to which one drips oils and medicines at its base:
and whether it is of silver or bronze, resembling an open lamp, like a tube, and the conduit likewise;
and if you wish, make a closed tube, and let the instruments be full to cleanse the head;
and let it have a handle at the head to hold when heating the oil or any liquid.
of the flesh on the nose
Often, a disease called "telul" arises on the head from the base, and it grows and becomes large quickly, so that it is a noticeable thing to look at;
and for this reason you must shave it at the beginning, and completely remove all hair, then apply the cautery or burning medicine to it;
and if you delay cutting it until it is large, be wary if it is hard, of a dusky color, with little sensation:
do not touch it with iron for it is an infected abscess, for when it is cut sometimes, great harm comes to the patient;
and if the abscess is of a moist nature, not of a dusky color, and you see that it can be completely cut out, then empty the patient and cut it without fear, and treat the area with drying and binding substances.
Know that when continuation solutions come to one of these cartilaginous works, it helps little, for in some men.
It is then necessary when this happens to someone, to look if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then join the two lips with a stitch, then treat it until it heals;
and if the lips are already separated on both sides, then you must peel all parts of their surface until they heal, then join the two lips with a stitch, and bind them, and sprinkle dragon's blood powder and ground incense over; and put the powders under a piece of a strong plaster or another adhesive plaster, and leave it until it falls off by itself, then treat it with ointment until it heals.
The manner of the suture is that you bring together the edges: or with needles, as we have said in the suturing of the belly; or with thread, as I have made known to you.
of abscesses of the lips
In some men, there appears inside the lips an abscess that is hard, resembling grains of wheat, and smaller and larger;
then it is necessary that you turn the lips inside out, and cut into each knot, and take them with tweezers and cut in each part;
then apply the area after the incision with ground vitriol until the blood is stanched;
and then wash with oil, and treat the area with dry substances until it is healed.
Many times, flesh grows on the gums, which the ancients call "albulus";
you must hold it with tweezers, cut it at its root, and allow the pus or blood to flow.
then apply ground vitriol or other binding and drying powders to the area;
and if that flesh returns after the incision, which often happens, cut it again a second time and cauterize it: it will not return after the cautery;
Sometimes there are gathered at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, crusts which are ugly and rough; and sometimes the teeth are black and yellow and foul, until the corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth are stinking;
so it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands, and his head be in your lap, and clean the teeth or the crusts appear, until nothing remains; and thus do for the blackness and the greenness, and the yellowness and other stains, until they are cleaned;
and if one removes what is there at the first reason, it is good; if not, then start over the second day and the third, until you have it all removed;
and know that teeth require various forms of instruments for cleaning, according to what the work demonstrates, because the scraper used to clean between the teeth has different shapes than those used on the surface of the teeth; and these forms and others should be prepared with you.
It is necessary when you treat the tooth for its pain that you delay extracting it as long as you can, for this is something one should never do; For it is a very high quality substance so that one has no excuse for failure.
Then when the patient is constrained to extract, you must be certain of the painful tooth. Many times the pain deceives the patient, and they think it is in the tooth, and have the good tooth pulled; and nevertheless the pain does not leave because of this, until the bad one is extracted, for we have already wanted to do this to these saints;
and when you are certain of the painful tooth, then you must peel around the tooth about one finger's breadth strongly to protect the gum on all sides;
then move it with your hands or with fine tweezers little by little until it is well loosened, then firmly grasp the tweezers; and let the patient's shoulder be in your hands between your knees, and hold it well so that it does not move.
After extract the tooth straight without breaking, and if it does not come out easily, take one of these instruments and gently insert it on each side, and move it as you did first.
and if the tooth is perforated and decayed, then you must fill it with cloths, where the holes are; and then grasp it subtly with tongs so that it does not break when grasping;
and you must work very carefully around the gum to loosen the tooth.
And be careful that you do not break it and leave a part behind, which may cause the patient, by the cunning of the root, greater pains than before.
and beware that you do not act as the ignorant surgeons do, who by their hastiness and boldness sometimes break the jaw, and do not administer what we have recounted;
but sometimes bring great illness through the extraction of those due to the roots that remain, or from the carriage they break, as we have often seen;
and when the tooth is pulled, wash the place with wine or oil and salt;
and if bleeding occurs, which often happens, then apply the area with ground vitriol;
and if that does not work, then cauterize it.
The forms of the instruments, with which one pulls teeth first, should have long points and thick handles, so they do not bend when you pull the tooth;
and these are the forms: And they should have thick parts so that they do not bend when pulling, and they should be made of good iron, and they should be toothed to hold the teeth firmly.
of the root of the teeth When the root remains in the wound, you must put cotton moistened with butter on the spot for one or two days until the tissue softens, then use the forceps called “algefri,” which makes the head resemble a bird’s beak;
and let them be made inside like a file and this is the form:
And if the roots do not wish to come out completely with these tweezers, then you must uncover the flesh all around the root, and place the instrument which is called "althali", that is to say a lever, of which this is the form:
And let it be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root comes out by this means, it is good;
if this does not work, then use all the instruments, whose forms come after here:
And one makes use of this instrument which has two prongs, of which the form is here: and other tools which are mentioned earlier in the discussion of teeth, and of this instrument which resembles large tweezers, of which the form is here:
And let this instrument be strong so it cannot break, and know that many tooth instruments are; and also of other instruments which are not mentioned;
and the wise subtle masters find their own instruments by themselves, according to what their works and the diseases show them, for there are such diseases where the ancients taught no instrument due to the diversity; and if one breaks a cartilage or other bones where it might, then he seeks out the appropriate instruments that I have told you about, and is aided by gestures, of which here is the form:
And let them be thick and well gripping to hold the bone so it does not slip away, but can hold and remove it;
and then restore the place with medicines suitable for this, and if there is putrefaction in the bone, and it is small, scrape it all with this instrument:
When the teeth appear not according to the natural body, and the form is ugly, and especially in virgin women, then you must know if the tooth has come after the other tooth, and it is not in the right place, and cannot be smoothed or filed:
then extract it; and if it is loose with the tooth, then take this instrument whose form is shown here, and it resembles a small beak, and let it be of iron and sharp at the tip:
And you cut little by little over several days because of the hardness of the tooth, and so as not to move the others, and if it appears that it can be ground, then grind it with a file like this one whose form is here:
and it is also like the steel with which needles are made;
and little by little I file the tooth lightly over several days so that it does not move until it falls out;
then smooth it at the end for any razor, and if the tooth is too sharp and it wounds the tongue, then you must file down the roughness until it is even, so that it does not wound the tongue nor corrupt speech.
When the front teeth loosen, either by impact or by falling, and the patient cannot bite down on what they eat without them falling out, and you have treated them with constricting medicines, and it does not work;
so they must be restrained with a gold thread, for the silver thread turns green and rots, but gold never changes;
and let the thread be neither too thick nor too thin according to the quantity of space between the teeth;
and if you wish to align the teeth, take the thread and place it doubled between the two healthy teeth, then insert the head between the loose teeth, if there is one or more, until you carefully reach the other healthy tooth; then begin the wrapping until the part where you started, and withdraw your hand subtly and carefully, so that it does not move at all;
and let your ligature be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Then cut the head of the wire with pliers, and join them together, and insert them between the healthy teeth so that they do not hurt the tongue;
and then leave it so tight as long as it can stay in place, and if it loosens or the wire breaks, tighten it with another wire;
it will remain and serve him in this way for his entire life, and this is the form of the teeth and the alignment of the two healthy teeth, and the two misaligned ones, as you see:
And when the tooth falls out, it is reset in its place, fresh to fresh, as we have said;
and let no one interfere who is not wise and patient, and sometimes the shape of a bovine bone tooth is made, and it is placed in the place where the deficiency is, and it is held tight as we have said, and remains and serves thus for a long time.
Sometimes this ligament comes under the tongue naturally, that one is born this way; or by accident of a sutured wound;
and the work is such that you operate the patient's mouth, and have his head in your hand, and lift his tongue;
then cut the nervous ligament widely so that the tongue is separated from its place, and if there is hardness or knot, and this is from wound suturing, then use the hook to insert and cut widely that ligament;
and take care that the incision is not too deep, for the artery which is beneath;
and when you have done this, wash the area with rose water and alcohol, or cold water, then place a linen cloth under the tongue;
and the patient should comb every night so that the wound does not close.
And if bleeding occurs, apply ground vitriol to the area; and if the sinew gives way, cauterize it with a lentiginous cautery, which is good for this; then treat it with other treatments until it is healed,
and if you see it of a greenish color or black or hard, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it at all, for it is a cancer;
and if it is declining towards the cheek, and there is moisture, then apply an ointment, and cut it with a fine spatula, and release it from both sides; and if the sweat hinders your work, then put ground vitriol on it until it is dried out, then return to your work until you draw all the moisture out;
then lift the area of ash and seal it, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
of the abscesses of the throat Sometimes come into the throat balls which are called "godath", and they are properly called the two almonds, and when you cure them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, take care:
if it is a hard abscess of small sense and of flesh color, then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is red and the root is large, then do not touch it with iron, also for the flow of blood; but leave it until it is ripe, and then you will open it, or it will break by itself;
and if it is of white color and the root is fine, then prepare the instrument to cut, but first check if the warm abscess has settled and is calmed.
Then make the patient sit facing the sun, and his shoulders be in your hands, and work the mouth and let the servant take hold of him between his hands, and press the tongue underneath with all the instrument, which is its form;
and let it be of silver or fine brass like knives:
When you press the tongue with all this instrument, and you see the abscess, then take the lancet and put it in the middle, and pull it out above as much as you can;
and pull out some thing from the cloth with it, then cut it with the instrument, which is its form, that resembles forceps; and all the same the heads are curved, and one part the other, and they are very sharp, and it is made of iron or steel:
And if you do not have this instrument present, cut it with pliers, of which here is the form: and be sharp on one side, and the other not;
and when you have cut one of the almonds, cut the other in the same manner, and after the incision, gargle the patient with warm water, and water mixed with salt, and if bleeding occurs, gargle the patient with water in which pomegranate peels or myrtle leaves have been boiled, and similar things, until the blood is stopped; then cure it until it is healed;
And sometimes other abscesses grow in the throat besides the two almonds, so cut them then just as you would the two almonds equally.
And I treated a woman for an abscess that had grown inside her throat, that is to say one small abscess;
and it had nearly closed her entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe because the passage was blocked, and she could neither eat nor drink, and she would have died if she had remained thus for one or two days.
And the abscess had risen so much that it had forced two fingers through the two nostrils.
I then hurried and inserted a lancet into it once, then drew it out, and brought out a large portion of pus;
then I repeated the procedure in another spot where it had grown, and I opened her mouth and pressed her tongue;
after insert the lancet into these abscesses, and cut away a part, and no more than a little blood came out; and thus the conduit of the woman's throat was cleared, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not stop cutting into that abscess for a long time;
and the abscess grew again, filling the place that I had emptied, until it became very large;
then I incited it and cauterized it inside the throat: thus it remained without growing;
and I departed from those parts, and know not what God did with her after me.
of the grape
When arthritis affects the vein, and it is swollen and elongated, it is called "perpendicular";
and if it is beneath, thick and round, it is called "grape".
When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, and you see that the hot abscesses are calmed, and they are subtle, then you must cut it;
and the one that is round and gathered and is not elongated; and it is bloody or of yellowish color or black, then you must avoid the incision of it. For there is great danger to the patient.
Then when you see it, according to the method I have said, of its blennorrhea and length, you should make the patient sit before the sun, and press his tongue with the instrument we mentioned earlier; then insert the needle into the eye, and draw it below, and cut it with one of the two instruments I mentioned in the incision of the two almonds.
And you must not cut too much so that the excess which is beyond the natural limit;
for if you cut more, you harm the voice and speech;
and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two almonds, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the patient fears the cutting, then you should use ingenuity in the cautery of such fear.
And the manner of the cautery is sharp and wet. And it is that the patient puts his head in your hand, and then you press his tongue with the instrument we have mentioned in the chapter on cautery, and moisten with hot aqua fortis so that it is not too thick nor too clear; and use the movement of this instrument, of which here is the form:
And let there be on the head a bristle where one places the medicine, like the bristles of a spoon, and place the instrument with all the medicine on the eye;
and let the patient lie on their side so that the saliva and mucus flow out of their mouth from the medicine inside, so that it does not go down to the throat and harm them;
then hold your hand on all the medicine and press it on the eye, the quantity of half an hour, until you see it swelled and the irritation of the medicine be calmed;
and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around some instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument with all the cotton into the canal above, until the cotton burns on the eye;
and do this often until the cauterization is complete, then leave it to dry, and it will fall off after four or five days.
And if you need to restart the cauterization with the medicine, then restart it, and after that, cauterize around the eye with cotton wrapped in butter, and clean what is around with the medicine;
and let it be soaked in cold water, and treat it with gargles until it is healed.
This treatment is more skillful than the incision, or the cautery;
if it is treated by fumigation according to this method, take calamus and hyssop and oregano and rue and chamomile and lovage and similar herbs, and gather them all or some of them in a pot, and put oil in it, and make it boil;
and the pot should be well sealed with strong clay, and in the middle of the pot have the instrument placed according to this method: and it should be made of silver or bronze, and one end should be placed in the patient's mouth so that the vapor rises to the eye through the tube until the eye is mortified;
after the bleeding starts again frequently until the pus dries, and take care not to do this at the beginning of the emergence of the hot abscess, for many things happen; and do not do this only because the hot abscess is declining.
And if this instrument is not present, then take a reed and put inside the head a chicken egg, so that the patient's mouth is not too hot; for the eggshell does not let the heavy vapor affect the mouth, and it is a good and healing treatment altogether.
Many times, a bone or spine of fish, or some other thing, gets stuck in the throat;
so it is necessary that you draw out what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument so that you may see the movement of the thing;
and what is not visible and is hidden in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit before the food is cooked in the stomach; perchance the burned thing may be expelled by vomiting;
or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navelwort, or a root of lettuce, or a morsel of dry bread; and tie a thread to the sponge and then have it swallowed; and when it comes to the place, it will ignite, and then you will pull forcefully;
and if it does not come out forcefully from what we have said, then take the suction instrument according to this form:
And let the instrument be curved at the head so that it may enter the throat more easily, and have the head lifted upwards; and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, lest it cause choking, nor push the bone inside;
and it is better that the patient insert the instrument, so that they may move it where the thing is burned; If the swelling is below, or it is drawn equally by all the instrument until it is even.
of the phlegm from the throat
Sometimes the blood is medicated, as I have said in the division, by the treatment of medicines; and when this does not help, then look into the patient's throat in the sunlight, since you press their tongue with the instrument that I have told you.
And if you see the sinew, then draw it out with a small hook, or with subtle tweezers that are suitable for this.
And if this does not work, then take a horsehair cord, and put it in the patient's throat, then insert the end of the cord with a hot iron, and do this often. And if the patient sweats all day long.
then take a full glass of cold water, and wash the mouth, and throw it inside to swallow, and move it around with his hand often; and as soon as the blood feels the water, it falls.
And if it does not fall as we have said, then sub-fumigate the patient with asafoetida, with the instrument that I have mentioned in the fumigation of the grape.
Do this many times, for it will fall without delay.
And the method of the fumigation is that you take a pot with live coals, and let the pot be covered with a lid pierced in the middle, and in that hole be the head of the instrument;
then throw your fumigation in it, and the patient puts the end of the tube in their mouth, and closes the mouth so that no smoke escapes, but goes down to the blood;
and the blood will now fall, and if it does not fall, then restart the fumigation many times;
and let the patient endure thirst, and eat salty and sour things, and not drink any water;
and then it will be necessary for it to leave through this treatment.
And the form of the instrument with which one draws blood is, when it can be seen, similar to curved pliers designed to easily enter the throat; and it should resemble the beak of an eagle, and have the roughness of a file, so that what it grasps, it cannot release;
Many similarities of abscesses exist, according to what the memory comes after one and the other in this book, and they differ in puncture and size;
and it is in two ways, one of which is in its own appearance and from what it holds moisture.
And the second way is for the places where they are on the body.
for the abscess of the head is different from that of the fundament, and the abscess of the fleshy part is different from that which comes in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
And there are abscesses that one should not pierce until the pus is dead according to its completion;
and there are such that it is necessary to pierce when they are hard, and do not die according to their completion, like abscesses that are near joints.
For when abscesses come near joints, and they are left until they spread around, by chance the ligaments and nerves of the joint may be corrupted, which is the cause of contraction in that limb.
When the abscess is near the main member, and if you delay the puncturing until it is dead, it will harm the principal member;
When it is near the fundament, pierce it before it becomes dead;
and it is not right that you pierce a hard abscess without completed digestion, except for the one near the fundament, so that it does not perforate completely and extend inside, and result in a fistula; and cannot heal over a long period.
And you must know the time for puncturing an abscess that is dead according to its completion, and this is when the pain is calmed, and the departure of fever, and the lessening of the pain and redness, and of the swelling and sharpening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs;
and you must place the puncture at the lowest point of the abscess, where it opens and moves;
and let the puncture be of the length of the body, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all similar places where there is no pus. In those that bend, according to that limb.
And when abscesses are in a fleshy area, it is best that you leave the perforation until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said.
For if you pierce it before this, the body's venom will be spread, and it will be full of much filth; and perchance the lips and the depths of it may harden.
And so for some abscesses that are pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the limb requires.
and you must treat small abscesses with small punctures; and in large abscesses, large openings, and many slits according to the resemblance of the size of the abscess;
and there are such abscesses where it is necessary to shave the area and cut; when it has become as yellow as a rag, and is softened, then it should be treated as one treats buboes:
and there are such that are split into three corners, and there are such that are cut like the leaf of myrtle, as abscesses of the armpits;
and there are such where one makes a round incision, and other incisions and similar cuts.
Those who have no head, such as a superficial abscess, you must pierce it completely;
and it is necessary when the abscess is large, and it has collected much pus, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus at that hour, but draw out a part; then plug the abscess until the next day, then draw out something again; do this several times gradually, until all the pus comes out;
especially if the patient is of weak strength, or pregnant women, or small children, or old frail men. For the fever sometimes rises with the discharge of the pus, which may cause the patient to die, and you would not be aware of it.
Beware therefore this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, wipe the wound, and look if the abscess's wound is small; and if it is a smooth cut, then apply linen cloths or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many openings, then you must insert a cloth into each one so that they come against each other;
and if you have cut into the abscess a part of the skin and you have shaved around it, then you must fill it with old cotton or lint from linen cloth without moisture, and bind it until the third day;
then the bone, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs in your work, then apply cold and light water, moisten the cloth, and place it on the bleeding area multiple times.
And if the discharge of blood persists, apply treatment and care, and the powders that I have mentioned in this book, and if it is during winter, and the area or the abscess is very inflamed, then you should put on cloths and drapes soaked in warm wine and oil;
and if it is in summer, and the area is fleshy, then you should put on cloths soaked in water and oil, or in wine and cold oil, until the third day, as we have said;
and then drain the abscess and wipe it and treat it as appropriate until it is healed.
And this must be universally known in the treatment of abscesses:
And I have told you how one should proceed in the treatment of abscesses, and here is the chapter.
When small abscesses come from the head, and they are kinds of sores that are on webs, like the wattles of a hen, and there are many similarities.
There are some that are fatty and of such kind that they have moisture like pus;
and there are some that are hard and stony to cut, and there is no doubt if the artery does not oppose it.
And the work of the waist is that you test with all the instrument which is called "intromittor," whose form comes after, what it contains.
For if it contains moisture, then cut it open above the length.
And when the moisture is emptied, then scrape without leaving anything the skin that contains that moisture, for it returns immediately when something is left;
then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; if not, use water and salt, apply it to the wound, and leave it until the next day; and this will dissolve what remains from the night.
And then restart the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that nothing remains from the night;
then treat the wound with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
and if the abscess holds hard matter, then cut it according to this form, lengthwise; and apply your ointments, and scrape it from all sides, and put all your effort into drawing out the matter where it lies;
and if the artery acts against you, then do what I have told you after.
And do the same for the abscess if it is stony, and in cutting and cleaning as I have told you.
And cut into the stony and moist abscess, it is lighter, for they are full of blood. And some of these abscesses on the head have no moisture, and there were such dry abscesses that I cut from the head of an old woman;
and I found the abscess like a hard, rough, and white stone, and it could not be broken; and if one had hit it, it would have made as much of a wound as hitting a stone.
In other abscesses coming on the head, such as those that come at the tips of children's heads and at the roots of the ears, the opening should always be in the lowest place, so that the pus may flow out;
and treat them as appropriate.
Often this abscess occurs in the neck, and beneath the jawbones, and in the glands, and sometimes they appear elsewhere on the body, and they are large, and are clustered together.
And each scrofula is properly within its coat, like the knot and the abscess of the head, as we have said; and the similarities of these scrofulas are many.
and the similarities of these scrofulas are many. There are such that contain moisture, and there are malignant ones that do not wish to obey health.
in that one then which you see of good disposition to the touch, and is similar in color to the skin, and moves on each side and is not adhered to the nerves of the neck nor to the artery nor to the channel, and is not deep;
then you should cut it from above, and peel it on each side, and stretch the two lips of the wound with probes, if you need to, as we have said in abscesses of the head;
and you pull it little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, and let not the spatula be sharp or cutting, so the hand does not slip, and do not go too far forward, lest you cut what you should not.
and if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not allow you to work, then put in the wound ground vitriol or some powders that stop blood, and bind up the wound; and leave it until the abscess is calmed, and the wound is softened, and begins to pus.
and when the blood is stopped, return to your work until you complete it;
then examine closely if any small scrofulae remain there, cut them off and clean them.
And if there is a large vein at the root of the scrofula, then you should not cut that scrofula at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it hang down by itself without harm;
then dress the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then treat it.
And if you cut all the scrofula, then you must bring together the two lips of the wound, and sew them now, since there is no remaining surplus due to the size of the scrofula. and you must understand to cut the root of it, and pull hard, and sew it as we have said.
and you must understand to cut the root of it, and pull hard, and sew it as we have said. Those scrofulae that hold excess, pierce them where it appears to be worst;
and pierce it in the same way as the one mentioned before, hanging down, then apply bandages with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, then treat it with an ointment that promotes flesh healing until it is healed.
The ancients spoke and talked about the structure of the throat; but I have never seen it done in our land, and this is the writing of their words.
For those who have a tracheotomy, it is necessary that the fold of the throat which is called "epiglottis" be cut; and one does not provide aid by this, because all the veins and the phlegm of the patient are hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in the two tonsils for those who have an abscess.
When the disease is in the channel of the windpipe, it is necessary to cut the epiglottis to avoid the destruction that comes from strangulation.
Therefore, when we wish to split the epiglote, we must split it below three circles or four a small slit across, between the two circles or by the quantity of the slit from the surface, not in the cartilage;
and that place is suitable for the section of the epiglote where there is no flesh, and the vessels are long within.
And if the master is fearful, then it is necessary that he stretches the skin of the throat for the entire inch, then splits the heart until he comes to the windpipe; and avoid the blood vessels if you see anything, and then cut the surface as we have said;
and it is demonstrated by the cutting of the phlegm from the throat which jumps out through the place that is broken, and by the lack of voice;
and leave the wound open for a while.
And when the hour has passed in which one fears strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound of the throat, and sew it all alone without the cartilage;
then administer medicines that promote flesh growth until it is healed.
Albucasis says one should not do this until the throat is completely blocked, and the patient is judged to be dying, and the defect is evident. Then cut the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe, and they breathe through the wound, and thus are saved from death;
and for this reason the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease had passed, and it passes in three days or four. And then they commanded to sew up the wound and treat it, until it was treated;
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw that a maiden took a knife and stuck it in her throat and cut part of the glands of the pharynx;
and I was called to treat her, and I found her as if dead.
I uncovered the wound and found the blood that had come out of it, and I knew she had not cut any vein or artery in her throat, and the air was escaping through the wound.
I hurried, sewed up the wound, and treated it until it was healed;
and it did not happen to the young lady that she became hoarse of voice, and afterwards returned to her normal state;
for that is why I say that in the area of the epiglottis there should be no fear.
This abscess is called "throat hernia," and it is a large abscess of the color of jaissé, and it often occurs in women;
and it occurs in two ways: naturally, and accidentally;
the natural one does not have any danger.
And the accidental one occurs in two ways, of which one is similar to fatty pus, and the other way is similar to an abscess that comes from arterial pus; and there is fear, and it is not right to work with great force except in those who are small, and he proves and examines the entire insertion: if you find it like an oily knot, and it cannot enter any vein, cut it as you would cut knots, and pull it out entirely with its covering, if there is any; and examine it thoroughly, and treat it as appropriate until it is perfectly healed.
There are many kinds of knots, of which I will describe all the similarities;
and now it is necessary that I say the entire difference that exists between a knot and an issue.
I say that heat and fever persist until the ebullitions have passed, and the putrefaction is complete; then the fever and heat subside.
With the knot, there is no heat, fever, or pain, and it contains the scab, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the flesh, and begins like a blister, and becomes large;
and they appear in two forms, dry or moist, and their colors are much like what I have said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the wound, that you examine and inquire first about all the instrument which is called "intromittor," according to what its form will come in the chapter that follows.
And the method of examining abscesses in the nose is that you take the moistest part you find in the abscess, and gradually turn your fingers, until you know that the instrument has pierced the center, according to the size of the abscess;
Then extract the intruder, and take care to not use too much force.
If running moisture appears, whatever color it has, cut it open as I have said for other abscesses;
and if after extracting the intruder no moisture comes out, know that it is fatty, so then cut it in a cross shape, take it with tweezers, and peel it lightly from each side and watch the spot where it lies that you draw it out clean with the root;
and if you cannot draw it out clean, then pull it out in pieces so that nothing remains.
For if anything remains, the pain will return many times;
and if some remains and the sinew troubles you, use some corrosive powders on the wound, bind up the wound, apply things to soothe a hot abscess, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed;
and if the wound is large, sew the two lips of the wound together, and treat it with what promotes flesh growth.
and if the pulsating vein opposes you or another, hasten and use powdered green vitriol, and leave it for two or three days until the wound becomes putrid, and stop the boiling of the blood; then return and scrape off what remains of the putrefaction.
See here the forms of the instruments for insertion, and they are of three kinds: large and medium and small;
and there are three squares which are called "albaret," and one which is called "breb," and there are of three kinds: large, medium, and small, to probe the abscesses of fistulas;
and they are also like the needles with which one sews the sores, and they are of amber citrin, or of iron, or of silver, and those that are yellow are better suited, and those proven more effective are of black plum for probing the ulcers of fistulas;
and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the openings.
The forms of tumors are very diverse, as you see here:
and there are tumors that have two curves in three ways as well;
and there are tumors that have three curves, and they are also of three kinds;
and there are tumors that have two curves, and tumors with only one curve, and they are of three kinds;
and all these are necessary in their place.
The heads of these are sharp where one cuts, and there are some that do not cut strongly except from one side, for which one strips the knuckles so that one does not cut the vein or the nerve;
and of these introducers, the needles are placed in sleeves so that the patient does not feel them during the opening of abscesses;
and they come in three manners: large, small, and medium, as you see;
and they are not used except in fleshy parts, such as legs, and arms, and breasts, and armpits, and similar areas;
And sometimes one makes another small instrument resembling flax bark, according to this form, with which one stops blood: and it is placed sometimes at the site that heals with cutting of veins, and arteries, and sometimes according to this large form:
Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to be corrupted, so that they resemble a woman's breasts;
and remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wishes to treat them must sew according to this form from this line 2 up to 8: then remove the fat, and apply a healing medicine to the wound, then sew the two lips of the wound together, and treat it until it is healed;
and if the breast sags down and is softened due to its size, as happens with women, then cut it open in two places on top, with two similar incisions; from which one is held to the other at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line 2 up to the line g; then peel the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitching and powders, and whatever is necessary for the treatment until it is healed;
and if it is not healed, or the incision is not fully made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to bleeding, then you must fill the wound with moist cotton in a corrosive ointment; and leave it until it consumes the remaining tissue and fat, then clean it until it is healed.
These abscesses that come under the armpits are kinds of hard scrofula with edges, and some contain moisture.
Those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line .b. up to line .g.: And when all the pus that is in the abscess has been drained, apply the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess resembles scrofula, cut it as we have said for incisions of scrofula, and if the wound emits pus, apply cauterization as we have said before.
When the artery is torn, and the skin above is sealed, abscesses often result, and similarly it happens with a swollen vein and an abscess;
and it is recognized thus for the artery, the abscess is long in appearance; and when you feel it with your hands, you sense the constriction;
and when it is for the vein, it appears soft and more prominent;
and it is foolish to cut this abscess, especially when it is under the ribs and in the angles and on the neck and in many other places, and it is very large. It is necessary then to avoid the iron treatment, and that which is at the head should also be avoided, and in that which is of arterial swelling cut above the skin of the long;
then work the size at the incisions, and carefully separate the artery from the tissues until it is exposed;
then place a needle underneath it and make it pierce to the other side, and tie the artery with a double thread in two places, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples;
then puncture the area between the two ties with an introducer until the pus that is inside comes out, and thus the abscess is relieved;
then administer the treatment that causes vomiting, until the bowels release; then treat it with an ointment similar to this, until it is healed;
and if the abscess is the size of a vein, then you should stain with your hand as much of the abscess as possible to the whole skin, then insert the needle under the area that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce, and have double thread so that you pull it from the other side; then tie the abscess, as I have told you, with the thread of one of the two ends of the doubled filament;
and if you fear that the thread will not come out, then insert another needle along all the thread under the entire abscess at the incision of the first needle, and hold the threads in four places;
then cut the abscess until the excess flows out, then cut the excess from the heart and leave what is tied;
then place a wet cloth in wine and oil on it, then administer treatments of bandages and ointments until he is healed.
As abscesses come in the artery and vein, so do abscesses come to the nerves when they are wounded, or by too great labor, and similar things.
And this happens more often in the shoulders and hands and all places where there are joints, and it is a severe abscess, and its color resembles the color of the flesh, and it is in various conditions without pain;
and when it is pressed strongly, the patient feels pain, and it is not throughout the body, but under the heart;
and moves well from all sides, and does not go forward or backward, nor below or above, and that which is in the joints should not be cut with iron: perchance there might be contraction; and for that which is on the head or forehead, cut the skin with a spatula.
and for that which is on the head or forehead, cut the skin with a spatula. If the abscess is small, hold it with tweezers, and cut it at its root;
and if it is large, suspend it with a lancet, scrape it, then remove and stitch the wound together, and treat it until it heals.
Sometimes it happens in bellies and not elsewhere, which is a disease called "fungus" by resemblance to fungi, and the roots are subtle, and the heads large;
and in it there are small and very large ones;
and I saw a man who had two in his belly that were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had a fine root, and were gashed open, and immediately moisture flowed from them.
I cut them and found one weighed eighteen ounces, and the other six and a half, and the work in the incision is to check if the patient is moist and the color of the joint is white and moist with a fine root; If you cut with a wide spatula, and let the cautery by fire be present before you.
If you cut with a wide spatula, and let the cautery by fire be present before you. For in cutting, there often comes too great a flow of blood, and if the blood overcomes you, then hasten to cauterize;
and if you see the patient is fainting and fearful of the incision of the iron, then take a well-made thread of linen, and tie the artery as we have said, and leave it for two days;
and then bind it, and do not stop tightening the linen thread until you cut the artery, and it will fall off without any effort;
and if the roots are large, there is fear in cutting, especially for the abdomen, but you can cut off half of it, then cauterize so that it does not grow back;
Then treat the wound, and be careful not to cut the tissue which is of a reddish color and has poor sensation and looks moist.
For this is an abscess infected, and I will come to the treatment of the sore afterward.
When the boil is about to burst. If the appearance of pus comes from a cautery wound or a tear in the skin, and it is on the stomach where some of the pus comes out, as happens in other ruptures, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries as mentioned before, or from windiness;
and if it is due to the rupture of the skin and from the discharge of pus, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the flesh, and it is a light matter without pain, and opens with various discharges. And if it is due to the discharge from the intestines, then it is more varied, and when one presses it with their fingers, it springs back, and then returns, and sometimes it hardens, and greatly expands at the entrance of the bath and with intense labor.
And if it is due to moisture, it is a light matter, and it opens well when you press it with your hand, without any constriction;
and if it is for blood, then the abscess is large and hard, and it is fixed according to a quantity; and if it is for wind, then it is soft to the touch, and the work is such that you observe whether the appearance is due to blood from an artery or a vein, or wind.
and if it is for wind, then it is soft to the touch, and the work is such that you observe whether the appearance is due to blood from an artery or a vein, or wind. And it is necessary that you leave the treatment. For there is doubt and fear in it, as I have said in the chapter on abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
and if the appearance is due to the intestine or the belly, then you must instruct the patient to lie on their back, and be stretched out straight, then sign all around the swelling; then command them to lie between your hands, then go all around the area you have marked with spatulum, then stretch half of the abscess above with the entire large uncinus; then bind around it with a strong thread, or a rope of strong silk firmly, and let the knot of the binding be secure;
then apply half of the abscess extended over the binding, and put your index finger in it, and seek the interior; if you find it caught in the binding, then untie it, and push the interior outside of the belly;
and if you find the boil, then take it with the lancet, and cut off the excess;
and if the artery or vein resists you, go gently around it, then return to your work and take two needles, and insert two strong threads, and place the two needles around what you have done in a cross so that you pierce it;
then extract the abscess in four places above the needles, and if you see them, remove the needles, and leave the area until it becomes pus-filled, and the dead flesh will fall off by itself; when it is thin and rotten, then cut it, and treat it as necessary, and the abscess will fall off as we have said;
when it is thin and rotten, then cut it, and treat it as necessary, and the abscess will fall off as we have said; and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the area as necessary, and sew up the area.
of the ulcer We have said in the division about the similarities of ulcers, and how one should work with medications, and how one should avoid iron treatment;
and we say that the chancre extends into the marrow, and there is great caution in its treatment, and the ancients said that when chancres are in a place where they can be scraped off like chancre which is on the mammary glands, and in the thigh, and in similar places, and it must be completely removed when it is at the beginning;
nor has anyone ever healed any before me.
And the work, when it is in a place where it can be removed, as we have said, is that you purge the patient of black bile;
then make it clear if there is evident fullness, then prepare the patient in a good place to perform the work;
then throw your lint on the ulcer, and comb it all around, and remove it from all sides without leaving anything;
and let the blood flow freely, and press the area with your hand or some object, and if the bleeding prevents you from cutting into the artery or vein, then cauterize until the blood is stopped; then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
of dropsy We have already said in the division the types of dropsy, and in what manner the accumulation of water is formed, and the signs of each type, and the treatment that is done with medicines, and that which is treated with iron:
and one should not touch iron in these two cases: that is to know, tympanitis and hydrops, for these are deadly things;
then when you treat this case of dropsy which is called "fractures" with medicines, and the treatment does not help, look to see if the patient is weak, or if they have another illness besides dropsy, such as fever and diarrhea and similar things; do not use iron, for there is danger;
and if you see the patient is of strong vigor, and they have no other illness besides dropsy solely, and they are not too young nor too old, then you must proceed thus: Lift the patient upright in your hands, and have the attendant press the belly by pushing the fluid to the lowest part of the breast, then take the sharp spine according to this form: And let it be sharpened from two sides. The tip, and all the while it should not be so penetrating that it might reach the intestine when inserted, and it should not pierce;
then look if the dropsy is spreading towards the intestines: then you must make three straight cuts below the bulge, right above the wrist; and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, then your incision should be to the left of the bulge three fingers wide;
and if it is for the pus, then it should be to the right, and it does not suit that the patient lies over the opening so that the excesses do not flow to that weak spot;
then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and insert it, and lift your hand to spread the space between the skin and the surface as when stripping to the quantity of a nail or around;
then pierce the surface until the space comes to the hollow place, and this is where the water lies, then draw it out forcefully, and insert this instrument of which this is the form: And it resembles a thin silver chain, and it is made of glass or light archaut, and at the lower part, there is a small perforation; and when it is cut from one side, three perforations; and two from the other side, and one from another;
and the shoulder is cut like a quill, and this is the form of the incision with which the scribes cut the quill:
at the top above is the alembic, so that when the instrument reaches the liquid, they now raise the instrument;
empty then half or a third part, for if you empty more than is appropriate at that time, perchance the patient may die from the resolution of his spirit due to the remedy, or he falls into confusion, or he approaches death;
but it is void according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the patient's virtue signify, and his pulses;
then draw the instrument and retain the liquid, and it is retained now by the plug that stops the opening which is on the surface, of which I have spoken, that you pierce according to this manner;
then reuse the instrument the next day, if you see the patient enduring this, and draw a small quantity of liquid;
do this for several days, and be careful not to draw more than a little bit of liquid remains.
And if you doubt about the patient, and you leave much liquid in him, then treat with burial therapy or hot sand, and cause heavy sweating or bathing in the sun, and dye from drinking; and the treatment with drying medicines until it is healed, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the water, as I have said before.
Sometimes children are born who have no opening in the penis, or the opening is small, or it is not in its proper place.
It is necessary to pierce it immediately with a very fine instrument throughout according to this form:
then put a fine cloth on the opening, and bind it and keep it that way for three or four days, and when he wants to urinate, remove the cloth, let him urinate, and then put it back;
and perhaps none is needed, because the urine that comes forcefully does not leave it closed.
He whose opening is small is treated with the wool plug, as we have said, so it will widen.
Those who do not have the opening in its proper place are damaged, because some are born with the opening at the tip of the penis, which prevents them from urinating unless they lift their penis upwards; and they cannot urinate because the matter cannot reach the bladder, and it is a bad disease.
And the method of the work is that the patient lies down on his back, then extend the head of the penis and cut it like the length of a feather, so that the hole falls in the middle, as it should;
and be careful of the flow of blood which often occurs, and if it happens, then stop it with what stops blood, and treat the wound until it is healed.
pustules of the penis Often this albathe comes in the penis, and it is an ugly appearance of flesh;
and there are malignant and non-malignant [ones];
and you must take them by the sharp point carefully, cut and clean all of them, then put on moist cotton with Egyptian ointment; then treat it with diafinicon ointment until it is healed.
And if the ailment is malignant, of putrid color and stinking, then you must apply a cautery to it.
When you have cut it, and if the tumor is at the tip of the penis, with part inside the skin and part outside, then you must remove the part of the tumor that is inside first; and when it is sealed, then treat the outside.
For when you treat it all at once, the head of the penis is not securely protected and may be pierced, leading to darkness and corruption in the penis and the groin;
so it is necessary to scrape off all that is black and corrupted, then apply the plaster of honey and flour which should be made from pomegranate rind and beans, then treat with other treatments until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs, then apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
The cautery thus helps in two arrangements together: that is, to the flow of blood, and to corruption;
and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, then you must insert a cane of platinum into the urethra, and the patient should urinate through it;
and when the skin is swollen at the head of the penis which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or it occurs due to a wound or an abscess, then you must cut away the skin with a sharp instrument until the tissues are separated, and the head of the penis is freed entirely;
and if it is difficult to describe this, then you must peel off a little bit from the head of the penis and the skin with a scalpel;
then gently separate them between two, and place a fine linen cloth moistened with cold water, so that it does not dry out again.
Circumcision is not the separation of continuity like other wounds; nevertheless, when we perform this work by our will, and especially for children, it is necessary that we do the best work, and the least severe for healing.
I say that the ancients did not speak of the circumcision of their children, for they do not use it in their law, and we have no more knowledge of it than what we have acquired by experience.
For I have seen the majority of masters and surgeons who performed circumcisions around one day, with force, and with an entire novacule;
So flee the veins because there are two layers, and perhaps one cuts the upper layer and leaves the lower one. Or the recovery is hindered, and the pain is doubled, and in the cleansing which is of the wound, the tip of the member is not securely treated;
and in the cleansing of the nail, by chance the iron slips, and the work is ruined, and often they grow back without needing cleansing, and I have seen it.
Of the cleaning that is done with force on all the thread of the ligament I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the force cuts just as well above as below.
For when you press your hand, you cut equally in one continuous motion; but that the thread be tight around the skin;
and let the method of the first work be such that you make the child think, if he understands, that you do not cause him harm by binding the thread around the penis only, and then give him hope in every way that you can;
then make him stand between your hands straight, and conceal the forces between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments;
then put your hand on the penis and blow on the groin, and pull it up until the head of the penis is inside; then clean it well of the filth that has gathered, then tie the marked area with a double thread, then bind it under one point to another tie;
then clean it well of the filth that has gathered, then tie the marked area with a double thread, then bind it under one point to another tie; and hold it with two hands by the second ligature at the pocket and the index finger, and cut between the two ligatures, then lift the heart upwards quickly and pull the head of the rod; then let the blood flow little by little, for it is the remedy; and put powder on and on the powder one bandage glued with a mixture of a cooked egg white diluted in rose water, boiled and fresh oil rosined, and leave it on until the next day, and treat it again as needed until it is healed.
The form of forces in purification is as follows:
the two shoulders should be held tight and should be cutting, and the shoulders should also be as large as the sleeve equally:
The mistake of purification is when the blood inside flees at the incision;
then you must extend it with your nail, so that the wound forms an abscess;
and cut it evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your nail, then hold it with tweezers, and then cut it.
And if it exceeds three days, and what is beneath the penis is swollen, then leave it until the heat of the abscess is calmed, and gently scrape it;
cut it as much as you can move it, and be careful of the part of the penis, for this will not harm it.
Then treat the area with a powder that we have mentioned in the chapter on powders, and if you cut beyond measure from the core and it goes above, it will do no harm;
Then treat it as we have said until it is healed.
about the retention of urine
The retention of urine is due to the obstruction by stones, or frozen blood, or feces, or dead flesh, or similar things that we have mentioned in the section;
and if the urine is not unblocked, and you see that the retention is due to a stone in the neck or mouth of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be bent over their knees; and let his feet be placed on the back, and extend his belly from the part above the back, and restrain the patient as tightly as possible; and then the neck of the bladder is constrained for the expression of the stone above, which loosens the urine;
and if it does not come as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer extraction with all the instrument which is called "catheter", of which here is the form:
and let it be of fine light silver wire, like the feather of a bird; and let the cane be one and a half palms long, and be fine at the head.
And the method of urine extraction is that you take a double thread, and tie at the head a ball of wool or cotton, and insert the end of the thread into the urethra;
and cut off the excess wool and insert it to the end of the urethra, then anoint the urethra with oil or butter and egg white, and have the patient sit on a chair, and moisten the bladder and penis with oily water and olive oil and warm water;
then gently insert the catheter into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis, then fold the penis upwards towards the belly;
then push the catheter forward until it reaches the bladder, and the patient will feel it reach the empty space, and this is not done according to this method forcefully because the path through which it goes is twisted;
then wind the thread on all the wool bit by bit, and the urine follows the wool, then pull it out strongly, and make the urine flow;
and repeat the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and the patient is relieved.
When blood comes into the bladder or corruption is gathered there, and you see aqueous and medicinal substances dripping in, then use all the instrument called "clepsydre", and this is its form:
It is closed, and it has three openings: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see;
and the thread is wrapped in such a way that the medicinal cord is suitable to plug the penis well without addition, so that one may draw out moisture and push when necessary;
and when you want to introduce your medicine into the bladder, put the head of the tube in the moisture, and draw with the drawer that is inside;
so you will draw out the moisture with a catheter, and then forcefully reattach by pulling in; so the moisture will enter, and it will come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it;
and this is the form of the subtle clyster with which oneclysters the bladder:
And it is made of silver or brass, and the head is higher;
and below the breast where the limb lies;
then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture in it with which you wish to clysterize the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts firmly with a strong double thread, and heat that moisture over the fire;
then place the head of the clyster in the penis, then draw your hand over the bladder as all the moisture comes in, until the patient feels that this moisture has come to the bladder;
and if you do not have the bladder, then take a piece of parchment, and make a circle, and pierce it roundly around; then put a strong thread through these holes, then close the circle as one closes a lid, and place inside what you wish of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument;
and do as you have done with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
about the stone
We have said before in the division the kinds of stones, and the extraction together with medicines;
and I have said the difference between the stone in the reins, and all the signs, and in which stone one should operate by cutting; and in the bladder, and in the penis;
and I will tell you clearly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is lodged in the bladder happens more often to children, and the sign is that the urine jumps from the bladder resembling water in its fineness;
and there appears sand, and it irritates the patient's penis, and it can happen many times, and then it swells; and to much of these leaps the foundations;
and the healing of children is light until they are four years old, and it is very severe in the elderly, and it is moderate for young adults, to those who are between youth and old age;
and the treatment is lighter for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with an enema, to draw out all the bile that is in the intestines. For it sometimes obstructs the search for the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet, and lift him up and move him downward so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes it leaves its higher position;
then have him sit between your spread hands, and his hands should be below his thighs, so that the bladder is completely tilted downward;
then seek it and touch inside;
if you feel the stone in the space, then hurry now to cut into the stone.
And if it does not fall at the total touch, then moisten your index finger with oil from the left hand, if the patient is an adult, or your middle finger, if the patient is a fully grown youth; and insert it into his rectum, and seek the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, then pull it towards the neck of the bladder;
then press with your finger, and push it out where you wish to cut.
And instructs the servant to press the bladder with his hand, and commands him to stretch out his right hand the testicles upwards, and with his left hand lift the skin that is under the testicles in the part where the waist is made;
then he inserts the spatula cutting, which is of this shape: And make an incision between what is between the testicles and the anus, not in the middle but on the left side;
and be straight on the stone, and your hands should be close to the anus, and the cut should be wide on top so that it is broad at the surface, and inside narrow according to the size of the stone, not too large;
by chance the pressure and the tooth which is at the root, jumps out without effort;
and know that there is such a stone in it with angles and edges: it is difficult to remove;
and there is such one that is smooth, resembling an acorn, and round, from which the removal is easy.
For those that have angles and edges, make the incision larger;
and if it does not come out, then you must grasp with the forceps that are like a file at the head, to tightly grip the stone so it does not escape; where you place under the I a subtle curved instrument at the head;
and if you cannot engineer it thus, then widen the small perforation, and if the sinew is dry, then tighten it with green vitriol;
and if there is more than one stone, then place the largest one at the neck of the bladder first, then cut above it, then pull it out firmly, and the smaller ones afterward if there are more.
And if it is very large, then it must be cut, and a larger wound must be made. For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or the urine comes out immediately so that the wound cannot heal;
but nevertheless exert yourself in pulling it out, or using forceps to break it, until you pull it out in pieces;
and when you have completed your work, then dress the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it tightly, and place upon it a cloth moistened in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then lay the patient on their back, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
And when you release it, wash the area very well with oil and water, then treat it with ointment diaphoretic and basilicon ointment, until it is healed.
and if hot abscesses and corroding sores come to the wound and clots of blood in the bladder, which cause the urine to be retained, conceived in such a way as to not pass with the urine: then insert your finger into the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder, and cause putrefaction;
then lift the wound of water and of ashes and of soil, and help it in all ways that you know, until it is healed;
and it is necessary that all the hours that you treat it, you bind the two thighs, and apply the medicines to the place.
And if the stone is small, and it is in the urinary duct of the penis, embedded inside, and the urine cannot pass; then treat it as I said before, that you cut it multiple times, and one is relieved of the cutting through this treatment. I have already proved it thus.
Take an iron rod according to this form and let it have three pointed ends fixed in one handle:
then take a thread and tie it around the penis below the stone so that it cannot move back into the bladder;
then insert the drill into the shaft gently, until it reaches the bone; and turn the drill with your hand in the bone little by little, until you can pierce through the other side of the bone;
the urine will soon flow, then press your hand on what remains of the bone that is inside the shaft. It will be broken soon, and it will come out with the urine, and the patient will be healed;
and if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then tie a thread below the bone and another above, then cut the shaft where the bone is between the two ties, then extract it forcefully, and untie the thread, and clean the congealed blood in the wound; and treat until it is healed.
of the stone of women
It sometimes happens that a stone is formed in women, and if it ever occurs, the treatment is difficult, and it is prohibited for three reasons:
one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin;
and the second is that one cannot find a woman knowledgeable enough who will expose herself to midwives, especially when she is chaste.
And the third reason is that perhaps one cannot find a woman well skilled in this art with her hands;
and the fourth reason is that the stone in the woman is more embedded than the stone in a man, which requires a deeper incision, and there is great fear. And if necessity arises for this, you must take a very knowledgeable midwife, who is hardly found, and if you do not find one, seek at least a chaste and subtle midwife;
and it presents a wise woman in the lives of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and commands her to do what you command her for the inquiry of the stone; and look very carefully if the woman is a virgin:
and look very carefully if the woman is a virgin: then he must insert his finger into the base and seek the stone;
and if she finds it, then she should press it under her finger, and commands her to insert her finger into the patient's vagina, and to squeeze and press her left hand firmly on the bladder.
If she finds it, then she must move it gradually from the entrance of the bladder downward until it reaches the root of the thigh;
then cut into the stone at the root of the thigh opposite the middle of the groin, where it is most visible, and feel for the stone in that part; and do not move his hand above or below the stone, and let the cut at first be small;
and do not move his hand above or below the stone, and let the cut at first be small; then insert the probe into the cut, if you feel the stone increase the wound until the stone can come out easily, and know that there are many kinds of stones:
that is to say, small and large, rough and smooth, long and round, and those that have ridges.
and know the similarities to understand the outcome.
And if the pain overpowers you, then apply ground vitriol to the area and keep it there for an hour until the pain is subsided;
then return to your work, until the stone is strong, and have the instruments that I have told you in the extraction of the stone from men to help you in your work;
and if the blood overcomes you, and it is from the artery that is cut, then put the powder on the place and use bandages of linen and cloth, and do not begin this again, and leave the stone and do not extract it, lest by chance the patient might die; then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is calmed, and the eye becomes dry, then return to your work until the stone is removed.
Aquous rheum is nothing other than an accumulation of moisture or white slime, which is beneath the cover of the testicles, containing the egg;
and it is called "syfac", and sometimes it is properly in the web of the eye, if one thinks that it is another egg; and it is the skin of the kernel between the white syfac that we have said;
and this does not happen if there is no pus. And the generation of this ramica is due to weakness that affects the testicles, and that material is spread out.
And sometimes it comes from a blow to the testicles, and this moisture has many colors: or its color inclines to yellow, or it is without red, or black, or white watery, and this happens more often;
and these are the signs to recognize this assembly, for if it is in the white syfac that we have said, then the abscess is hard, the pus long like the shape of an egg, and the testicles do not appear, for it has moisture all around.
And if there is moisture in the inner cloth, then the abscess is hard with part of the egg white, and for that reason, one thinks it is another egg white;
and if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white surface, then one feels it well;
then when you wish to know the color of the moisture, test throughout the inserted area, of which the form is described above. According to what comes after the insertion, judge of what is within.
And when we cure it with iron, then it is necessary that the patient be bled according to our ability and the fullness of his body;
then lay him on his back, on something slightly raised, and put under him many cloths;
then sit on his left, and instruct the assistant to sit on the right, and extend the rod to one of the two sides of the heart of the testicles;
then take the sharp blade, and cut the skin of the testicles from the long side down to near the wrist, and let your incision be straight, dividing the skin of the testicles until the white surface appears, and peel it subtly according to your ability;
then pierce the surface full of water with a wide hole, and drain all the water, and then insert your needles, and stretch the surface up;
and do not touch the heart of the testicles, but only the surface; cut it all or piece by piece especially the thin part of it, that if you do not cut it wisely, the ailment will return;
and if the eye jumps out due to your work, reset it in place when you have completed the work on the face;
then sew the two sides of the scrotum together with one stitch, then treat it like other wounds until it is healed.
and if you find the eye corrupted by another disease, then you must tie the vessels that are suspensorial, fearing the flow of blood;
then cut off the testicle along with the suspensor, and remove the eye, and treat it as we have said.
And if the fluid is gathered in two parts together, know that these are two branches; cut the other part just as you have done the first equally, then wipe the blood, and put in the wound wool soaked in rose oil;
cut the other part just as you have done the first equally, then wipe the blood, and put in the wound wool soaked in rose oil; and put over it more wool soaked in wine and oil, and place on the two sides, and put over that doubled cloths, and tie it up with a bandage according to this form:
Then take two cloths, and stuff them with shredded wool according to this shape and let them be joined by stitching at the waistband, and one of the shoulders should reach from the anus to the back, and the other to the area near the genitals;
and the other two heads on the two angles, and let all the binding be confined in the loop of the bridle;
and sometimes this branch of cautery is used instead of iron surgery, and it is that you take a subtle knife-cautery, and cut the skin of the testicles, and heat it as we have said, so that the white surface containing the fluid is exposed;
take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that surface with the tongs, and scrape it with this hot subtle cautery:
and cut it in all ways that you can, until you clear everything;
and be careful that the fire does not touch the egg;
and know that this work is more beneficial; and beware of the flow of blood, and be careful with the operations of cutting;
and if anything opposes you, whether a warm abscess or a flow of blood or something else, then treat what opposes you according to what has been said before.
And if the patient is fearful and does not want to undergo this work because of its horror, then administer puncture as I tell you, and it is that when you are certain by the signs we have mentioned that watery phlegm is there, then make the patient sit on the raised seat; then pierce the abscess in the part below all around the broad area, and perform the puncture with the long instrument;
and let the pores be wide so that all the water flows out;
then put cotton on the place, and bind it, and leave for the remaining water to flow out, then clean it until the wound is healed;
and if the white cloth does not allow the water to come out of the mouth of the wound, then you must insert a quill or the instrument used to draw water from dropsical patients, whose form is described above;
and widen the wound little by little, knowing that the water returns and accumulates after about six months or so, and when it is accumulated as before, thus will the patient spend his days.
Know that in the section of this branch there is fear in many positions, which is why it seems better to leave it alone;
and I will tell you the work and the similarities of the abscess.
I say then that many abscesses come to the body, and especially to the testicles; and it is for many reasons.
It is to know due to an excess of sour and watery humors, which spread to the testicles, or from contusion;
and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body; and finds no pain, and it is a severe abscess;
and by chance some severe abscesses are fearful and stony, and of a fox's color, and sometimes come from artery pus, or vein swelling.
When it is from artery pus, it is known by the condition of the hot abscess, when you press it with your fingers; and it is not right that you touch it.
The one caused by vein swelling is known by its condition upon the expression of touching with fingers, and one can well perform the incision on this appearance, and on other forms; and it is that you cut off the core of the testicles, then the egg rises up, and the thread comes out from the white surface, and release the suspensory from all sides of the egg.
if the egg is already cooked with these thin membranes, then you must draw out the egg, and cut it;
and if it is airy on the surface, or in what is inside the vessels, then you must release all of that membrane, and cut it roundly.
And if the birth of the flesh is at the rear place, then you must cut it all away and extract the egg, just as we have said.
And when your work is completed, apply the wound with wool moistened in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
This is an abscess wrapped in a membrane resembling blains, with the softening of the testicles, and the patient suffers greatly when urinating;
and the treatment of this disease is also very fearful like the one mentioned before, and nevertheless we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancients did.
You must make the patient sit on the elevated chair, then place the scrotum suspender below with your hands, covering all the vessels close to the penis, and grasp the main ones, stretching them out firmly;
then cut with a broad sharp knife across the vessels until they are exposed, and then peel on each side, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries in the temples;
then insert a needle with double thread, and tie it at the first place where the vein appears, and then tie it at the other end; then cut them in the middle straight, according to the length of the body, and draw out the corrupted moisture;
then treat the wound like the others where we cauterize, so that no pus remains that nourishes one of the testicles;
for by this no harm comes, and if pus forms in all the wounds, then it is necessary to extract the testicles from all the wounds; so that the organ does not lose its nourishment due to the incisions of the wounds, and they dry out and cannot heal.
The consequences of this procedure are by the section that comes to the groin, or the extension on the belly in the area of the thighs, so that the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the testicles;
And this rupture is either on the surface or from the extension of it, and these two kinds come from many causes:
or from percussion, or from jumping, or from straining, or from lifting heavy weights, and by similar things;
and the signs when it is from the extension of the surface, are that it happens little by little, over a long time, and does not come suddenly; and the abscesses are equal until they are ripe, because the surface presses on the intestines.
And the sign is when it is from the cut of the sphincter, that it brings sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscesses appear diverse underneath the skin near by, and this is due to the exit of the intestines and the body beyond the sphincter.
And sometimes the hernias come out with the intestines, and are held there, causing great pain to the patient, especially when they are pressed.
And in these iron treatments there is fear, therefore one must avoid them.
And the method of the work is that you instruct the patient to keep the intestines inside with their hand in the wound, if they can insert it; then remember on his neck. between your hands, and lift the thighs;
then bring the heart above, and cut all the skin of the scrotum lengthwise; then insert into the sides of the waist hooks according to what you need to open the wound, and they should be such that the pus may flow out;
then peel the surface that is under the skin of the scrotum until the white hard surface is completely exposed on all sides;
then insert your index finger into what follows the testicle, between the white surface that is under the skin of the egg, and the second surface, and separate what is behind the egg, and between the second surface;
and then move the right hand inside the kernel of the testicles, and stretch the white surface upwards with your left hand, and lift the egg to all the surface towards the waist; and command the minister to stretch the egg upwards, and loosen that which is air behind the binding;
and feel with your hands if any of the intestine is wrapped in or on the hard white surface, and if you find anything, then push it into the belly below;
then take a needle with which there is thick thread made of several threads, and push it into the back part of the surface, which is behind the skin of the testicles; After castration, then cut the shoulders which appear from the veins, until there are four veins; then gather them one on top of the other in the shape of a cross, and tie the syfac, which we have mentioned is under the skin of the testicles, with a strong binding of two parts; then wrap the shoulders of the veins and tie them firmly in two parts so that none of the vessels that nourish them can enter inside, so that no hot abscess may come; and place the binding according to the first binding long two fingers from that, and after these two bindings leave of the syfac which is under the skin of the testicles a length of one finger; and after all the other according to the roundness that the eye bears;
then cut in the part that is under the skin of the testicles, as much as the sinew and the bowels, just as we have said above;
then apply wool moistened in oil, and place it on the wounds, and apply the linen that we have mentioned. And sometimes the white surface that we have mentioned is cauterized after the incision, out of fear of blood flowing. For this happens often, and leave the linen until it falls off by itself;
and if it is slow to fall off, let it be soaked in warm water, and put on what we have said until it falls off;
then treat the wound with another treatment until it is perfectly healed.
of fleshy hernia
In this branch, I have never seen anyone who dared to perform the treatment with iron.
And the ancients said that it is made like the branches which are together with the screw, in such a manner that you bind the vessels, after cutting lightly underneath;
then cut in the middle, and treat the abscess of the one who works, until the vessels flow;
and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Sometimes rupture occurs in the muscles, as we have said, and the wound opens;
and none of the intestines should descend to the testicles, and if they do descend, it is a pouch, and repairs itself continuously;
and if it remains too long at this stage, the wound or swelling grows, so that the intestines descend;
and this happens by the extension of the swelling that is in the veins, as we have said, for it is extended, then the flesh softens and swells and opens;
and the treatment is by cautery, as we have said before;
and sometimes it is treated with iron in this manner: and it is that the patient lies down on his back between your hands, then cut the swollen area of the rupture lengthwise according to the quantity of three fingers;
and then extract the sebaceous substance that is beneath the skin which follows, then take the rait and put it on the area where the sebaceous substance appears;
and press it to the perfection of the belly, then sew the two areas where the sebaceous substance appears on top of the head of the rait, and sew one and the other;
then extract the head of the rait, and do not cut into the sebaceous substance nor stretch the egg or anything else, as I have made known to you in the treatment of the removal of intestines; then treat it according to the treatment of wounds.
then treat it according to the treatment of wounds. And when you cut the hairs, wash and treat the wound until it is healed.
The suture is tight, and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cauterization is softer in this place, and closer to healing.
of the softening of the skin of the testicles
Often, the skins of the testicles in some men become soft because the substances inside are softened, and it is clear to see;
and it is necessary, when one wishes to treat it, that the patient lie down on his back, and cut the skin which is softened over the natural skin;
then bring the two lips together with a suture, and if you see, first sew the excess of the softened skin with three or four firm sutures;
then cut between the sutures, and treat it like other wounds until it is healed, and remove the thread.
about chastisement
Know that castrations are disapproved in our law, and for this reason I would prefer not to speak of it in this book;
and it is not necessary except for two reasons:
where one is that the doctor should know how to answer when asked, and know the treatment;
and the other is that we often need to carefully use certain animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and cats and other animals.
I say then that castrations are performed according to two methods: either by attraction, or by incision.
In the one that we do by attraction, we make the animal sit in warm water until the testicles are softened and hanging; then take them in your hand until they are removed and you no longer feel them.
Of the treatment of hernia: you must dye the animal, and press the skin of the testicles with your left hand, then tie the suspensory ligament, and cut above each egg when you have properly skinned them;
and leave some of the fat from the intestines and the thin membrane that is on the viscera;
and this method of castration is better than that which is done by traction, because with traction sometimes some part of the testicles remains, by which the animal desires lust;
then treat the wound until it is healed.
about hermaphrodites
Hermafrodite exists according to two ways in men: one of which is that between the two testicles appears as the form of a woman's opening, where it has hair, and sometimes the urine flows from there.
And another manner is in women, and it has on the wrist like a rod and two coins.
And the treatment for the man and the woman is that you cut away all the attached flesh, and treat it like other wounds;
in the second way, for men whose urine jumps over the skin of the testicles, there is no treatment.
Tentigene is a piece of flesh attached to the natural part, such that it is too ugly to see; and some women have it as large as a hand, and that is the treatment.
You must dye the excess of the tendons with your hand or needles, and lightly cut them;
and do not go too deep, so that bleeding does not occur, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed;
and for another growth that appears at the mouth of the molar, and it is painful, and sometimes it swells, and it resembles a kernel, and for this reason the ancients called it "kernel disease". So you must cut it, as we have said about the tendon, and treat it until it is healed.
It is erratic when the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the opening is small; and it is caused by birth, or accidents by disease that has occurred;
and it is caused by birth, or accidents by disease that has occurred; or it is attached by glue, or of fine or thick silk, and it is made in perfect form on the forehead, or on the sides, or underneath, or wherever;
and it prevents conception, and childbirth, and perhaps the flowers to have;
and the knowledge of this is by the look at the bile.
If the swelling appears close, you may want to treat it with your hands or with a rasp.
If it is of fine silk and it is close to the two temples, then hurry, and do it thus:
put your two index fingers together, and the woman should be on her back, with her legs spread apart;
then stretch the two temples properly, until the fine silk is round, and above the stitches;
then take wool, and moisten it in oil, and place it on the area, and have the woman lie with the man each day, so that it may not heal.
And if the surface is hard and thick, then you must shave it with a sharp instrument resembling a myrtle leaf.
if the swelling is from new flesh, then suspend it on a lancet and cut it;
and have blood-stopping medicines, such as quicksilver, dragon's blood, frankincense, all mixed with egg white;
then apply a wide bandage to the wound so that it cannot heal;
and let it be so for a long time, and apply a linen cloth to it;
then let other treatments be applied until he is healed.
And when in the wound comes a foreign body, it must be cut out according to this method, if they are not infected abscesses. For an infected abscess that is in the wound, one should not touch it with iron.
hemorrhoids Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that bleed without cause habitually, and when hemorrhoids are old they become hard.
and we have said before in the division the similarities of them, and the signs, and I will say here those that receive treatment.
I say that hemorrhoids and hard lumps, when they are perfectly inside the wound, and do not appear to the touch, should not be treated with iron.
Those who are at the mouth of the murrain, which one can feel, are those whom one can cure.
Therefore, you must put the woman in a cold room, then extend the altar with tongs, and cut it at its roots, then apply powder of blood-stopping medicines such as alum and dragon's blood and frankincense, and similar things;
then place her feet against the wall for an hour, then put her in cold water;
and if bleeding occurs, then make her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate peel and galls and similar things, and then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and lard, and make a poultice on her back.
And if it stops, it is good. and if not, apply cupping to the back and breasts without pricking;
then take wool, and boil it in plantain juice or in elderberry juice with old wine, and apply it to the area.
And when the abscess has subsided, treat the area with ointment until it is healed;
and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a rough head, so it must be cut as I have said for the tumor; and then treat it until it is healed.
Many kinds of abscesses occur in the jaw, such as canker and stony abscess and herpes and thrush and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscess, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
It is therefore necessary that I speak in this treatise about the hot abscess that occurs in the marrow, which is not one of the abscesses that are gathered by the boil.
and if you wish to know the treatment for iron, then observe if the abscess is sharp at the beginning of its appearance, and full of heat and fever, and if it turns red if you can see it. Then do not hurry to pierce it, but let it ripen until the pain is calmed;
and then have the patient sit on a chair, and have two small stools where he can lean, and support his back and bring his feet together behind the leg;
and let his thighs be spread apart, and place his arms beneath his knees, and bind them well with a good binding;
then turn the body towards the right side, and apply the instrument used to work the mouth of the maris, from which comes the form;
and it is necessary that when you apply this instrument, you first insert the rod to know the depth of the maris, so that what enters from the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and it does not injure the patient; and if the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the maris with cloths, so that the instrument does not distress it;
and it is necessary that he places the cone of the instrument above, and that he taints the instrument.
and when the abscess is open, and one cuts it with a soft hand, then it must be cut at the head, with the spatula clean;
and when the boil is emptied, then it is necessary that you put in the wound cloths moistened in rose oil, or in dried green oil;
and place the cloth firmly in the wound at the center of the mortar, and put further on top of the mortar and on the pain clean wool moistened in water or mallows that have been cooked;
then treat it after two days of applying ointment similar to this, until it is healed;
and sometimes raise the maris and the wound by aclyster of water and honey, and then with water or roots of lilies and long artemisia boiled; then return to the ointment.
And if the wound is deep in the marrow, then you must be careful not to use iron for treatment, but cure it as we have said in the division.
of childbirth It is necessary first for the midwife to know the signs of natural childbirth, and these signs are when you see the woman pressing down, and desiring to smell the air.
then the infant hastens to come out; then you know that this childbirth is according to the natural form, and the exit is under his head, and the afterbirth with it;
and when you see these signs, then you must gently press his abdomen, so that the infant comes out soon;
for when he urinates on his head, then the afterbirth comes with it, and the mother is cleansed of her excesses through proper cleansing;
and he who comes otherwise does not come naturally.
For sometimes he comes on his feet, and the body or the shoulders come out first, and the hands, or he comes on his abdomen, or buttocks, and is turned by chance on his neck, and in other bad positions;
it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and skilled in these matters, and to beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the positions how one should assist them.
If the child comes onto its head by natural passage, and the woman gives birth with difficulty, and the strength of the mother is weak, then make her sit on a saddle, where the women hold her;
and warm her nature with oil or fenugreek that is cooked, and then the midwife puts between her fingers the small spatula which has this form: and cut the amnion, and scrape at its nail until the moisture inside comes out;
and hold the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to give the woman an enema of fenugreek paste with sesame oil;
then have her sneeze from condisi, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: the infant will now come out.
And if the two hands come out forcefully, then you must gently reset them little by little; and if they cannot enter, then place the woman on a seat and lift her feet up; then stand the seat on the ground, and steady the woman so she does not fall when standing;
and if the hand cannot enter and the infant is dead, then cut the hands with the knife that was previously placed there, extract the infant, and reset equally.
of the birth of the child on its feet When the infant comes on its feet, then one must push it up; and then turn it little by little, until it is even;
then take the feet and stretch them little by little.
When it reaches up to the thighs, then command to grasp it, and make it sneeze with condiments; if it is strong, may God will it.
And if it does not go strong as we have said, turn it little by little until it is according to the natural form. For then it moves lightly.
And if it does not come strong as we have, take mastic of attar, and oil of sesame, and dissolved gum, and grind all in a mortar; and put upon the nature of the woman inside and remove this ointment, then have her sit in warm water up to below the ribs;
and when it is moistened underneath, make her a necklace of myrrh, and put it underneath, and leave it for an hour; then have her sit on the seat, then make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose, and gently grasp her belly, for the infants are now jumping.
of the birth of the child upon its knees When the infants come in this form, then the midwife gradually places her hands; then let her be supported on her neck, and let her legs be hung down, and let her lie on the bed; and bend his hands little by little, and then takes hold of the hands on the belly, and removes the cushions underneath, until she is aligned downward; and if the infant does not jump, then take its feet and move them strongly, then move its belly upwards, then put your hands there; and wash the child little by little; and command the woman to strain until the infant comes out.
of the birth of the child who comes with one hand extended widely It is necessary to devise to return the hand: if it cannot be returned, then make the woman stand up and walk;
If she cannot walk, then make her lie on the bed, and extend her legs properly;
then apply the massage that I have described;
and if she does not give birth, then make her sit on the stool, then attempt to guide the hand; and bring the child out according to its natural position, and make her sneeze, and command her to pull as much as the infant comes out.
from the birth of the child on its neck, and have its hands spread out, and its face turned towards its mother's back. It is necessary that the practitioner holds his hand, then turns it little by little, and brings it out gently;
and when it is aligned, then apply the natural massage with fat and oil, as we have said, then command her to move little by little;
and when you have done this, then make her sit on the chair, and command her to hold tight; and make her sneeze. of this same manner to all the tonsil
of this same manner to all the tonsil When it comes to this manner of swelling throughout the sinew, cut the sinew with your nail until the moisture is drained;
and if the swelling can be on his face and neck, then cut it from the root so that it is not held back, and reduce the swelling;
then place the child inside, until you have put it as it should be, and command the woman to hold tight at times;
of the birth of twins Know that abscesses often occur, and sometimes three or four may form; and this is not a strange thing, and it often happens. Two are strange things, and do not live much, if at all;
Two are strange things, and do not live much, if at all; I know that they are multiplied, and are separated by the surface that divides them, which is attached to the flesh;
and sometimes they come out as naturally as any other pus, as we have said.
And if they come out difficultly, then treat them as we have said, and let the bandage be fine, and do quickly and lightly what needs to be done; and do so as it is worth moving to safety. of many children
Sometimes they are formed in the womb I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more up to XV, and are all shaped like a child by the measurement of the wise glorious, and it is necessary that the bail sage knows all this, for perhaps similar things happen to him; do as it is appropriate.
of the dead child
When you treat the woman for a dead child in her womb, as I have said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are constrained to manual work; you must know if the woman is of sound health, and has no condition where she fears death;
so that the woman should lie on her back, and her hips inclined downward, and the legs raised;
and the minister should hold the thread in two parts, tied to the bed so that it is not pulled during the descent of the child;
then rub the mouth of the mother with moist oils mixed with alum and fenugreek and flaxseed, then anoint her hands with these oils and these mixtures;
then place them lightly on the mother, then apply the places where she should put the plasters that are suitable for this, and be careful if the child is positioned that it descends headfirst;
so insert the awls in his eyes or in his neck or in his mouth or in his palate or under the beard or in the throat or near the sides, and if the hemorrhoids are on the feet, insert them in the ankles and the middle ribs;
and it is necessary that he holds the awl in his right hand, and places the cautery between the fingers of his left hand, and gently applies it with all his hand, and inserts the awl into any of these areas that we have mentioned, until it reaches the empty space;
then insert another awl opposite it, or a third one if needed, so that the extractions are equal;
and then stretch it equally by moving from one side to the other, for teeth to come out, and let the bones be toothed to hold the teeth, as is here the form:
and if a part of it remains, then anoints one of his fingers with oil, and puts it in that part, and pulls the other part;
and if any remains, then place this tooth in the higher part, and do this until it comes out completely.
and if one hand comes in front of the other and cannot be brought back due to constriction, then you must wrap it with a cloth until it comes out completely; then place the bandage at the joint of the sole or on the foot, and thus you must do the same for the other hand, and for both feet.
And if the shoulder of the child is large and it is stuck at the exit, or it has a pointed head gathered together, then you must place the sharp spatula between your fingers, cut the head and draw out the water. or you round it with the instrument which is called "almidach," from which the form comes with the instruments or chapter which is after this one;
and in the same way do it if the fetus has a large head naturally;
and then pull the bones with the tongs, and if the shoulder slips out and it sticks in the forceps, cut it open until the moisture that is in the breast comes out;
and if she cannot come out, then cut her into pieces with the tool you can;
and if it is swollen in the belly or below the ribs, then you must pierce it until the moisture flows.
And if the swelling is on his feet, then the attraction is light, and the adjustment at the mouth of the vein is slight.
And if it is tight in the belly or the breast, then you must stretch it with a cloth wrapped around the hand; and cut open the belly or the breast until the moisture inside flows out;
and if the other limbs are removed and the head remains, then the physician puts his hand in the fontanel of the skull and draws it to the mouth of the skull; then put one ounce or two, and draw forcefully;
and if the opening of the ear is narrowed by a hot abscess that has come there, one should not work on it, but instead administer moist and greasy substances; and the treatment should be plasters, and seats in water that soften and moisten.
And if the infant is on its side, and you can make it lie flat, then administer what we have said for the living child;
and if one cannot do so, then draw forcefully in parts, and leave nothing of the second layer.
And when you have done this, if the assistant remembers what we said about hot abscesses that come upon the maris;
and if bleeding occurs, then put it in restricted water, and the assistant should perform other treatments.
And I saw a woman in whose womb one fetus had been dead, then another was placed on top of it, and the other also died. After a long time, an abscess came on the buttock, and swelled so much that it burst, and began to rot severely.
I was called to treat, and I thought long, and could not heal the wound.
I put on a strong attracting poultice, and an bone came out, and after some days others came out. I was very amazed, because the belly has no bones.
I thought that they were the bones of a dead child.
I stitched the wound, and pulled out many bones, until the woman was in better condition; and the woman lived for a long time like this, and now she releases a little pus from the site;
and I have recalled this chapter for the reason that when a master finds something strange, he should add help to it.
After this comes the form of the pressor, to which one applies the books;
and at two turns of the two shoulders of the two limbs. However, the horns should be finer than the restrictive piece, and they should be made of ebony or boxwood;
and the mouth of the staff should be one inch wide, and the margin of the trees should be one inch, and in length one and a half palms; and between the two limbs should be two adjustments of this same staff, which should be fixed on one and the other side, half a palm in length or a little more;
and these two adjustments are placed in the mouth of the device to open when turning the two horns.
Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, should be made of ebony or boxwood, according to the likeness of tongs; and have at both ends two adjustments, as you see, one palm in length, and two fingers in width;
and when you wish to open the uterus with the entire instrument, make the woman sit on a bed, feet hanging down and legs spread apart, then insert the two adjusted pieces together into the uterus, and hold the head of the instrument below between her thighs; then work your hand with the entire instrument, just as you have done with the tongs equally, according to the amount that you wish to open the mouth of the uterus, until the loose part does what it wants.
These instruments are all crowned, and their likenesses are multiplied; and when the doctor has prepared them, the work is done more quickly, and it is more impressive to people because of their quantity.
Do not despair of the instrument that you have prepared, for their necessity is not excusable.
When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold back her flow, and then make her sneeze with condiment, and hold your hands at her mouth and nose; and if she is relieved by this, it is good.
If not, then take a pot, and make holes in the lid, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the womb inside, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, casia lignea, and centaury; all these herbs, or some of them, be cooked in a pot with water over the fire;
then place one end of a cane or tube from the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the patient, and have them inhale until the vapor comes inside the patient;
then make them sneeze, as we have said. Then the tendon springs quickly.
And if it remains after this treatment and does not come out, then instruct the nurse to moisten her left hand in oil of sesame or in musilage of althea, and then insert it into the area, and gently massage; and when she has found it, then grasp it and extend it little by little straight, so that the patient does not fall during the extraction;
but there it is necessary to move lightly to the right and to the left, and then draw; it will come and become dislodged.
And if the mouth of the ear is too narrow, we have mentioned the treatment of sneezing and fumigation with herbs;
and if it does not come out with everything that we have said, then be careful that you do not follow through with drawing;
but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the ear, you tie it to the thigh of the woman, then cleanse it with an ointment of four ingredients; it will swell and be reset, and come out freely;
but nevertheless, when it ferments, a bad odor comes to the stomach and head, and harms the patient. then appropriate fumigations are needed for this:
some of the ancients have tested the fumigation of cress and dried figs.
The form of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman for the retention of flows and the secondina is thus:
And it resembles a cane, and one places the thin end into the affected area, and the wide ends over the fire;
and let the fumigation be over the coals, and continue until it is consumed, and start another one.
Many children are born who do not have their anus perforated, but it is plugged with a fine membrane: then it is necessary for the nurse to puncture that surface at its proper place, and not pierce it with an acute spatula, and be careful of the stitching so as not to touch it;
then place moistened wool in wine and oil, then continue the treatment of anointing until it is healed.
And if you doubt that it will not set, then put a pin of linen in the wound, and leave it for several days, and remove it when the child wants to go to the chamber.
And sometimes this swelling comes from the sudden opening of a wound or an abscess; then it is necessary to cut that swelling: so it should be treated, as we have said about the hernia of the groin.
Fistulas that come below the anus are nodulations, and swellings that appear near the anus or in the space between the two parts, so there is one fistula or more;
and when that knotting is old, it operates, and sometimes white or subtle liquid oozes out, and at times these fistulas are perforated;
and they are known by what comes out during defecation or flatulence when the patient defecates, and sometimes one can see worms coming out.
And there are fistulas that reach as far as the bladder, and up to half of the penis; and they extend as far as the hip joint, and up to the kneecap.
And thus one knows the perforating fistula at the anus, and the non-perforating one: and it is that you put your index finger in the anus, and insert a fine needle of brass or iron into the fistula when there is no twisting.
and if there is twisting, then insert a thin lead probe or horsehair until you feel the probe or hair at the right place;
and if you do not feel it, and there is no discharge of excrement or wind or worm from the perforation, as we have said: know that it does not pierce; do not hurry with the treatment.
And when the fistula extends to the bladder or to the urinary duct, then the urine leaks out and cannot be sealed by medicines.
if it is pierced up to the junction of the thigh, then the probe reaches up to that place; If there is no curvature and the source of the pain around it, then it immediately causes bowel issues, and neither medication nor salves by application are effective;
and in these Persian fistulas there is no cure except work, and the vanity of foolish physicians who interfere with them.
In the one that is not Persian and is not old, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on their back;
and lift the legs up to his thighs, and have his thighs inclined towards his belly; then insert a probe of silver, or of bronze if there is curvature, until you know where the probe goes.
If the patient feels it around the anus, then you must put your index finger there, and if you then sense that the tent has pierced it;
and it is uncovered where you feel between your finger the surface or the flesh, then you know that it is pierced; do not tamper with it, for it cannot be healed;
it is said nonetheless that some can be healed well, but this happens rarely;
and the aid that is done consists in heating the fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as was previously mentioned; and he inserts it entirely hot into the fistula until it reaches near the anus; and do this two times or three, until you know that these contaminated substances are burned, which resemble the feather of an eyelash;
and then clean with wet cloths soaked in butter, until those substances come out, then clean with an ointment that cleans and heals the wound.
If he is thus healed, it is well.
If this is done, it cannot be healed in any other way;
and if the tent enters, and does not penetrate to the bone at the base, and there is a thick layer of flesh or tissue between your finger and the tent, and you see the fistula beneath this covering from the core; then cut from the beginning of the fistula, and immediately push the tent forward, and then cauterize after, until you reach the head of the tent; and the tension will be released, and it will fall;
then purge those tainted substances that resemble bird feathers, and leave nothing behind.
And if the sinew overpowers you and cuts between you and the work, then cauterize it with fire or medicinal acid.
For the fire cauterization brings together two good things: that is to say, the binding of these applied substances, and the stopping of blood and the drying of moisture;
then treat the moistened tensions with butter or ground substances until the wound spits out the burned substances in the pus;
then treat the wound with soothing ointments that soften hard flesh, and these medicines are dry.
For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
And if a fistula comes up to the anus perfectly and is far from the body, put your finger in the anus and explore it.
If you feel the tension, and between two is the thread or the sinew or flesh, where it is close to piercing, there should be no force but a way of trust and hope, by the administration of one of the three methods:
or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it to the bottom, or if you can, place threads and treat it as before;
and do not go too deep that you do not cut the tissue holding the foundation, and excretions come out involuntarily; then treat it as we have said;
then treat it as we have said; perchance it will be healed, or you remove that covering and clean it after it is cut near the foundation, whether by thread or by another sharpened instrument; then cleanse that carrion which is in the wound as much as you can; then strive to restore the wound, and to keep the fistula in the part outside the anus:
then strive to restore the wound, and to keep the fistula in the part outside the anus: it is a lighter thing for the patient.
And sometimes fistulas are according to this manner: and it is when you place the tent in the fistula, and it is on the side of the anus near the skin above, then take a tent pierced at the top according to this form: And you twist the thread twice, and insert the tent with all the thread into the fistula until it reaches the head.
if it is inside the margin of the anus internally, then pull the thread from that perforation, as if you were putting your finger into the anus;
and draw the head of the thread, and bring the two shoulders together, and hold one to the other, and leave it for one day or two;
and restrain it sometimes until the thread cuts these tissues that are between two and fall out;
then treat the wound until it is sealed and healed.
If the fistula does not drain, then make it drain in all ways that you can, if it is not too deep. For it is not right to cut too deep for the suturing, and then clean it as we have said, until it is healed.
The form of the spiked spatula used to make the fistula is very sharp on one side and cutting; and on the other side it is not, so that one does not cut what should not be cut, as you see here:
Emorrhoids are according to two manners: where they are inside the anus, like grains of resin, and there can be small and large ones, and they immediately cause bleeding, and whether there is one or several, and they are found deep within the anus and at the top of the anus;
but those that are deep inside have little moisture, and still immediately or a little bit of yellow water or a bit of blood, and they have the color of the flesh;
and the treatment for those who have them inside the anus is that you instruct the patient to strain as if going to the chamber, until the anus protrudes, and then the threads become visible; then you should act quickly, and grasp it with tweezers, or hold it with your nail, then cut it at its roots;
and if the tweezers cannot hold them because of their moisture, then take them with a flag, or with cotton, or with a piece of cloth; and pull them out with your fingers, then cut them, and sprinkle some hot powders used for cautery on top; or you cauterize them as it is said in the chapter on cautery, then treat them with other treatments until they are healed;
and if the fundament cannot expel, then give the patient a harsh and astringent enema to wash what is in the fundament so that it may be expelled easily; when the patient is purged, and if the threads are strong in the fundament, then the treatment is mild;
when the patient is purged, and if the threads are strong in the fundament, then the treatment is mild; and it is that you take them with your nail or with tweezers, and cut them, then clean them as we have said, until they are healed, and fear the incision by iron. and you must treat the stitch according to this method:
and you must treat the stitch according to this method: take the twisted thread, and put it in a needle, then draw the thread above and pierce the needle from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread under the needle, and thus make it wide;
and pull the thread tightly, then tie a knot in the thread, remove the needle, and do this for all the others, leaving one to allow the excess blood to flow out;
Then place a moist cloth soaked in rose oil or in ointment on the fundament, and place it on the fundament, and instruct the patient to rest;
and then leave it until they defecate, and when they have done so, clean them with ointment and other treatments, until they are healed.
from the dryness of the fibers in the wound Often it happens that there is dryness of phlegm in the intestines, and by constraint of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help. Then you must scrape at the surface with the tip of a spatula or your nail, which should not be allowed to become moist. then clean it until it is properly cooked as it should be;
and if it cannot heal, then restart the shaving more forcefully than before, until it heals well and is peeled; then treat until it is healed.
of the trembling A wart is a small, rough appearance around the body, and it goes very much to perfection;
and sometimes cold causes it, and it is felt like dead flesh, and it affects the whole body, and more so in the hands than elsewhere.
And the treatment is that you take a quill from a goose feather, or a strong vulture feather, and place that quill on the wart until the circle completely surrounds the wart; then turn your hand around the quill until you cut completely around the wart, and it is brought to perfection, and remove the wart from its roots.
And if you wish, do this with a needle of brass or iron according to this form, and let it be sharp below and broad above: not to perceive, to hold the thumb still, and to press the thumb.
And if you wish, cauterize the tremor, as it is described in the chapter on cautery.
Sometimes a clyster of silver or arkhot, or melted tin or lead is made;
and sometimes these substances are made small and large, according to those to whom they are administered. Those who are treated in the care of children and who are weak and painful, are small.
Those who are treated in the care of children and who are weak and painful, are small. The form of the small and large catheter is wide at the top, or where the belly is tied according to this manner:
and there should be a separation where the belly is tied, as you see, and the inside of the cheeks be pierced;
and there should be two holes on one side, and one hole on the other;
and let the belly where one places the medicines be of a beast’s bladder or of parchment, and let it be pierced all around with small holes, and have between each hole 1 inch of space, then put into these holes 1 strong thread of raw flax wound in X or hook around, and gather the belly as if it were a goat; and when the medicine is inside, tie the instrument tightly with a strong thread, then use an enema;
and this is the form of the circle:
and let the medicine not be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the enema with oil or egg white, or a similar thing, then insert it gently; then the minister heats it with his two hands together until it is all warm, then extract theclyster, and lift the patient's legs to the wall, and if the medicine wants to come out, hold it as much as possible; and if he sleeps all night, it is greater help.
And if you clysterize in a disease of flux from the stomach, and the medicine hastens to come out, renew it until it is absorbed.
and if the hemorrhoids are in the anus, or an abscess, then theclyster should be as mild as for a child;
and this is the form of the mildclyster with which the skin should be drawn tight:
We have already said in the division about the treatment of wounds;
or we shall tell you of the cures of hands and of medicine, according to the fulfillment.
I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made by, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and of what they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are by the throwing of stones, and the cutting of sword and knife, or spear or staff or arrow, or similar things;
or they are made according to the parts of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or the chest, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members;
and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, for the remedy will come in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, then take care if it is from the throwing of stones or similar things, and the skin is entirely ruptured and the wound is large, and you fear the rising of a hot abscess: so that he may bleed from the cephalic vein especially if little blood comes from the wound, and let the bleeding be opposite to the injured part;
and prevent the patient from excess of wine and heavy foods.
And if he does not wish to bleed, then his food should be reduced, and he should drink no wine, nor eat any meat;
and apply to the wound, if hot abscesses come, cotton moistened in rose oil only, or in astringent wine;
and if there is no hot abscess, then put on the fresh wound, which has all its blood and is not exposed to the air, powder, which I will mention a little later;
and if the burn has moved, then apply some ointments until it is healed.
And if the wound is large like that of a sword cut and similar ones, and the edges cannot be brought together by bandages, then bring them together by stitching, just as I will say about abdominal wounds, of the stitching.
if the wound is exposed to the bone, and can, and holds only to a bit, then cut it; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat hearty foods, such as heads and cooked wheat, as well as beans, and similar things.
and if you find rotten flesh on the skin, and it is not near the bone, then cut all the rot out and discard it, then treat the wound;
and if there is an artery or vein in the wound that cannot be stopped by medicine, then seek the artery, and if you find it separated, tie it with a thread; and if this does not help at all, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and it is that you put this powder which soothes as soon as the fire has moved it.
And the method of the powder is as follows: take frankincense one part; dragon's blood two parts; live charcoal three parts, and powder it finely, and apply to the wound, and press it firmly until it dries well and adheres to all its blood;
and then strain it well, and leave it unloosened if it does not swell; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
And sometimes this is done with coals alone, when one does not have the incense or the dragon's blood, but the fire has not moved the wound.
And if the burn has moistened the wound, especially in this state, one does not apply this powder;
but apply some digestion ointments, or powder of barley flour made with water and honey, until it gives off pus; then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
And if the bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with fine forceps;
and I will tell you hereafter the fractures of the head.
of the wound of the neck
If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, then there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut.
if it is the nerve, there is no other method but to leave the treatment alone, and not apply anything constricting, for it harms the nerves and makes them retract; and do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their connection to it is with the brain, which is the highest member;
but let the medicine be warm, such as hot water mixed with sweet water, and blended with rose oil, and cucumber also washed in sweet water, and other minerals according to this method, and moist ointments.
And if the wound is large, sew it up and bind it with bandages, then treat it until it is healed.
And if the wounds are deep and it is covered and full of pus, pierce it at the lowest point;
and if the artery is cut and bleeding comes out, then open it, tie it up, and cauterize it if necessary;
and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the windpipe, and the conduit is preserved so that the flesh can pass, then sew the windpipe to the neck bone, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural form; and then bind it appropriately, and leave it for some days, then treat it with drying ointments until it is healed;
and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then remove it; and if there are bone fragments, then pull out all that you can, and for those you cannot remove, leave them until the wound becomes rotten, and is separated and the discharge is lightened;
and if the wound is fresh, then powder on the powder that I have mentioned. And if there is bone in the wound and it has a fistula, then treat it as I have said in his chapter.
If it is a stab from a lance or a knife, and the wound is deep, then check if wind comes out of the wound when the patient breathes: then you know that the wound is mortal;
and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, then do not put the powder at the first hour, nor bind it because the blood does not clot perfectly, and returns to the heart, and kills the patient; but apply an attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day;
and if you do not have an ointment, then put old cotton in the wound to draw out the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more; then there will not come spasm, nor trembling from the heart, nor strangeness of alien influence; and when you see the good signs, then know that the wound is healed. then treat it with bandages and other treatments until it is healed;
and if it cannot heal and continues to discharge, then know that there is a fistula;
treat it as one should. and if the wound is from the incision of a sword or knife, and it is simple, whether on the buttocks or the back, treat the part that is in front; if it is large, by suturing;
and if it is small, by powder; and if it is compressed in the bone, and has been chopped into pieces, gather the wound, and pull out the fragments if they are separated; and if they are not removed, let the wound fester, it will lighten the extraction;
and for other wounds on other limbs, the judgment is the same as we have said.
Of the rupture of the belly
The rupture of the belly is great and moderate and small;
from the large wound sometimes the intestines or the nerves of the intestines come out, causing intrusion of other substances;
and the suturing is more difficult, and sometimes a small wound is worse than a large one, because one delays in putting the intestines back in place, if they are not put back continuously;
For the reason that the intestines swell immediately when they feel the cold, they retract more deeply, and for this the middle wound is beneficial, for it allows the intestines to be moved back into place more than the other two.
And know that the rupture of the belly is according to four manners:
the two common sutures happen in the belly suture, and the suture of other body wounds and the two other specific sutures are common to other wounds;
and nevertheless they are more specific with the belly suture, and I will say one by one and explain.
I say that when the wound is small, and some part of the intestine comes out, and it is difficult to put back, this is by one of the two manners: For the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen from the cold.
And when it is crushed, warm it in such a manner: soak a sponge or a piece of cloth in warm water only, or you boil in water squill and cinnamon and spike, and moisten the intestines until the swelling is removed;
and sometimes this is done with wines that constrict, and it is better to use only one for reducing swelling.
And when you see the swelling begin to subside, moisten the intestines with water in which nettles and mallows have been boiled, for by this the entrance is made easier for small things;
and if it cannot enter, then cut slightly into the wound with the instrument used to cut hemorrhoids;
and the first treatment is to reduce the swelling, which none should cut unless there is great necessity;
and this is the instrument for making the incision:
then cut inside the curvature and not further, and see here the form: And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines jump out, put them back in place according to their natural form in their proper place, if you can, for this is worth doing.
When the wound is wide, and it is in the part below the belly, then you must make the patient lie on his back, and raise his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the part below the belly, then raise the head and chest higher than the parts below, and likewise if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts, then place your attention so that the wounded part is higher than the other;
and thus one must administer what I say in large and medium wounds.
In small wounds apply what is prepared for you, then have between your hands the pitious minister who thoroughly closes all the rupture with his hand, and brings together the lips;
and this is the common method of sutures, which is that you take one needle or more, according to the width of the wound, then leave at the head of the wound some space, and insert a needle with strong thread; and pierce the two sides of the skin with the two sides of the sinew, which is beneath the skin inside, until you pierce that part, and bring together the two ends of the sinew all four together;
then strain a double thread around the needle in two parts, then bring together the two edges of the wound properly, and then leave one finger's width, and insert another needle;
then twist the thread like you did with the first needle, and do not stop doing this according to how many needles you need, until the entire wound is restrained;
and let the needles be of medium size, between fine and thick, for the fine needles cut all the flesh, and those too thick cannot enter well: for that reason, they should be of medium size;
and it is not right to push the needles too deep into the flesh and skin, so that they do not cut and work the wound before the suturing;
and then cut the heads of the needles so they do not prick the patient while sleeping, and put cloths or towels on the heads of the needles to keep them still, and leave them until the wound is healed;
and this method of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, for it requires one or two needles.
The second stitching is common, and it is when you bring together the two sides of the skin and the two sides of the flesh together with one needle using one strong medium thread;
and when you have pierced these four sides together, then return the needle to the part where you began, in the manner one sews clothes;
and place between each stitch the thickness of a small finger;
this stitch served the man, and I sewed a wound that a man had in his belly, which was cut by a knife, and the wound was more than a palm wide, and the intestines came out about two palms wide, and the wound was in the middle of the belly.
I brought back the intestine after it had been outside for 24 hours, and the wound was sutured until 15 days, and I treated it, and he recovered.
And the physicians had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle;
and I did not treat it with ointment, for I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicines; and I placed old cotton on the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until he was healed.
Now I will tell you the two proper methods of stitching:
Take the needle, and push it from the outer part to the inner part;
when it has pierced the center straight through, then place the head of the thread where you have pushed the needle, and make it pierce from the inner part to the outer part;
and the meaning of this stitch is that you sew as skinners do with skins, and that you leave one side once, and take it from the other side, until the stitches are completely finished.
The second method of stitching, which Galien properly described, is such that some use to join the two parts naturally together, and bring one end of the thread to the other end in such a manner:
stick a needle at the head of the mirach that is close, and make pierce that place only, and leave the two cheeks of the syfac; then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the outer part to the inner part, at the two cheeks of the syfac;
then make pierce one and the other from the outer part to the inner part, at two other cheeks of the mirach that are on the other side;
and this is the most difficult manner of stitching and the most common.
Galien said this word, and some testify that one should sew the belly with two needles, each having thread;
and one must push one needle from one side, and another from the other, in the manner of those who sew leather;
and know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, the stitching is more severe than in other parts of the belly.
The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, although the iron has moved it, you must reset the intestine, and the stitch;
then put the healing powder on it, and if the iron has moved it, then put some ointment that is available on it, until the wound draws; and they cut the threads, and the scissors are soldered, and the mirrors; then treat the wound like the others until it is healed;
and if you do not have medicines, then put on it, as soon as it starts to expel pus, old cotton, and change it twice a day until it is healed.
For you do not need other medicines in many cases when the wounds are simple;
and if you fear that the wound may spread to the principal limbs, then you should moisten light wool in tempered oil heated or in rose oil, and place it around the joints, and under the armpits;
and if he feels pain or putrefaction in the bowels, and it often happens, then cleanse them with warm black wine, and especially if the putrefaction extends to the intestines;
and pierce it from the inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small intestine.
The intestines which are called "jeun" cannot heal when they are wounded, and this is due to the abundance of veins that are there, and because of the delicacy of the entire body, and its closeness in nature to the nerves.
and if the bladder jumps out of the wound, then put it back as you would with an intestine, while it is fresh;
and if it is old and has turned green or black, then you must tie the place that is black so no bleeding occurs, for there are veins and arteries;
then cut what is between the ligament, and let the two shoulders hang from the part below the wound up to above to lighten the extraction when the arrow falls, and the wound draws.
Of the rupture of the boil
When the intestine is round, and the wound is small, it can be restored in some people, for I have seen that one man was wounded in the belly by a lance;
and the wound was to the right of the stomach, and it became stitched and turned into a fistula, and through it came out excretions and wind;
I applied treatment according to what I could, and did not cease to care for it until he was healed, and the wound was closed.
And when I saw it sutured, I feared that the patient might have harm in his belly; and there was no harm, but he remained in better conditions, eating and drinking;
and some experimenter said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be tied in such manner: take fronds with large heads, then bring together the edges of the wound, and when the frond has opened its mouth, place it on the two edges so that it presses its mouth upon them;
and then cut off the head, and it will stay so that it cannot untie, then place another frond after in the same manner as before, until the wound is entirely covered; and cut the wound.
and the head burns in the intestine, and no harm comes to the patient, and one can tie the intestine with a fine thread that is cut from the intestine of an animal, in such a manner:
take the head of this intestinal thread that is very lean, and then tie to the head of this thread a fine linen thread tightly, then put the thread in the needle, and sew the intestine, and reset it in the rupture;
and this manner of stitching of wounds is not far from according to the way of faith and hope;
and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the great intestines, then there is no skill or health without subtlety.
about the fistula wherever it may be Know that any wound or abscess, when it awakens, is generally called a "fistula," and especially when it is hairy and discharges pus.
And a fistula is according to the truth a false knot hard and white, where one does not feel pain, and it is also hairy like the feather of a bird;
and sometimes clear spittle, and other times thick; sometimes little, and other times enough;
and I have spoken of this in the section on wounds, that any wound which is not healed and has no flesh, it cannot be except by one of the nine causes: that is to say, by the insufficiency of blood or body; or by its maliciousness; For there is hard flesh inside, and on the lips, where no new flesh grows; where there is too much bile; where the pus is thin, and the matter is of bad quality; where the medicine is not good in the treatment; where the corruption is of a pestilent nature; where due to the property of the region, digestion is slow, and health is delayed, and swelling occurs naturally; where there are veins or bones;
and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the medical treatments in the division.
Now I must make you know the treatment of fistula which is done by manual work.
Know that fistula occurs in all parts of the body; for there are fistulas that occur in the large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or on the skin, or in the intestines, or in the bladder, or in some of the ribs, or in the spine of the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet; and there is one that comes to the principal part of the member and similar areas.
And all the fistulas that are of this kind are difficult to heal, and there is only labor and ignorance;
and if there is any fistula that does not reach the place I have mentioned, and you are confident in the treatment, and you want to understand it, take a probe of bronze or iron, if the fistula is straight, then use it;
and if the fistula is curved, then search it with a flexible probe of lead, for lead can bend around the curvature;
and if the fistula has multiple openings and you cannot search it well with probes, then irrigate it through one of the openings, for the moisture will flow from one opening to another, and cleanse it;
then carefully probe it as much as you can, so that you may know if there is bone or nerve, and this is done properly, and ask the patient about the pain they feel when pressed by your hand, and the place where they feel it;
and when you truly know the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, then cut according to what I have told you, and remove the foulness and the corrupted matter that are inside;
and then treat it until it is healed, and if the fistula is deep in a straight place, then you must cut deeply as much as you can, then put moistened tents with medicinal herbs inside, and push them to the top of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the excess that remains at the bottom;
and then apply healing ointments to grow healthy flesh until it is healed;
and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut it off.
If vein or sinew does not bother the principal limbs, as we have said;
and if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackening, then scrape it until all the corruption is removed, then treat it with things that heal flesh until it is healed;
and if it is not healed, and pus returns as before, know that you have not gone to the root of the problem:
so expose and scrape until you reach the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore the area;
and if he is thus healed, it is well. if not, know that the corruption is too advanced, that you cannot come near; there is no other method than to leave it to nature;
and if there is a small corrupted bone and you can extract it with tongs, then pull it out with the appropriate instrument for that, and if there are many bones, pull them all out, do not leave even one;
and if the moisture hinders you, and there is no mistake nor fear, then cut away both the moisture and the flesh, and free the bones.
And if you cannot remove them in an hour, then place on the wound something encouraging putrefaction, and leave until the flesh is rotten around the bones, and then the bones will come out more easily;
and if it is a large bone, such as from the leg or thigh, then raise the putrefaction only until all the blackness is removed, then heal the wound;
and if there is a large part of the corrupted area, it will reach the marrow of the bone; one must scrape and cut all the way to the putrefaction, and then treat it until it is healed;
and I will tell you of an ulcer that happened to a man in his leg, so that you may take example and help in your work.
The young man was about thirty years old, who had pain in his leg from a cause that came within the body, so that the matter came to the leg, and it swelled with a large abscess, and he had no reason to defer opening;
but the physicians by their folly worked so much on it that the abscess opened, and they let out a great deal of matter, and it became a fistula, and there came many openings that all discharged pus and moisture from the body;
and many physicians applied treatments for about two years, and there was no wise person in the art of hands until I was called, and I saw his leg and the medications with which he was being treated, and what discharged through the openings had a strong odor; and the body of the young man would become red, and had a yellowish color.
I put up a tent in one of these perforations, and then searched all the perforations, and found that one came opposite the other from all parts of the leg.
I hurried then, and cut into one of the openings until I discovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupted and perforated, and the corruption reached to the inner bone;
I scraped what appeared to be the corrupted bone, and thought there was no other corruption except that which I removed;
and began to treat the wound with poultices for a long time, and it could not heal;
and then I began again, and uncovered the bone as before, and found the corruption continued in the bone, and scraped it, and then removed it, and attempted to heal the area; but I could not cut around more than a palm's width of the bone, and I pulled it out with all its flesh, then I restored it with medicines; and he was healed and stitched quickly, and there was no need to begin the work again except for the weakness of the patient, who could not endure, and for the fear of death that I had for him. For the evacuation he often bled, but was entirely healed, and in place of the bone a hard flesh grew, and it was well positioned and had no harmful or adverse effect whatsoever, neither going nor coming.
and if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it must be treated in this manner: take the linen, and stretch it at the head of the exposed bone, and instruct someone to stretch it upwards; and take another linen string thicker than the first one, and tie it on the flesh that is over the bone, and stretch the top end so that you pull the corrupted flesh underneath, and expose the flesh where you wish to sew, so that the suture does not bruise the flesh;
and put the ember on a board under the bone to cut away the corrupted flesh;
and one must scrape as much as can be seen and felt of the corruption, and scrape again another time.
And if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, then uncover all the flesh;
then put the ember underneath, and then scrape from one part to another the corruption, and let the scraper follow the length of the corruption closely, as we have said;
and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut away the corrupted joint, and scrape the bone where it contains from the other side;
and if the corruption is in the continuity of the two joints, there is no other remedy but to cut;
and if the corruption is in the wrist of the hand or the ankle of the foot, it is a very serious matter, but nevertheless you must inquire about that corruption, how it appears to you; and cleanse it in every way that you can, but do not let the vein or the nerve oppose you;
and know that the incisors and the saws for cutting these bones are various, according to the position of the bones and their appearance, and their thickness and their fineness, and their size and their smallness, and their hardness; and for this reason, it is necessary to prepare his instrument for each kind of work;
and know that the work will show you the instrument you will need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the methods of diseases; so consider the instrument you need according to what is necessary.
The joints become diseased either due to internal causes or due to external causes;
and when you have treated that corruption with the care of medicines and they do not help, it is necessary to amputate that limb up to the place where the corruption comes from, so that the patient escapes death by this means or by the evil, which is greater, of the loss of the limb;
and the sign is that the limb becomes black, so that it seems to be burned by fire, and after the blackness could come the corrosion member by member, and takes over the whole body;
and if you hurry to cut, and if it is due to the sting of venomous beasts, such as sea scorpion and basilisk and the like, if the corrosion is at the head of the toe, then cut it off, and do not give space for it to reach the hand.
and if it reaches the hand, cut it off at the joint, so that the corrosion does not reach the arm;
and if it comes to the arm, then cut it off at the elbow;
and if it passes the knife, it is death, and there is no remedy other than the quantity of its virtue;
and do the same when the corrosion comes to the stone: if it comes to the first joint, then cut after the other joint;
and if it comes to the stone, then cut away the entire stone; and if it rises up the leg, then cut at the knee joint;
and if it comes above the knee, then there is no other remedy but to let the patient die;
and the method of cutting or sawing the limb is that you tie above and below, and stretch one minister at one end down, and another minister the other end up, and you separate the flesh which is between the two ties to a span wide, until the bone is uncovered;
then you cut or saw, and place on each side a cloth of linen, so that the saw does not touch the healthy area, and does not cause another injury and heated abscess to the patient.
and if bleeding occurs when you operate, then quickly cauterize the area, or apply some binding powders;
then return to your treatment until it is completed, then bind the wounded limb with a suitable bandage, and care for it until it heals;
and I will tell you what happened to the man in such need:
a darkness befell him that seemed like the burning of fire, and that corruption came first to his toe of the foot, until it would spread over the entire foot;
and when the man saw the corruption, he hurried to cut off the foot, and was healed;
and a long time after, the corruption returned to his toe of the hand, and he came to me, and I applied repellent things after cleansing the body, but the corruptions could not be stopped;
and he wanted me to cut off his hand, and I did not want to, as I had hope of repelling the matter; and I also doubted that if I cut his hand, he would die, for the strength of the man was weak;
and he completely despaired, and returned to his land, and hurried to cut his hand, and was healed;
and I have not found content elsewhere except for what is done differently when it is necessary.
Sometimes an abscess comes in the cartilage, and remains for so long that it forms a large collection of pus; and then it rots and bursts, and the pus comes out, and the hole remains there for a long time, like a vessel; and the skin that is above is as delicate as fine draperies, and does not extend down to the bone, nor to the nerve, and such a disease is called "healthy," and is not called "fistula";
but if it is so extended that it reaches the bone entirely, it is called "fistula";
and the skin is such that you cut that skin all around, especially when it is delicate, just like fine draperies; and it does not matter because of its corruption.
And if you fear that the skin will burn, and the corruption is not complete, and the skin is thick with flesh, then treat it with aclyster thus:
Look if the breast is large, and the milk that comes out has a foul smell, then cleanse it with Egyptian medicine which is made thus: take arsenic, and oil, and white lead, equally, and put to cook in a vessel over fire, until the medicine turns red, and becomes as thick as honey;
and then take of this according to your need, and mix it with water and honey, and cleanse the breast with it, and bind the wound; and leave the medicine on for two hours, then remove it by squeezing;
do this many times until the breast is cleansed and the stench is removed;
and sometimes it isclysterized with ash water, when this medicine is not present, and it is that you take ashes of vine wood, and throw water over, then strain it, and use it as a clister until you know that the intestines are well cleansed;
and if the patient cannot tolerate it, nor the Egyptian medicine nor the ash water, thenclysterize him with water and honey in which there is a bit of ground litharge; or you clysterize it with honey and mixed wine, for the honey has the property of cleansing and washing, and the wine causes the body to heat;
and when you have done this, and you are confident that the intestines are well cleansed, then clysterize him with what causes flesh to grow in them, and it is that you take a diaphoretic plaster, and make it with rose oil and wine;
where you cleanse with some medicines and ointments, of which I have described the properties in the treatment of ointments;
and if the opening of the breast is small, and the nozzle of theclyster cannot enter, then widen it with an iron a bit, and put in a tent of Egyptian ointment, or basilicon ointment, until it is widened;
and if the wound is too wide, sew it up leaving only enough space for theclyster to enter, and if the opening that expels pus is at the top, cut it lower where it is.
and if you cannot cut the breast below as you wish, then arrange in such a way that the bow goes to the lowest place there is, for when the bow is fully formed, it does not allow any flesh to enter and if you cannot cut the breast below as you wish, then prepare in such a manner: that the bow moves lightly downward, and leaves nothing of the bow;
that the bow moves lightly downward, and leaves nothing of the bow; and take consolidative medicines to put on the wound, and stretch over the linen cloth that covers the entire wound; then cut at the strong place the opening of the breast a bit wider than the first, then spread an ointment over another cloth according to the size of the opening, and put it on the wound's opening to alleviate the bow, and do not remove the large cloth except once after many days;
and the one who is on the nipple of the breast, often removes it to remove the pus, and you know what comes from the pus, whether it is venom or blood or enough, or digestible, or indigestible;
and take notice if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has spread in such a manner and you see that nature rises up on the nipple of the sore, then know that the breast is already curing, and health approaches;
and then untie it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you untie the wound, change the other bandage, and renew the ointment.
And if subtle pus forms after a long time, do not despair of the health, for recovery approaches.
For there are people who take too long to remove the flesh from their wounds, and of those who do the opposite;
and if undigested milk spits from the breast after many days, know that the breast does not heal;
and if the breast is slow to heal and is swollen, apply drying but moist in substance and dry in virtue medicines, such as diaphoretic ointment, for it has a large part of vitriol, and this is the last medicine;
take diaphoretic ointment, and make it with rose oil, and sprinkle it with old wine equal in substance;
then cook it and use it;
and this same is best when the diaphoretic ointment is not available, or you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind it, and powder it over the honey when it is on the fire;
and then in glue the cloth, and stretch it over the breast, and sometimes one administers aristologe longe, and roots of celestial lily, which is also like flour of veal and centaure. and use simples or compounds: grind them, and make powder, and put on the honey that I have said, and use it;
and if the cure is prolonged, and is not cured by this treatment, then know that the corruption is perfected, and makes an impression in the bone, or in the hard members, or in the ligaments; treat the fistula as we have said before.
Panarice is an abscess that arises beneath the nail of the little finger of the hand, or of the foot, or perhaps arises in other fingers;
and when it grows old, and no attention is given to it, then comes the hot abscess, and it runs and throws pus until it reaches the root of the nail, and perhaps it corrodes it entirely;
and the corrosion reaches the bone, causing a foul-smelling pain, and the joint of the finger becomes swollen, and its color turns purple.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, then you must cut off with an iron all the excess that remains of the nail, then cauterize the wound afterward. The cautery is greatly helpful if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy;
and if the nail presses against the flesh inside and begins to pierce it, and injures it, then you should place a thin piece of iron under the nail that pierces the flesh, lift it up, and cut away that flesh subtly and lightly, and apply burning and corrosive medicines on the remaining flesh to remove everything; then treat with ointments until he is healed.
And if the corruption is in the bone, cut it away and draw out, for as long as the corrupted bone remains, it cannot heal;
and if you see the toe becoming corrupted, cut it as it is said before, then treat it until it is healed;
and if it is bitten, and swollen, and he feels great pain, then you must cleanse it first;
then cut the nail of the infected area sharply by cutting across it, and be careful that the cut does not reach the flesh underneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain;
and if it happens, then put something on that soothes.
The dislocation that occurs in some men's hands is entirely fleshy, and sometimes it has bones, and occasionally there is a nail, and some are born at the root of the joint, or the origin is in some parts of the fingers.
He who is born with any knot on the toe does not move, and he who is born at the joint of the toe, by chance moves;
the size of he who is fleshy is light, in such a manner: cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
He who is born in the root of the joint is difficult to treat: be careful with cutting.
In him who is born with an anus or should have it at the back, you must first cut the flesh roundly to the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable seam for this, then clean it until it is healed.
The web that comes on the fingers together comes by birth, or by wound healing, or by fire burn, or by similar things.
you must cut that suture so that the toes return to their natural forms; then place between two tents or cloths moistened with rose oil so they do not stick; or you place between two pieces of thin linen until the wound is sealed, as it should be.
If webbing comes on any of his fingers with the palm, then cut that webbing as appropriate.
Veins are large and wrapped full of melancholic superfluities, which come to many parts of the body;
and it happens more in the legs of those who walk on foot and work and carry loads than in others.
It is then necessary that you administer to him a purgation of bile, and then heal him with basilicum.
The iron cure is according to two methods: one is that they are cut, and the black blood is drawn out; and the other method is that you lift the vein, and draw it entirely out.
The castration is according to this method: first raise the leg with very hot water until the thick part is made subtle, then remove the leg of the patient from above the thigh down to the part below the knee;
then cut the vein in one place, or in two or three, with a wide incision, then lift and draw out the black blood forcefully from one end to the other, until as much blood comes out as the strength of the patient can endure;
and then tie it off, and instruct them to cleanse themselves with black bile-inducing foods;
and repeat the evacuation and bleeding when the veins are full, and it is harmful to the patient.
The elevations of it are according to this manner: shave the patient's leg if it has a lot of hair, then put it in the bath, and wash the leg with warm water until it becomes red, and the veins swell;
and if you do not have a bath, then heat it with fire, and then cut directly from the vein at the knee to the area below near the ankle;
then work the skin with the lancet, and strip the vein on both sides until it appears when you feel it;
and when it is seen red and black, and when it enters the skin it seems like a white thread;
then push the root underneath, until it is lifted from the skin, and then pierce it lightly with a lancet, then cut it in another place three times;
then scrape the skin over the vein until it appears, then lift it with a thread, as you have done, and pierce it with another lancet, as you did first;
then cut another section, or several if you need them, then lift it, and cut at the tip with your thumb, then pull and lift until the second section;
then extract it piece by piece until all of it comes out, then cut it;
and if you cannot pull it out, then put a needle with the thread doubly strong, and tie it and pull it, and insert it under the skin, and turn your hand from one side to the other until it comes out; and be careful that it does not break, for if it breaks, one cannot pull it out or lift it, and harm comes to the patient;
and when you have pulled it all out, then put wool soaked in wine and rose oil on the site of the wound; and treat it until it is healed.
And if the skin is tight and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must split it crookedly, but do not cut it off; and treat it as we have said before.
The shape of the iron with which one cuts the skin is curved, and it does not cut deeply, so that it does not cut the vein;
and it is of thick curvature, for if it were thin, it would cut the vein, but let it be thick as we have said, and here is the shape:
This vein is located in the legs, in warm areas where no herbs or trees grow, and in soil that has no moisture;
and by chance it arises in another place than the legs, and this happens due to the putrefaction that comes under the skin, just as serpents and worms come within the body between skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are such that a great inflammation comes to the leg, then the color changes, and the vein begins to come out forcefully, like the root of a plant.
When the wound is open, you must wrap around a piece of linen from one and a half fingers up to two fingers wide, and tie it, and leave the linen hanging on the leg, and every time some comes off due to decay, wrap it around the linen again, and tie it.
and if it is too long, cut off a part of it, wrap the remainder, and do not cut it at its root until it is entirely out; for if you cut it, it will re-enter the flesh and cause an abscess and putrefaction in that place, leading to a bad illness;
For this reason, it is necessary that it be treated little by little until the end, and nothing remains in the body;
and sometimes this vein is treated when it is five palms long, or ten, and a man came to me once, whose was ten palms long, and when you cut it, you put one reed into the hole, and pierce until the bottom, so that everything comes out;
and the material inside should be emptied out, and apply to the area medicines that prevent putrefaction for some days, then treat it like an abscess.
And sometimes this vein has fewer reeds, especially when it opens at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and many holes come from it, and from which few reeds sprout;
Then cure it as we have said before.
worms that are born between skin and flesh This disease is called in our land "cattle sickness," for it often occurs in cattle, and it is a small worm that lives between the skin and flesh, and moves all over the body up and down, and one can feel it well as it travels from member to member, until it bursts the skin where it goes, and becomes fierce;
and it is caused by putrefaction of certain humors, such as worms and snakes and earthworms and ascarids in the belly;
and there is fear of its maliciousness, for when it moves through the body and ascends to the head, and comes to the eye, by chance it may enter and destroy the eye; and this happens often.
When you want to treat and care for it, one cannot do so except when it comes.
then you must bind the area above and below with a strong tight bandage, then cut above and draw it out forcefully, and if the pus is embedded in the flesh and you do not find it, then cauterize with fire above until it burns;
and the greatest harm that it does is to corrupt the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming near the eye on the head, then press below it firmly on the eyebrow, then cut above and draw it out forcefully;
and it is necessary to treat the patient with body cleansing of soluble medicines for the corrupt bad humors, and they should be fed nutritious foods to prevent corruption.
of the pain that comes from flatulence This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and it is a pain that comes to some limbs, and then moves from limb to limb;
and I have seen what I tell you. I was called to a sick woman, and she bared her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm;
and it then rose up as quickly as a worm to the shoulder, faster than anything, just like quicksilver when it moves from one place to another;
the pain departs from that place, and fixes in the shoulder, and then a bit after runs throughout the body, until it comes to the other arm;
then she told me that it turned around the body, as I saw it.
I was greatly amazed at how it moved from limb to limb, for I had never seen this disease in such a manner. Nevertheless, I had wanted to believe that it was good to move the pain from one place to another, but I had not wanted it, as I saw in the woman;
and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body, and the veins exposed, and because of this the constrained wind appeared;
and it does not appear according to this reason in those who are plethoric, and who have moist bodies and veins hidden.
And when you wish to treat this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears as we have said, then scrape above and below quickly, and then cut so that that wind constrained in place comes out; and cauterize the place;
and if you do not see it with your eyes, then treat it with those that expel the winds, such as foul pills, and pills of serpent, and similar others.
Arrows are diverse, according to their forms and according to the places of the body where they strike.
The diversity among them is that there are those which have large points, and small ones, and branched ones, and soldered ones; and those which have two angles, and those which have tongues, and those which have pieces;
and she who falls on any limb falls according to two manners: or in principal members it affects, such as the brain, heart, liver, lung, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When she falls then in any part of these members, and the sign of death, which I will tell you later, appears to you: then you must beware of the extraction of this arrow, for death follows in many cases; and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not embedded deeply, then extract it, and treat the wound.
And the sign of the brain when an arrow strikes and pierces the bone, and the suture which is on top of the brain jumps, is when there is scotoma and bleeding and inversion and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of tongue, and spasms and confusion of mind, and vomiting of bile; and perchance it comes out without force from the nostrils, or from the ears; and by chance loses the speech and voice; and from the wound jumps white moisture resembling pus, and it also jumps like broth of flesh;
and if this sign appears to you, then be cautious with the treatment, and remove the arrow if it is not embedded.
The signs of pleurisy when it falls upon the heart are that it is near the left breast, and it feels as if it were fixed in something hard, not empty; and sometimes the pleurisy beats like the pulse, and it causes black blood to come out, and coldness and cold sweat occur, and syncope: then you can be sure that death is imminent.
And the sign of the arrow that remains in the body is that without pause foam jumps from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and sighs loudly and seeks the cold.
And if the arrow falls on the covering of the lung, it is near the lower ribs; and it causes great anguish and great pain and sighing; and it moves all the limbs from the shoulders.
And if the arrow falls into the stomach, perchance some undigested flesh may jump from the wound.
And if the arrow falls into the belly, and if any dung comes out through the intestines, there is no hope in the treatment, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrowhead falls into the bladder, and the urine jumps out and comes to flow, and the patient feels great pain: Know that the wound is mortal.
The other members, such as the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the arm and the spine and the wrist and the thigh and the legs, and similar members, are safe according to many dispositions. When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me, so that you may do likewise.
It happened to a man that an arrow struck him in the armpit at the root of the neck: I probed it, and pulled it out from the other side beneath the ear fat, and he was healed without harm.
And in one attempt, I pulled out an arrow that had struck him in the eye fat beneath the eyelid, and the arrow was embedded, and I could not reach beyond the tip towards the shaft, and the arrow was as large as a Turkish bow's iron part, almost light without feathers;
The eye was healed, and no adverse incidents occurred to him.
And he drew an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic with ears:
I shaved the beard, and worked carefully until I drew it out, and the Christian was healed.
And I drew an arrow from the man, which had lodged in his abdomen, and I thought he would die;
and after he had passed thirty days, his condition did not change; I cut into the arrow, dislodged it, drew it out forcefully, and he had no adverse effects.
And if you see a man to whom an arrow has fallen into the back, and the wound was sealed over;
and the arrow remains inside him, and does not change its natural disposition, nor finds harm in any of its natural functions.
And you see another man to whom an arrow fell into his face, and the wound was sealed; and remained thus without suffering great pain;
and many other similar cases.
And extract an arrow from the man of the king's court, into whose nose the arrow had fallen, and it was slightly leaning to the right side; and the arrow was completely embedded.
I was called to treat her after she had been fallen for three days. And I found the wound very narrow.
I wanted to examine her in a completely private tent, and did not feel any; and he felt a prick and pain under his right ear.
I thought it was from the tip of the arrow. I placed on the area a plaster that is attractive and digestive, so that the area would not swell; and the head of the arrow appeared.
and the head of the arrow appeared. I applied the plaster for several days, and reopened the wound again, and the patient remained this way for a long time, until he felt the arrow one day inside his chest;
and he told me. I put corrosive medicine on the wound for several days until it opened, and I probed it, and felt the head of the arrow that was embedded in the place;
then I applied that corrosive medicine to the opening of the wound until the head of the arrow appeared visibly;
and it took about four months to complete the process around the wound, and then I widened the wound so that I could insert the forceps, and I moved it from one side to the other, but it could not come out;
then I did not stop refining and devising methods of instruments until one day I grasped it with well-made forceps, according to what its form will come at the end of this chapter, until I pulled it out and closed the wound.
And the physician judges that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: Then I restored it, and the wound was sutured, and the patient was completely healed.
Now I have told you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you apply your care to what I do not mention, for the books cannot take everything into account;
but the wise masters compare very little, and upon what is present and lacking, find new work and new instruments, through the understanding of foreign things that occur in this art.
I say that arrows do not remain in the members where they are embedded without two manners: or through the place where they enter, or through another part;
and the one that jumps out where it enters is an arrow entering its flesh, and sometimes it jumps out now.
And if it does not jump out now, leave it until the flesh around is rotten, and the discharge is diluted;
and also if it is embedded in the bone and cannot come out, leave it that way for some days and move it each day;
and then it jumps out, and if it does not jump out, pierce around the entire shaft finely until the surrounding area is widened, and then pull it out.
And if the arrow is embedded in a part of the body where it cannot be seen, seek it throughout the entire area; and if you feel it, then pull it with a suitable instrument;
and if you cannot because of the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone or nerve or vein, then cut it so that the wound is large;
and pull the arrow if you can, and if it has ears by which it is held, then remove the flesh that is embedded from two parts as much as you can, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow so that you can pull it out;
and be careful that you do not break the arrow, so that you can pull it out more easily.
And if you cannot do it at once, then leave it until the area around is swollen, then pull it out, for the extraction will be eased. And if the flow of blood is contrary to you, then administer what we have said about the treatment in its chapter;
and beware of the incision of the nerve and the vein, and devise how you can draw out the arrow without danger, quickly or slowly, firmly or gently;
and place the patient according to the position they were in when the arrow struck them, for this is the greatest help there can be, and if you cannot, then place them according to what the signs show you.
The arrow that comes from another direction, or where some part of it is visible, or the skin is swollen in such a way that it can be seen or felt clearly:
Cut then up, until the forceps can grasp, and then extract: if it is now possible.
And if it is retained in the bone, then rotate your hand roundly, until it enters into the bone, and widen the bone, then extract it.
And if it cannot come out, then leave it again, and then restart the extraction until it comes out;
and if the shaft of the arrow is there, push it with the entire shaft;
and if the shaft breaks off and you wish to administer further, then use the instrument with hair, so that the tip of the arrow enters into the hair of the instrument;
and then push out; and if the arrow is barbed, use the pointed instrument to enter it, to ease the extraction.
And if the arrow is poisoned, then you must cut away all the flesh around where the venom is, if you can, then clean the wound as appropriate.
And if the arrow falls on the hip or in the abdomen or at the bladder or at the side, and it is close, and you can cut over it;
and beware of cutting the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then sew the wound if necessary; and treat it until it is healed.
The form of the pincers used to pull out arrows is similar to the beak of a bird, and you see here the shape:
And there are many methods: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
The form of the hair tip is also like the feather of a bird, to place at the tip of the arrow, as shown here the shape:
There are thirty-one veins from which one recovers, of which sixteen are in the head, namely: The flaps that are behind the ears, which are called the two "herbech"; and the two arteries that are in the two temples appearing; and two veins that are in the two tear ducts of the two eyes, which are called "aspires"; and the vein that is in the middle of the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the nose; and the two glands that are in the neck; and the two veins that are on the upper lips of the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich"; and two veins that are under the tongue.
The veins from which we commonly bleed are 5 in each arm:
one is the cephalic, and it is on the left side, and the common people call it the "vein of the head"; and the middle one is called "faste," and it is composed of the cephalic and the basilic, and the common people call it the "vein of the heart"; and the basilic is on the right side, and the common people call it the "vein of the belly," and it is on the forearm, and it is the one from which we bleed, which appears clearly on the wrist.
And the saver vein is the one between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has two branches;
and in the leg and foot there are three veins: one is below the corbeure of the instep on the left side, and the second is the sophene which is at the ankle on the right side; and the vein which is called "nesse", which is at the ankle on the other side;
and in the other leg there are three veins below those.
The inflammation of the veins that are behind the ears helps with old catarrhs and migraines;
and the qualities of the surgeon, as I tell you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth; then have the patient compress his neck with a twist, until the two veins appear behind the ears in two places dependent on the head: take them then in your hand, and where you feel the pulse beneath your hand, mark it there;
then take the lancet, and pierce below the vein until the bone, then lift your hand along the entire vein above, and cut both the skin and the vein well twice across, and let the blood flow out as much as you wish;
then extract and bind until it is healed;
and I have already said about the incision and the cautery in the first book.
The inflammation of the two arteries that are in the two temples is good for old migraines, soreness, and customary ophthalmia, and for watery tears in the eyes;
and the qualities of the inflamed are as I say: and it is that the patient stretches his neck so that the two veins appear clearly; and feel the pulse under your thumb, and then sign from there;
then lift the vein with your index finger and place the lancet underneath, and lift the vein up, and cut it, just as you have done in two other veins, and let the blood according to your necessity;
then release the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it; and then tie it firmly, and leave it until it is healed;
and we have already spoken of their cutting and extraction at the beginning of the book.
The vein of the forehead is as useful as the cephalic vein for old diseases of the face, and for migraines, and for redness;
and the quality is such that the patient strains his neck by twisting until the veins appear; then take the instrument which is called "digging tool", of which this is the form:
and place the tip on the vein, and press down with your hand, or with something else, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you wish; then loosen the patient's neck, and tie the vein so that it is sealed, and sometimes the work is done with a wide flame.
However, it is not right that the flames be too sharp; and cut sideways, because the bone is near, and by chance the flame might break when it is thin.
The swelling of the two veins that are in the two temples helps the eyes, and with the sty, and with redness, and with the sore in the eye, and with diseases of the face;
and the quality of their swelling is that the patient strains his neck by twisting some ligament, as mentioned before;
then it swells, and the swelling should be across, a bit long of the flame and a bit wide, for there is no flesh. And if the flames are fine, they may break;
then let blood as much as you need, and then bind on cotton, and tie it well.
The swelling of the vein of the nose is good for water, and for strong decoctions, and for illnesses of the face, such as migraine and redness that comes in the face, especially when it is old;
and the quality of the swelling is that the patient tightens his neck, then pulls his nose with your left hand, and take the fine long flame, and insert it between the two nostrils in the space that is there, for the vein does not open well on its own, and the pus will now begin to flow;
and do not go too deep, and let blood according to your need, then leave it for a night, for it is restored very quickly;
The salve of two binders helps with the tightness of the collar, and at the beginning of mixing, and with many diseases, and with ringworm, and with corrosives, and with herpes, and warts;
and the quality of the salve is that the patient pulls his neck under one and the other, as we have said;
and let the master be standing on the head of the patient, and the patient sits on the chair, then apply the salve to the vein widely, then draw blood moderately, as much as is necessary;
then do the same on the other vein, then loosen the ligature, and moderately constrict the veins so that the patient does not strangle; and leave it until morning, when the wound should be healed.
of the swelling of the lips The swelling of the veins of the upper lips helps with phlegm in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and cracks in the lips, and from the nose and around.
And the quality of the bleeding is to sit the patient in front of you, and constrict his neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one of which is on the right lip and the other on the left, and they are recognized by their black color, and by the small black veins around them:
cut both of them, and if you do not recognize them and are in doubt, then cut the largest one on each side, and do the same for the two veins that are above and below, for it is the same method.
of the swelling under the tongue The swelling of the veins under the tongue helps after the swelling of the cephalic vein, and this is at the constriction of the throat, and for diseases of the eye, and for diseases of the mouth;
and the quality of the swelling is that the patient sits between your hands facing the sun, and lifts the tongue, and looks underneath on each side a black vein:
swell then one and the other, and do not go too deep, for underneath are the arteries.
The veins of the body that are commonly swollen are treated according to two methods:
either by pricking with an entire martian flask, or with subtle olive oil like cutting bodies, and it is called "anesil"; and they are wide and subtle according to the width and narrowness of the veins. The first form of the martian flame is much renowned, and it is wide as you see:
and it is necessary to open the full and closed veins filled with thick visible blood, which contain thick and murky blood; and this is the form of the olive oil flame:
and it is more finely pointed, and it is for healing the fine veins where there is fine citrine blood.
The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are below the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the abdomen;
and it is necessary for the surgeon to bleed wisely and to be careful of the artery that is below. and if he cuts the artery, and a flow of blood comes, then he must stop it, as I have said; and the flames should not be pricking but cutting like a file.
and if the basilica does not open clearly, you must extract it and change to another one; or if you want any vein of it, or you incise in its place the vein along the arm: it opens clearly; and the edge of the flame should be file-like, as we have said.
and if you wish to know the place of the incision, you must first extract the arm, touch the place until you feel the pulse; then mark the place of the joint, then bind the arm, and cut the vein from the flame inward; and be careful not to hit the artery when you see the place swollen, for it is from the artery: avoid it then.
And if you see it spurt up like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is the blood of the artery: hurry then, and press your finger on it for a long time, then remove your finger if the bleeding stops, which often happens; bind the arm, and leave it thus, and let the patient not move it;
and let it be under fear, and do not move it until it is healed.
And if the blood flow is not stopped, and it overwhelms you, and the medicine is not present, then cut the artery if it appears, for the head of the retractors; and stop the blood flow.
and take a bark of fig, and split it, and take one of the halves and bind it on well until the next day;
if the blood is stopped, it is good; if not, then treat it as we have said, with powders that stop blood;
and the bindings are not severe in many positions due to the small space of the wound, and the strength of the arm's joint.
The vein in the middle helps draw blood from the head above and from the body below, because it is composed of the basilic and the cephalic, as we have said;
and it is necessary for the surgeon to be careful of the nerve that is below, and if he pierces too deeply, and he hits the nerve, it swells and the patient's health becomes severe, and perhaps cannot heal;
and this nerve appears often, and if it does not appear in some people due to its subtlety, you must probe for it with the anesil instrument; and cleanse the nerve to your ability.
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, then cut it lengthwise.
The application of the cephalic helps, drawing blood from the head, and aids the eyes;
and it is necessary to apply it by pricking with olive oil flame or myrtle flame, for it is the safest of all veins, for there is neither nerve nor artery beneath it. Nevertheless, it is necessary to find the lightest spot, and it does not matter if one misses the first time, and one retries; and sometimes the area swells for some people when one misses the first time, but it does not matter.
The quality of the sanie is according to your thought.
The first thing you must know about medicine, is that medicine is not practiced merely to maintain health, and to avoid future illnesses;
and let the bleeding be done in one of the three veins that are in the arm; that is to know, cephalic, saphenous, and basilic; and one should bleed at the beginning of spring in January, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the sign of repletion appears;
and one should bleed on the first or third day, after two or three hours of the day.
The medicine that is administered to the illnesses has no determined time, but when there is need by day or night, at all hours and in every season;
and it is not appropriate to bleed children until 14 years, nor a woman carrying a fetus from the fourth month until the seventh. And one should not treat those who have passed sixty years.
And when someone wishes to be bled, in whatever manner, it is necessary that they purge the intestines with a mild enema if they have much retained feces, so that the veins do not draw from the intestines the harmful superfluities detrimental to the principal members;
nor should one bleed those who are overly satiated with food, nor those who are drunk until they recover, nor those who are dropsical;
and if one suffers from cleansing after colic pain, and vomiting, and diarrhea, and frequent intercourse with a woman, and work, of staying awake and fasting, and that which robs all strength, whether by weapon or body;
then refine the humors, if the blood is thick, through foods and drinks and medications, if you have the power;
then enter the bath, if nothing prevents it, to refine the blood, and let blood from the vein of the arm around the third, as we have said;
and guard yourself that day from work, and from piercing, and from lust, and from similar things;
and be bound and joyful, and let the leeches be higher than those whom one bleeds, and rub the arm two times or three, then bind the bandage above moderately, for when it is too tight or loose, blood cannot flow;
and then rub the area with your hands until the veins swell, and they can be felt;
then moisten the leeches with a little old oil, then place his finger of the left hand on that vein below the area where he wants to bleed, so the vein does not move when pricked.
For there are veins that flee like cords from the bleeder, and some are full of windiness, so when one places the flame upon them, they retract from the flame, and one cannot open the vein, and thus one is of those; and if he works the vein, the wound is too narrow, for this reason the surgeon must be cautious in these matters.
And if the vein is worked the first time, it is good; if not, then begin again a little below that place or above quickly, if the area is not swollen.
And if the area is swollen and the patient is frightened, leave it for one day or two, and do not loosen the arm: perchance hot abscesses may come;
do not enter the bath, then restart the surgery if it pleases you;
and if the opening is small, or the blood comes out subtly and you fear that not enough blood will come out as you wish, then cauterize that opening entirely with the flame directly;
and perform it somewhat hastily, so that the area becomes swollen; for this often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the area swollen, do not begin the bleeding again, and put on a bit of oil residue, for it lightens the body from blood, and in this place, the residue is milder than the oil;
and thus administer the oil residue in each bleeding that you bleed the veins to stop the flow of blood;
and this same thing makes a trilication and applies egg white when it is placed upon the site; so refine the sinew and split it when it is too thick.
And if there comes a large abscess, which often happens, especially when it is not sufficiently opened at the time when the vein's opening is small, then hurry and place on the site a sponge moistened in warm water and salt for a little while, and bind it for an hour;
and it is necessary that you do this after the blood has flowed from the vein, and if there remains any blackness or greenness at the site after some days, it does no harm; and if you wish, put on some substance of aloe or of myrrh mixed in juice of calamus, mastic, or similar.
And often an abscess and appearance occur in the swelling of the basilic vein:
put your hand on it, and if you find the spot soft to the pressure of the hand, then that appearance is malignant. Therefore, avoid putting on any of those things we have mentioned, for fear it might cut into the artery;
but make for it a dry poultice to harden the spot, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
And draw from each the blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and of the color of the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it flow until it is thinned; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it is necessary for those who are full and strong, and need bloodletting, that a larger wound be made, and the flames be wide;
and for those who are weak, do the opposite, and it is necessary to let blood less and more frequently, and it should be done by cutting across, not by piercing;
and this method of bloodletting is safe from bleeding and nerve damage, and is better than long or wide bloodletting.
And to those whose body is lacking at the healing, it is necessary to give moist bread in pomegranate juice; If it is heated, then bleed three or four times. And if it is of a cold temperament, then before the healing, eat moist bread in musk syrup, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and strongly scented syrup.
And if he faints from the bleeding, after the discharge of much blood, then it is necessary that he inhales a broth of meat and a subtle aromatic syrup, and uses the other things we have mentioned in the section or chapter on syncope for the evacuation of veins.
And if he wants to bleed one arm and bleed another time, then it is necessary, when he is weakened by great bleeding, that he bleeds a little at a time, according to the amount of his continuous strength.
And whoever wants to bleed one arm after the first bleeding, and he has a strong body, then he bleeds seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
And whoever wants to be bled from the other side, should be bled on the second day or the third.
For there is much blood within the body that is already heated, and it causes fever; so it is necessary to bleed a large quantity and widen the opening until it flows into the basin; then you should examine all the signs of healing, and place your hand on their pulse when they heal, so death does not come instead of health, and this happens often, when the healers are negligent;
and it is not appropriate when you want to release the arm and make blood come out a second time, and the wound is closed, that you press strongly on; nor if it is swollen, should he extend the arm hastily, for that would be harmful;
but leave it until it heals a second time; or you poke with the tip of the flame until the blood that is clotted in the wound comes out, and place on it a piece of cloth soaked in water, and press lightly on.
And if the vein is swollen, then leave it alone and do not constrict it until the abscess is calmed.
And if there is need to bleed for the second time, then bleed in that same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein inside the arm is bled instead of the vein of the head because it is composed that way.
And the method of the salve is that the patient puts his hand in hot water, until the foscile is red;
then it should be moderately bound, so that the vein appears well, then apply the salve across, not lengthwise or widthwise;
and let the opening be wide, and apply the salve close to the joint of the hand, and if nothing can come out, then put the hand back in hot water, and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough;
and if it is summer, do not put the hand in hot water, for it is used more in winter than in summer;
and the inflammation of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there is neither artery nor nerve.
The inflammation of the vein on the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is the method:
stretch out the hand, and put it in hot water until the vein is swollen, so that one can see it; and if the inflammation is across, and if you cut it completely through, it will cause no harm;
and do not go too deep, for the nerves are beneath entirely bare of flesh, and then put the hand back in hot water, if the blood is congealed in the wound, and cannot come out.
And when you have drawn as much blood as is necessary, put oil and seal on the vein to quickly close it, and do this for each cut.
The salve on the left hand is good for the disease of the spleen, and do everything as I have said for the right.
The salve of sophene is worth for all the diseases that are below the body, such as diseases of the marrow, and retention of flowers, and disease of the kidneys, and of the hips and old legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of its treatment is that the patient puts their foot in hot water, and rubs on the vein until it breaks, and binds over the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above it, many veins go up over the foot;
treat then at the widest vein, or at the ankle, whichever is better.
And if you treat it on the foot, beware of the nerves beneath, and treat it crosswise as in cutting;
and let the flame be mild.
And if the blood cannot come out, then put the foot in water, and let the vein fully empty.
and if the treatment fails the first time, start again a little higher the second time, for the place is salty;
do not doubt about the nerve, as we have said, and thus do with the splint of the other foot equally.
The area of the sciatic vein is at the ankle, and its bleeding relieves the pain in the hip when it is due to hot blood.
And the quality of its healing is that the patient enters the bath and tightens above the ankle four times by twisting, for otherwise the vein does not open;
and if it opens, then heal it in every way that you can, and by crossing; and it is worth moving so that you cut it, for the pain is slight, and it is very beneficial to many people.
and it is worth moving so that you cut it, for the pain is slight, and it is very beneficial to many people. And if you do not find it, then heal any vein that opens on the back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and beware of the nerves;
and let so much blood flow as you wish, and then loosen the tie, and put on cotton and bind it tight; she is now healed.
Leeches are made of horns, or of clay, or of glass;
and windiness is done according to two ways: or by beating and drawing blood, or without beating.
And this windiness which is without beating is according to two ways: or it is done with full fire, or without fire;
and windiness which is done by beating and extraction of blood is done in fourteen places of the body, of which one is at the very top of the head; and another is in the neck; and two others on both sides of the neck; and the suction under the chin; and the suction on both shoulders; and the suction on the buttocks; and the suction cups on both arms; and the suction cups on both legs; and the suction cups on both ankles;
and the ventosation does not draw any blood, for it acts on the small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and therefore does not weaken anyone, as is done with vein bleeding; and it should not be administered, neither in full heat nor partial heat, in any disease that comes from excess, until the whole body is emptied.
And if by necessity of diseases it is needed to cup, or for customs, then we perform it each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in between and at any time;
for there are those who, when they need to be cupped, have heavy head;
and there are those who find fullness and redness in their face, and in their head, and at the neck, and darkness before their eyes;
and there are those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongue, and spit blood; and there are those who dream and see blood and wounds and dead and similar things by night.
And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the middle of the month, we order it to be bled after three hours of the day.
The salve of hellebore helps with the dryness of the head… which affects the eyes, and it is not advisable to use this after the evacuation of all the body;
And this ventilation is in place of the salve of the cephalic, and it is not advisable for those with a cold disposition to use it, or those who have catarrh, for it does them great harm;
And for that reason, it is not advisable for the elderly to use it, nor those who have cold diseases in the head.
And those who often recover from it become forgetful, and for this reason, the cupping should be placed a bit lower due to the fear of forgetfulness.
Ventosation around the neck is in place of the salve for the head and the basilica, and for that reason, it is useful for constriction of the breast, and to split the channel of the nostril, and for all, and for fullness;
and there must be a little pressing, for if it holds too tightly, it engenders faintness or nausea in the stomach and heart.
Wind in the two ribs of the neck is good for headaches, and opthalmia and migraine, and strangulation, and pain at the roots of the teeth, and it is in the place of the sanies of the basilic;
and you must instruct the surgeon to press his hand when applying it, so that he does not cut the artery, and there are no flows of blood.
Wind beneath the chin is good for mouth diseases, and corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the place of the salves of the two lips.
Windings on the shoulders are good for diseases that come from heat and fullness.
The ventilation of the guts is worth as much as the three veins of the arm, for it draws blood from these large veins;
and instructs the surgeon not to incise too deeply, for the muscle is bare of flesh, and lies beneath nerves and arteries.
The cupping that is on the buttocks is worth for hemorrhoids of the anus, and for diseases beneath, and it is necessary that the cupping be large, and be of glass, so it can draw well; and by chance, if they were delicate, they would break; and I make great wounds.
The leg cupping treatments are very effective, for they draw blood from the entire body, and they are useful for old pains in the reins, and of the spleen, and of the bladder, and repeatedly alleviate the flows.
and they are placed at the sites of the two ankles, and the two heels, and over time they weaken the body with long use, and cause fainting in many conditions.
The method of applying the cupping is that you first place it empty, suck moderately, apply quickly, move evenly, and do not stop until you see the area turn red and swollen, and then release the blood's redness;
then apply force, and reset the cupping devices, and take care in the positioning of the body, for there are those who have so much flesh, and clearly poor: so it is necessary to strike only once, and it is necessary to make wide wounds, and one deep incision; and suck lightly.
And if the vein is large, then it is necessary to strike twice: the first time to refine the path of the thick blood.
And if the blood is very thick, then it is necessary to strike a third time;
and when we want to draw blood little by little, then we strike only once. And if we wish to let much blood, then we often reopen;
and if the blood is thick, then use a sharp instrument, and it is important that the veins be punctured suddenly, and it is necessary for those who have thick and hard skin, and who have narrow pores, that you anoint the places of the cupping with opening and dissolving oil: if it is in this state, of violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or cucumber seed oil;
and if it is in ivory, of watercress oil, or lily, or chamomile, or other similar oils.
And if the excess is thick and cold, then take oil of marjoram, or of balsamite, or oil of aniseed, and similar things.
And if the one to be treated has tender flesh and large pores, then no oil should be applied, but it is necessary to wash after ventosation with rose water, or cold water, or water of black nightshade, or water of cucumber, or water of porcelain, or other similar.
And for those who have much moisture, it is lifted with oil of ash, or water of myrtle, and of sumac, and similar things.
And those who have large excesses rise from old wine, or from juice of succory, or from decoction of anise or chamomile, or from other similar things;
and it is not suitable to bleed with cupping before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath one hour or two;
and do not sleep after the cupping, and it is necessary that he sweats, when he should be cupped and when he has been cupped.
And beware if the one who is bleeding is choleric, and if the blood is too sharp and inflamed; it is necessary that he takes cold things, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuces with garlic, and similar things; and soft porridges, and castrated fowl meat, and moist foods.
and soft porridges, and castrated fowl meat, and moist foods. And he who has a cold temperament, let him take honey syrup, and moderately scented wine, which is between old and new, and soft foods, and soft porridges and small birds and pigeons;
and on the day he will be cupped, he should drink more than he eats;
and it is necessary to give some people at times treacle or nutmeg before cupping, or after, to strengthen the main limbs; and let the broth be refined, but it is not suitable for those who are hot to drink it.
The suction cups that are placed without striking are those that are placed upon the liver, and upon the spleen, and gout, and upon the abdomen and the buttocks and the kidneys and the hip, for these limbs do not endure being struck upon them, and it is done only to draw blood from limb to limb, as we place upon the breasts when the child suckles;
to remove the viscosity which is in the limb, as we place suction cups upon the abdomen and upon the buttocks to reduce the limb;
and remove the pain when there is an obstruction or stone, so by its attractive power it may possibly remove the obstruction, or dislodge the stone from its place;
and thus it does when placed upon the liver and upon the spleen when there is retained wind, and these cupping vessels are administered empty to suck solely; and sometimes are administered together fire, and sometimes filled with hot water, as in diseases of pleurisy, and in such a manner that one fills the cupping vessel with hot water alone, or with water in which suitable herbs have been boiled for this.
The form of the cupping administered with fire is as follows:
And it has two fingers in width and half a palm in depth, and it has on the side around the middle one small hole, as if to insert a needle, and it should be made of brass, smooth so that it does not injure the patient when placed on the limb;
and have in the middle a crossbar of brass or iron, to hold a torch tightly, and let them be both large and small according to the illnesses and age of those who use them;
for the suction cups for children are different from those for the elderly, and for the thin different from those for the fat.
And one should place this suction cup on the limb in this way:
take the wax torch or the linen strip, and place it inside the suction cup across the bar that is inside the suction cup, so that the flame is at the bottom of the suction cup so it does not burn the patient;
and then place it on the limb, and your fingers should be on the opening we mentioned, so that when you want to, the vapor escapes, and you remove the suction cup;
and imprint the liniment as before, and repeat it often, if you need to.
In the cupping which is administered for a disease of pleurisy, to all water, there is no vein or pore, and it is not administered except when it is full of water, and is placed on the limb only briefly;
and this is the form:
Blistering is only administered in areas where cupping cannot be applied due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar places; and on areas bare of flesh, such as toes or nails, and other similar places;
and the quality of the use is such that when you find veins that are in clear sweet waters without putrefaction, then take them;
and place one nut in sweet water, until they become familiar, and have nothing in their bellies; and then let it be bled with a vein and a cupping glass, then rub the limb until it is red, and place on the veins;
and when they are full and fall out, if it is a place where you can apply a cupping glass, then apply it, for it helps greatly afterward.
If not, then clean the area with ash, and then with water, very well, and then stamp it;
and if the wound is too far from the body of the veins, then moisten the linen cloth in cold water, and place it on, until the blood is stopped;
and if the blood is multiplied, then place vitriol powder or gall, and similar things, until it is stopped;
or you put on the place half of peeled beans, and leave them until they burn at the site, it will stop now;
and if you need more, then take other veins.
and if the veins do not want to be taken, then rub the place with fresh blood, or you stick a needle until blood comes out, and then put them on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will burn;
And when you see that they fall, sprinkle on a pot of aloes and crushed charcoal, or ash, so they will now fall.
Here begins the book of fractures This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Know, dear son, that the foolish physicians discard this chapter, which they have never seen in any of the ancient books, nor read a letter of it.
and for this reason, the knowledge is rare in our land, for I have never found any good one;
and I know nothing of it except through the knowledge of ancient books, which I have studied so much that I have treated the subject with knowledge, and by experience, and by the habit of my life;
and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained, and have summarized at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are mentioned, as I have done in these two previous chapters.
It is therefore necessary that we say in the prologue of this book the summaries of the words and the chapters where the wise place their understanding, and remain on the truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when a fracture or dislocation or torsion or contusion comes to anyone, you must hurry to treat the patient on one side and the other, if nothing else prevents it, such as weakness of body, or fainting, or old age; or if the weather is not very hot, or too cold;
and eat cold foods, that is to say cold broths, and meat of chicken and veal, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not overload yourself with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you have no fear of a hot abscess, or the spreading of matter in the limb;
so the patient returns to his first government which he has used.
And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that one nourishes the patient with foods that promote thick nourishment, where there is viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, and rice, and eggs, and meat, and cow's stomach, and poultry, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things. For with such nourishment the break mends and heals faster.
And know that the bones of old and frail people cannot be easily mended or united according to their nature due to the dryness of the limbs, nor can those which are too tender, such as the bones of small children;
but have no concern, place on the broken bone the thick tendons which hold and join the limb together, until it strengthens as it was before; and do not stop all of his work, and for that reason he must be nourished with hearty meats, as we have said.
And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot, or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all manner of fractures. For there are fractures that require elevation, and others in sharpening, such as the cutting of a quill for writing.
For there are fractures that require elevation, and others in sharpening, such as the cutting of a quill for writing. And there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture with a small裂痕。为了保持翻译的准确性，最后一部分“fendure”更准确地译为“fissure”或“split”，因此句子可以调整为：“And there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture with a small fissure.” 但是根据您的要求，我将提供一个直译版本。
And for each method have his ingenuity and proper instrument in the restoration, according to what the memory comes into place;
and the bone fracture is recognized by the fact that the limb is twisted, and it is clearly visible due to deficiency, and it sounds under pressure from the hand;
and when there is no twisting or sound upon touching, and the patient does not feel great pain, there is no fracture;
but it may well have twisting, or splitting, or small fractures. So you must not move it by hand, but apply medicines that come after here, and then hold it tightly now subtly.
And know that for fractures that go outward, and the two parts are separated, they must now be put evenly in place, although abscesses may come;
and if hot abscesses come, leave it for some days until the abscesses are calmed;
then set it equal to the motion that you can do lightly and wisely, and know that the restoration of this is lighter than the restorations of those in which there are pieces;
then bind it, as is appropriate afterwards.
And if the bone has broken pieces, then stretch it in two parts, if it is a hand or foot, or with your hand if it is a small limb, or with two ropes, or with one rope and your hand;
and set the limb according to its natural form, so that when the broken parts of the limb are separated, you reset all the fragments in their places as much as you can, and be careful that your work does not cause injury or pain to the patient;
and properly align the two ends of the bone according to the best methods.
and you can feel with your hand if it does not seem properly aligned:
raise it gracefully, and do not pull too tightly, nor press as those who cause a hot abscess and contraction in the limb through their work, as we have seen many times.
And when the limb is properly set, instruct the patient well that they do not move it, whether awake or asleep, or turning, or in any other way; and ensure that the limb is so secure that it feels no pain. For when he feels no pain, it is not complete, and it must be put into such a position that he feels no pain;
and ensure that the limb is so secure that it feels no pain. For when he feels no pain, it is not complete, and it must be put into such a position that he feels no pain; and take care that it is put straight, so no twisting comes when it is restored;
and the qualities of the broken limb are according to what I tell you.
Know that broken limbs are diverse in smallness and in largeness and in form.
For there are small limbs, such as arms and legs and the like: one must wrap cloths of soft and fine linen; and those that are large, such as thighs and shins:
one must wrap with a broad and hard binding, for the wide bindings embrace the entire large limb and constrain it equally on all sides, so there is no unevenness;
then bind around with light bandages, three turns or four according to the limb, and tighten your hand a bit on all the binding, then go above the fracture and tighten less, so that the fracture may spread slightly apart;
and soften the binding little by little, until you take a large part of the healthy area, then take another binding, and wrap around again over the fractured area;
then go back to the part below the fracture, and tighten moderately, not too strongly nor too loosely, as we have said in the first line above;
then place between the bindings threads of linen or cloths, until it is all even, then bind everything on top with a bandage, and then put your well-made splints on, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or an abscess, then place something soothing on the abscess that is warm and which reduces the swelling, and leave it this way for some days;
then stretch over your stakes, and let them be half a large cane in width set firmly, or of wood from which we make cleats, or palm ribs, and let them be according to this figure:
but it is necessary that the stake which one places on the break be a bit thicker and wider than the others;
and it should also be as long as is necessary for the member's smallness or largeness; then stretch over the stakes as you have done at the first place, then bind over a suitable thread, just as in the first place on the fracture; narrower below, then less;
and it is necessary that the threads be medium, neither too thick nor too thin, and they should be of soft flax;
for if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the works of fools who make their ligatures from twisted linen cords, and it is great error, for the ligature cannot be even if it is too fine, and it should not have less than a grain's space between each needle.
And if the patient is injured by the heads of the arrows after they are embedded in their flesh, place beneath them tow of flax, or shredded wool, so that it does not harm.
When the wound is with the splinter, and the skin is broken, I will speak of the treatment hereafter.
And know that it is not right to extract arrows from all broken limbs on the first day. For when the limb is large, it is not necessary to place strong stitches that after five days or seven, or more according to your certainty of a hot abscess coming.
and see here the method of ancient plasters to restore fracture, dislocation, and twist:
and it is that you take the flour that clings to the mill walls, and mix it with plenty of egg, and apply this mixture, not too thin nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common method of the plaster restoring the fracture in various conditions, especially for women and small children, for it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Another method of plaster restoring the fracture and the dislocation and the twist: take З pounds of balsam and labdanum and alum and asafetida and gum arabic and myrrh, in total X З. mirtle and aloe, each half an ounce; alochil nine halves; and make it into powder, and mix it with egg white; if the person's complexion is hot, then use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and quickly restores broken bones, and is beneficial to many people.
Another kind of plaster that is good for sprains: take myrtle and vervain, each ten halves; mirtle and aloe, each nine halves; accident VI Z.; Bole armeniac X З., and grind well, and cook with water or egg white, and administer it.
Another way of plaster for joints and bones dislocated from their places, and to ease the ensuing pain, and for bone fractures and breaks: take new wool, and boil it in oil, and apply it to the area.
These plasters do not heal, but they are good for soothing a hot abscess and properly removing pains.
Another way of plaster that restores broken bones: take dried fig leaves and ground ivy leaves, and grind them together, and make a plaster.
Another manner of plaster for the restoration of bone fractures and to reduce the remaining abscess. Take root of malva, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of wych elm, one part of each;
and grind, and mix with wine, and if the limb is heated, mix it with moist coriander water, or with water, and use it.
Another way of making a stronger plaster than the first, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the limb. Take roots of malva, and flaxseed, balustrum, melilot, and figwort, and flowers of violets and chamomile, one part of each; and grind, and mix with salt water, or fresh water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its condition.
Hippocrates says in his book that one should not place on the broken limb to restore strength anything but a salve made of wax and oil, and nothing else more, and he says it should be between two neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems Galen thinks one should place on the broken limb, to restore, things somewhat dry and warm, such as myrrh and aloe and frankincense and similar things, as we have said.
Another method for a plaster that is good for injuries and pain: Take mutton fat and human nails cut off, or bird feathers, and mallows, and salt equally, and grind them, and make a plaster and lay it on.
And then loosen it a little after, and take care if the patient does not feel any pain, nor has the bone moved from its place; do not loosen it for several days. And if pain comes to the place, or itching, without rest or swelling, then hurry, and loosen it, and remove the plaster now;
and take a light cloth, and moist sea sponge, and soak it in water, and cleanse the area until the itching stops, and the pain is soothed; then let the limb rest for an hour, then apply dry wool soaked in water or rose oil, and bind it tightly until you are sure of a warm abscess;
and rest the inflammation of the limb, and remove the pain, then begin a gentle binding, and apply a poultice, and do not bind it as tightly as before; and treat gently until he is healed.
And if you see that the abscess is hot and red and painful and swelling has entirely been removed, and you need plaster and bandaging, then restart it as you did first equally.
and if none of what we have said applies to the limb, do not loosen it until after three days or four or five or seven; and sometimes leave it for twenty days, according to what is seen, until the fracture heals, and the flesh grows over the alignment;
then he restrains it more than before, and swells his flesh, as I have said before;
and if you see the area dry more than necessary, know that no growth can come; apply then warm water, every time you release it, and this should be done every third day, and slightly remove the dressing;
by this work then the growth returns to the limb, and quickly amends what the foolish doctors do, who restore the limb incorrectly:
it is harmful, and the work is fearful, and I see nothing else but to leave it alone and treat it properly.
Many kinds of fractures are there, and diverse shapes, and the causes are distinct;
for there are fractures that are caused by the impact of a sword, and the collarbone removes all the bone down to the surface which is beneath the bone, just as an axe does to wood; and for that reason, this kind of fracture is called "hatchet wound.
when the sword cuts the bone from above without piercing, and this kind of fracture is called "absolute";
and the wounds from these two fractures are large or small.
And if there is an embedded impact, or a split from the edge of a stone, or from falling on a stone, or from other similar causes.
And if there is a penetrating fracture, which approaches up to the tissue that is under the bone, or on top of the bone, and this wound is either large or small.
and there is a wound that penetrates the bone as fine as a hair, and the split is small, and for that reason, this fracture is called "hairline";
and if the wound that is made by striking a stone, or by falling, or by similar things, and makes the piece of the bone go inwards, and the joint is twisted as do the blacksmiths when they strike on the cauldrons; and the stone enters inside.
And this happens more to those who have moist bones in their head, such as a child's head;
and it happens in all these manners of fracture that small pieces are separated as stars; and I will speak of it in its place.
And we know all kinds of fractures by the incision on them, and by probing attempts, and by the corrupted flesh that is on them.
The hairline fracture is known by this, that when the bone is exposed and rubbed upon, the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of the fracture, be wary of the patient's accidents, and if you see any bad signs, such as vomiting bile, loss of consciousness, stiffness, fainting, fever ague, and eyes protruding and reddening, and other similar symptoms in various conditions, then it cannot heal without doubt.
And if you do not see any astonishing accidents, and you hope for recovery, then begin the treatment.
And when the wounded comes to you first, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day at least that you can.
And if it is in summer, then you must hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, lest the tissue under the bone be corrupted, and the accidents that we have mentioned come.
and if the bone fracture extends to the membrane that covers the brain, then you must split the fractured part thus:
and it is that you take the head of the wounded patient, and uncover on the bone in all ways that you can, and on the surface of the wound more than you can, and if bleeding comes from uncovering the bone, or an abscess hot, aid with what is necessary, and it is that you fill the place with cloths soaked in rose oil; and let the wound rest until the hot abscess is calmed, and be sure of the bleeding; then begin to remove around the bone, and it is done according to two methods of work:
one method is that you cut with a narrow incision in front, and this is the form:
And then he makes another cut larger than the first one.
And the second method is that you have a number of various cuts, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed, and they are made of iron;
and work lightly, so you do not bruise the head.
And if the bone is hard and strong, then you must pierce around it, otherwise you administer cuts with probes, not fully piercing through the skull bone, and the tip should have a margin or a circle that prevents the point from going through the bone;
and you must have several, so that each comes into its place according to the thickness of the bone, so that you have probes for all skulls;
and these are the forms of the three types of tarers:
and the quality to pierce around the broken bone is that you place one tarer on the bone, and turn with your hands until you know that the bone is pierced;
then place the tarer in another part a little afterward, and thus do all around, then cut with the incisors the space of the bone which is between the holes, and do this more subtly than you can, and gently, as we have said, until you draw out the bone by hand, or with any of the instruments that you have such as forceps, pincers;
and be careful not to touch the brain or the surface.
And when you have pierced the bone and pulled it out, then you must remove the residue that remains in the bone with another instrument similar to an incisor, but it must be more slender and finer than other incisors;
and if any of the small bones or scales remain, then remove them lightly with the instruments; then clean the wound with lint and ointments that we have mentioned.
And another method of practice is the one that Galen said, which is more thorough; and he praises it greatly, and this is his word. You must first uncover a part of the bone where the fracture appears displaced, so that once you have uncovered this part, you will place under the head of this lens-shaped incisor, of which this is the form:
And do not cut from one side, and the part is split on two sides, so that the cutting is towards the bone;
then strike with a small mallet so that you lightly cut around the bone entirely, and be careful of the cloth that is beneath;
if it is adhered to the bone, remove it lightly, for it can be removed without harm and without fear.
And if the bone fracture does not penetrate to the membrane, and the bone is cut only on top, and there are small pieces, then you must restore that roughness, and remove the scales with a fine scraper of which you should have various sizes, to apply in each place most suitably, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
And scrape first with large scrapers, and then with finer ones, and do not stop doing this until it is smooth.
In each of the other haircuts and subtle fractures, you must administer treatment according to its direction;
and this is something that is not unknown to one who has devoted their study to this art.
And if the surface is exposed, then you must take a piece of linen, according to the size of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and place it on the wound; then take another piece of linen doubled in two or three, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first piece of linen; and do this as gently as you can so that you do not burden the surface, then apply another layer on top, and do not bind it too tightly but only enough for it to cover the wound;
and leave it like this for one or two days until the hot abscess is calmed, then untie it, and apply medications such as lily roots, and powdered beans, and frankincense powder, and aristolochia, and similar things;
and of these things make powder, and put on the wound, and immediately administer cleansing medicines without biting;
and ensure that the wound is immediately clean, do not leave any ointment, nor allow scabs to form, for when scabs form on the membrane of the brain, they can corrupt and harm it, causing great mischief to the patient;
for when you put something biting on the surface, it burns above. Take care then, if any bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without a doubt.
And if blackening does not come except from the medicine that you have put on, which has such power, then you should take one part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and glue one bandage, and put it on the surface; then treat it with appropriate treatments until it is healed.
Know that sometimes both parts of the nose above are broken, or one by itself, for there are two bones;
and the one below is cartilaginous, and does not break, so it does not cause to sink in or twist, and then it heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, then you should put your little finger into the nostril hole, and place that break inside with your index finger, and push it back by force, until the nose returns to its natural form; and do this gently, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
And if the break is on the upper part of the nose, and your fingers cannot reach the place, then you must put it equal at the head of a rod a bit thick.
And if the break is in two parts, do likewise, and hasten to restore on the first day, if you can;
and if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the hot abscess is calmed, then place at the head of the nail strips of linen cloth, if the break is in one part.
Place one other on the other side, if the break is there; and let the strips be so thick that they fill the gaps of the nail.
And some say that one should moisten the threads with butter and change them each day. It does not seem right to me, but they should be moistened in a mixture of egg white and mill powder; then leave the tent until the bone is hard, and the cartilage is hardened.
And sometimes one puts goose feathers in place of tents, and wraps a covering around it, and the breaker holds it, and the patient blows through; or do what you wish.
And if hot abscesses come to the neck while you are working there, then put a poultice or cotton moistened in rose oil, or in a vial of diachylon.
And if hot abscesses do not come, then apply a plaster made by mixing flaxseed flour and frankincense powder with egg white, then put light bandages on top, and do not bind the neck;
and if the neck fracture is small and it is broken into small pieces, then extract it with appropriate instruments, then sew up the tear, and treat it with things that heal flesh and promote healing, such as plasters and suitable ointments;
and if there is no wound inside the nose, then treat it with tents, and put in rushes of pine until it is healed.
When the jaw is fractured below, and there is no open wound, and the fracture is only superficial, and it is not broken into two, but rather indented inward, then it is recognized as slight.
It is necessary, if the break is in the right part, that you put your index finger in the mouth of the patient; and if the break is in the left jaw, then put your index finger of the right hand, and push the break inside gently, and tighten it with the other hand by force, and make it equal.
And if the fracture of the jaw is separated into two, then you must administer extension from two parts until they are aligned.
And if movement of the teeth occurs or a tear, then extract them with a gold, silver, or silk thread, then put on the broken jaw a cerate, and place a double cloth over it; and put on the cloth a large well-made needle, or a piece of leather equal, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it up as high as you can at the cheek, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
and if you see that the face changes, then untie it on the third day, and then reset what has changed; and put a poultice on, of the mill powder with egg white or sesame flour, after you have removed the plaster;
and put on the poultice a light wool, and if the poultices dry out and the condition of the patient does not change, leave it until he is healed; many times is healed in three weeks.
And if hot abscesses come, then administer what we have said many times.
And if there is a break and wound together, bind if no piece of the bone has been removed; so delicately remove the fragments with suitable instruments for this.
And if the wound is narrow, then widen it with fire according to your necessity.
And when you have removed all these pieces, and none remain, sew the wound if it is wide, and apply appropriate poultices to it to promote flesh growth until it heals.
The forearm breaks often in front, towards the shoulder, and the break is according to three manners:
or it is broken and separated into two, and there are fragments, and it is the easiest to restore;
or there is a break with a wound.
And the work is when the break is without a wound, that you have two assistants, so that one holds the shoulder where the forearm is broken; and the other extends the neck towards the part;
then place the fracture evenly in your hands, so that the form is as it should be, and there is no appearance or misalignment.
And if you need to stretch further, place under the patient's shoulder a round ball of cloth, or wool, and let it be large according to your necessity; and stretch and lift the arm, and hold the ball in your hand, so that you set the fracture evenly as it should be.
And if you cannot pull the head of the shoulder back into place due to it being stuck, then the patient must lie frequently on his side, and put a medium pillow under the shoulder, and the assistant pushes the shoulder down until the bone of the shoulder is raised.
and then align the fracture with your hands, and if you find it shattered, you must split it open;
and draw out the fragments gently, and if the bone cannot join due to some obstruction, then cut it with one of the incisors that you have; but place under the forceps this instrument, to protect the surface:
and it resembles a spoon, and is not closed, and should be as wide as necessary, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work;
and let it have two ends, as you see, and let one be wide, and the other narrow, as is the tear of the wound that you made when you drew out the bones;
and when you are sure of a hot abscess, cut the wound open, and if the tear is small, or if you doubt it is a hot abscess, then apply cloths and bandages to the wound according to its size.
And if hot abscesses come, moisten the cloth with rose oil and ash and wine, and apply on.
The compression of the bone, when it is without wounds and without cutting, is that you place on the bone the plaster of the powder from the mill and egg white, and put light bandages on top, and place a sphere under the splint, if you need one; then take a very wide bandage of a palm in width, then put the doubled cloth on top of the bandages, and the plaster; then take a narrow strip of three digits wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage, so that the ends of the bandage are hanging; and place the strip on the fracture, and wrap the bandage around the neck, and under the healthy splint, and under the diseased splint; and the reset of each part, and when you see that the plaster holds the fracture properly, and you clearly see that the needle does not move over the broken bone, reward it each day, and when the bindings loosen, restrain it;
and make the patient lie on his back, and put a small pillow under the mattress when he sleeps, to raise the shoulder up; thus lighten the fracture of the forearm by lowering the shoulder, or you tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it unless bad accidents occur, until twenty days;
then restart the plaster, if you see that it is needed, and bind it tightly and leave it so until it is restored;
and it is restored in more than twenty-eight days, and in less for some men.
of the break of the shoulder
It often happens that the shoulder is broken at its broad part or not in the middle, and one does not know it except by touching it;
so set it according to the shape of the break, and reset it according to its natural form, in every way that you can;
then apply flour from the mill with an egg white and light bandages, and place a double cloth over it; then place a wide and thin splint slightly wider than the shoulder, and if beneath the splint there are gaps in any part of the shoulder, use flax bandages to fill those gaps so that the splint lies evenly;
and then it is bound with a large bandage firmly, so that the splinter does not move from its place, and the binding is checked each day;
and every time it softens, it is bound, and the splinter is placed back in its proper place if it has moved, and the patient lies on their side;
and the shoulder is restored in twenty days or twenty-five.
And when this number is completed, then untie it, and be sure, for it is not bone that moves easily out of place.
And if a piece of the bone sticks out and points under the heart, cut above it, remove the bone, and do what we have said in the fracture of the collarbone to appease the abscess heat.
of the breast fracture
The bone is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; but it often breaks from weakness.
And when it is broken in the middle, it hangs down below, and the patient feels great pain, and lacks strength, and coughs, and perhaps vomits blood, and the fracture site in the bone becomes apparent, and it can be well felt.
And the restoration is such that the patient lies on his back, and you place a cushion between his shoulders, then press the shoulders, and align the ribs from both sides with your hands, and delicacy in placing equally in all manners as you can, until the figure of the bone is as it should be;
then place poultices and pads over the stake made subtly of salt, or another light wood, and wrap it in a cloth, and lay it on the broken bone so that it does not move; and turn the bandage around the back, and bind it moderately, and loosen the bandage every hour, and if it becomes loose, then bind it again;
and if it needs to be untied because of corrosion or itching that comes to the place, or pain or abscess, then hurry, and untie it, and remove the plaster, and address what has come in ways of treatments;
then reapply the plaster, and keep it tight until it heals.
Of the breaking of the ribs
Know that the breaking of the ribs occurs only in their thick parts behind the back, and at the head inward, and they do not bend except because they are slippery; and one can feel it well upon examination with the hands.
And the restoration is that you set the break evenly, as it should be. And then apply the plaster, and bind it with a splint, if you need to.
And if the breaking of the ribs is leaning inward, then the patient feels great pain and pricking, like from pleurisy, for the bone pricks the membrane; and alembic with points, and soon it vomits great spitting of blood, and this is from severe illness, and the old ones have put much ingenuity into it.
And there are some who say that one must administer foods that swell the belly, to push the stone downward.
We do not wish for hot abscesses to occur if they have not already appeared. And if it has occurred, then we heal it.
And some say that we put cupping glasses on the place to bleed thoroughly, and this seems reasonable; nevertheless, there is doubt that the cupping may not draw the excess to the spot due to the condition of weakness.
And some say that we should cover the area with wool soaked in hot oil, and place pads between the ribs to distribute the heat evenly, then treat it with the treatment for pleurisy, with food and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear from the bone piercing the tissue, and there is doubt for the patient, then it is necessary to cut over the spot of the broken rib, and it is necessary to place an instrument underneath to protect the surface;
and then one must cut the bone, and pull lightly, and then sew the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and treat it with plasters until it heals.
And if hot abscesses come, then put on cloths soaked in rose oil, and apply to the area;
and treat the area as appropriate for an abscess, and let the patient lie on their side where it is needed until they are healed.
and likewise for the spine of the back.
And when this happens to anyone, and you wish to know if they will be healed or not, then take note if you see his hands softened and swollen and numb, and cannot move or stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, he does not feel it.
Know that it is mortal in many conditions, and if they move and feel well when they are squeezed and pricked, know that the bone joint is saved, and that the patient will be cured if care is applied.
And if similar things happen to the spine of the back, and you wish to know if he will be healed or not, then beware if the feet are softened, and if the signs are present which are in the hands, and on the back there is flatulence and involuntary emission;
And when it is treated on his stomach, there is involuntary emission. And when he is lying on his back and wants to saddle up, he cannot. Know that it is mortal: do not labor too much in his care.
And if this accident does not come to him, then the condition is lighter.
And the treatment is that you bleed it if there is a hot abscess, then put on the spine rose oil or egg yolk oil until it is calmed;
then place one of the comforting and drying plasters on it and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on the part where he feels the pain until he is healed.
And if any bone becomes disjointed, it is necessary to cut on the joint; and remove the bone, then sew together the two edges of the wound if it is large, then treat it with an ointment to promote healing until he is healed;
and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the skull," put your pouched hand (left), and make it equal to the other hand as much as possible, then apply the plaster and the splint on top if needed;
then he binds it, and if there is loose bone, he cuts into it, removes it, and treats the wound until it is healed.
of the break of the bone of the hip
It rarely happens that the hip bone is broken, and if it does happen, there is only a slight reduction at the top; and it extends downward, inclines outward, and causes pain, swelling, and bruising at the site of the break for the patient.
And the restoration is that you place your hand on it, until you are above the fracture; and understand what the nature and shape of the fracture are;
And if the fracture is only at the head, then set equal this fracture, until it has a natural shape.
And if the break is downward, or it tilts inward, then make the patient lie on his stomach until the restoration of this break is aligned for you. And when you have set it equal, then apply the plaster, then place a wooden or horn splint on top, and bind the fracture so that it does not move;
and fill the area below the ribs until the level is equalized. And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side, or on their back.
And if hot abscesses come, do not touch them until the hot abscesses are calmed, and apply what we have said before; and then return to the restoration, and bind it as appropriate, if there is no harmful accident;
of the shoulder fracture
The shoulder joint is what is between the arm and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, it should be restored according to one of the two methods:
one of which is that you take a stick of medium thickness, according to this form:
And tie the two ends with two bindings, and pull them upwards, and seat the patient on a chair;
then lay the broken arm on the stick until it reaches the shoulder, and have in the middle a wooden cradle, then pull upwards on some weight or let the servant stretch it down;
Then the physician places the splint equal to his hands together, until the splint returns as it should.
And the other method is that the patient is placed on his back, and his hand is tied to his neck, then command two assistants, one to hold what is above the splint with both hands, and the other to hold below all the way to the joint, and each stretches their part.
And if you see that the extraction should be stronger, then hold the limb below the fracture and above the fracture, and extend each of the assistants to their side.
And if the splint is close to the shoulder head, then you must place one strap in the middle under the armpit, and the other towards the side, under the splint;
and likewise if the splint is towards the side, then you must place the strap lightly, without effort, until the splint is even on the spot and on the side;
then place the fracture evenly as it should be, and bind it, if no warm abscesses come.
And if warm abscesses come, then do not bind it for seven days, and place wool soaked in wine and rose oil on it until the warm abscesses are calmed;
then you compress it, and the method of compressing is that you put the plaster on the fracture, then bring the arm to the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the chest;
and apply the bandage, and compress it on the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm is in its proper place, unless something prevents it, or if the bone has not moved.
And if you fear that the bone may move, then use splints, and place on the fracture a splint wider and stronger than the others, and have an inch of space between each splint, and let each splint be so large that it extends three inches beyond the fracture on each side;
Then cut into the stones, as I have said at the beginning of the chapter on fractures, more strongly and less distantly.
And if you see the setting of the stones and the binding, as we have said, at the time when you restore the broken limb, and you fear an abscess is hot, then leave it to bind until the seventh day, as we have said;
then examine the bandage every three days to ensure that itching or swelling does not occur at the site, or that nourishment cannot reach the limb because it is too tight. If it adjusts, as we have said.
And if no such accidents occur, then do not untie it until after three days or more, and have the patient sleep on his back, with his hands on his stomach;
and put under the shoulder a cushion full of wool evenly, and look at each hour of the day or night, that the shape of the broken limb does not move, or the ligaments do not soften;
and direct it through the power of medicine, and give it the meat that we have mentioned before, in such a manner that the meat be at first subtle; and when it begins to recover, let it be coarse.
And it is customary that the shoulder and the leg should be completely recovered in forty days; and then one should untie it and administer baths and medicinal ointments to properly direct the area.
And if the constriction is tight and embedded, it remains to untie for one day or two months.
of the breaking of the arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the two "fo-scile", of which one is small, and it is the one that follows the pocket;
and the other is large, and it is the one that is below, towards the small finger;
perhaps only the large fo-scile is broken, or the small one, and perhaps both together.
When the small fo-scile is broken, the restoration is light, and the healing;
and when the large one is broken, the healing is bad, and more grievous than when they are broken together.
If it is the small fragment that is merely broken, then it must be slightly extended gently, and made even.
And if it is the large fo-scile, then it must be bound more tightly;
and extend him on the cushion, and hold the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and the small fingers lower than the other fingers, and let the patient be crossed over himself, and the cushion in front of him higher, so that the patient does not suffer any strain;
then extend the minister's arm below to his hand, or to the joint, and another minister above.
And then the physician makes it even, according to its best form.
And if in the break there are pieces, then place each in its place, and if any detached piece pricks the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then cut above it and remove it, as we have said before.
And if with the instrument for wounds, I have spoken of it in a specific chapter; then take care of it.
And if at the beginning of the healing process hot abscesses occur, then apply a cloth with ointment made of rose oil and white wax, which should not be too hard or too soft; and tie the cloth carefully above it until the heated abscess is calmed.
and then remove the plaster, and apply a poultice of mill powder with egg white, then place the splints, and let the splint at the fracture be stronger, and a little wider than the others;
and know that there should be six splints on the arm in various arrangements: whether the fracture is in one of the bones, or in two;
and bind tighter over the fracture than elsewhere, and always less tightly as you move away, just as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the bandages that are on the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard nor rough;
and let the bandages that are on the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard nor rough; and let the thread, with which it is sewn, be of flax, not too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
And reward the member and the joint after some days. And if any bad accidents come to the member, such as itching that comes to the member, then you must rinse the member with warm water, until the itchings are calmed;
and let the member rest without being too tight.
And then begin the binding again, and if the joint is softened and the bones separated, and similar things, then address it.
And take care if the nourishments cannot reach the member because it is too tight, then you must soften it a bit, and leave it this way for some days, until the nourishments flow, and then bind it tightly.
And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, then do not release him until twenty days.
or wrap around, then he can place his hands on his neck, and let his necks be equal, and beware of movement and shaking, and sleep on his back;
and know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or in thirty-five, and by chance in twenty days, according to the compositions and the complexities of the virtues.
Of the break of the hand
Know that on the back of the hand and the joints of the fingers there are few fractures, and they do not come except with much bending many times.
And when the palm of the hand is broken or bent, it is necessary that the patient sit crossed, and sits straight in front of him evenly;
then place his hand on the stretched cloth, and the assistant extends the broken bones, and the doctor aligns them equally until they are well joined;
and apply the plaster and bandages, if no abscesses form, then place a splint according to the size of the area; and be wrapped in a linen cloth.
And if the break is on the outside around the belly of the foot, make a sphere of cloths, and instruct the patient to hold it tight against their broken foot; and then bind it with a long cloth, and let the splint be as large as the palm of the hand, and bind it tightly as is appropriate.
And if the fracture is on the top, you must place a splint on top and another underneath in the sole, so that the hand is open and straight, then bind it all around the hand, and stop the binding between the fingers.
And if the break comes to any of the joints of the fingers, if it is swollen, then set it straight as appropriate; and bind it with the palm, and if you wish, put a small straight splint to elevate the break, and do not move it;
and if the fracture is on the other fingers, such as in the index or one of the others, make it even, and bind it with the healthy finger that follows; or you bind them all together in one hold, which is better, or you put on a splint, as in a pouched;
and take care in the restoration and in the treatment of a hot abscess, and support those who come to it, as I have said.
The bone of the thigh is often broken, and it is well seen when it turns forward and backward;
and the restoration is such that one binds the limb above the fracture and the other below. And the patient lies on his face, then each minister extends his limb equally on his side;
and this is when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
And if the break is near the root of the thigh, then one of the bandages should be towards the hip, and the other bandage below the break.
And also if it is near the knee, then the band should be near the knee, and the extension should be downward;
then the physician places the bone straight with his two hands, until it is according to its natural form, and then he applies the plaster, and binds it, if no abscess comes.
And if there is a hot abscess, let it subside, then return to your work and your treatment; The book is made in such a manner.
You must wrap over the fracture with a thick bandage doubled in two or three layers, and leave the excess, then bend the leg so that the heel comes to the root of the knee, and put one long thread between the thigh and the leg, below the knee joint, and let the end of the thread come above;
then wrap the bandage over the leg and thigh, then place splints on the fracture, and put a splint on the bone of the leg;
then fill the space between the leg and thigh with soft cloths to make the pressure even, then begin to tightly bind three or four turns over the fracture; and when you go higher up on the fracture, it holds less tightly;
then tighten the two threads that you have put between the leg and the thigh, and tie three knots that are above, then go down along the head of the thread until you come near the foot;
and hold it tightly so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, provided that no abscess or swelling or similar occurs. And if it does occur, then untie it, and address what happens, as we have said many times;
and if there are pieces of the bone that bother, they must be removed, if one can; and if one cannot, then it is necessary to split the place, and draw force; and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
And sometimes the thigh is broken in such a way that one must insert splints, as in the shoulder and arm;
nevertheless, in such restoration, the patient does not limp.
And know that the thigh is restored in 50 days, or a little less or a little more, according to the differences of temperaments.
Know that in the joint of the knee there is little breakage, but it bends many times.
And if it breaks, it is merely a crack or a perforation, and it happens in open wounds and without visible wounds, and this is well felt.
And the restoration is such that one places equal weight on what is round at its ends, until it is assembled as much as can be moved;
then apply the plaster, and place a round splint if you need it, and bind it as appropriate, then treat all the conditions as we have said in other fractures, such as hot abscesses and similar ones; so apply to each condition what is necessary until he is healed.
of the break of the leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is properly called "tibia", and the other is called "fibula";
and all types of fractures occur as they do in the arm, and therefore the restoration is the same as that of the arm, and the treatment is entirely similar. And if both bones are fractured together, then the leg turns in all directions.
And if the thin bone is broken, it turns forward.
And if the large bone is fractured, then one feels great pain, and it is clearly visible; and it turns inward.
Then apply extension, and make it equal, and bind the splints equally;
but nonetheless, if the fracture is bad and there are many pieces, the extension should be lesser and lighter; and lighten it according to your skill.
And when you have completed your work, take two splints that span the leg on both sides, and let them be the length of the leg from the knee down;
then wrap one bandage over and under them twice, and tie it in the middle as well, so that at this binding the leg cannot turn to the right or left, and thus it is proper;
and some administer the splint of the long leg, and if it is wood, the leg is placed there to prevent movement, and this is properly done in the fracture where there is a wound;
and move the leg each day to see if there is an abscess hot or other accident; treat it until it is healed.
of the fracture of the leg bones
At the ankle there is no fracture, but in the bones of the foot sometimes a fracture occurs and slightly in the toes, and there is force that breaks in many positions.
And if the bones of the foot are fractured and you see these bones protruding over each other, then place the patient's foot on the ground as if they were about to walk, and then put your foot on top of theirs where the bones are raised, then press until they return to their places;
then put the plaster and bandages on, and place under the belly of the foot a small board two spans wide, then bind it to the foot appropriately, after you have wrapped cloths around, and other things you need.
And when three or four days have passed, then loosen the binding, for you will find the bones aligned, whether they are fractured or dislocated.
And if any of the toes are broken, then restore them, just as we have said for the fingers of the hand; then put a splint on the broken toe according to the length of the toe, and let it be a bit wider, then place under the foot that board I have mentioned, and bind it appropriately;
and if there are two or three, or more, broken, then put a splint on each toe according to its size, wrapped in one linen cloth, and bind the board under the foot; and being on top of the head of the table, expose the belly of the patient, so that it is well stained.
and you must not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, which we have mentioned; and consider each incident as it is appropriate.
of the fracture of the bone of the wrist
When the bone of the female genitalia is fractured, make her sit stretched out, then incline her towards the back part, and let her be held from behind;
then have the practitioner fill the female genitalia of the patient with cotton, and put as much as a thumb;
then stand the woman up, and lift her back little by little, and then the cotton comes out, until it reaches the entrance of the genitalia, and the bone returns with it;
and when she wishes to urinate, she removes the cotton, and after she has urinated, she puts it back, and thus does this for seven days or around: the fracture will be restored, and if you want, take a bag of partridges, and tie a cane to the opening, and insert the entire bag into the natural orifice; then blow into the cane forcefully, until the bag is inflated inside: nature will then return the fracture to its place;
then it should be filled with cotton, and leave it this way for several days until it is healed.
And when the bone of the wrist of a man or a woman is broken, restore it as we have said for the bone of the hip;
and these fractures are not hidden to those who apply their study and practice to them, and understand my book.
For the fractures indicate in various ways the right path of restoration: understand it then.
In the case of a broken penis, take a goose's throat and insert the penis into it; then wrap cloths around it, and leave it for three days or so, and it will be healed quickly.
of fracture with wound
It is necessary for one who has a fracture with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, that he be bled now, so that the bleedings we have mentioned testify to this.
And if the wound heals, then staunch it with vitriol, if you have nothing else, then continue to restore the broken area in that same hour, or on that day, if no warm abscesses come.
And if warm abscesses come, then delay the restoration until the ninth day, until the abscesses are calmed, and do not touch it on the third day or the fourth, for you would cause harmful accidents.
And if the broken bone is visible on the open chest, then you must set it lightly with your hands, with slight extension.
And if the extension is not suitable for you to hold equally in your hands, then reset it with this instrument which is made of iron, which has seven or eight inches in length, and the width is according to the size of the wound; and for this reason it is necessary for the physician to apply three or four, according to what he needs in each case of fracture;
and let it be round and a bit thick, so that it does not bend when compressed on the limb during your work, and let it be sharp at the front, and thick from the middle to the front, thus:
And it is called "pallet," which is why the curved head should be placed on the exposed bone; and push it in once, until it returns, and let them be equal to each other. And if the fracture is fine and the instruments cannot properly grasp the bone, then you must chop off the head of the bone until the instruments have power over it.
and if you cannot bring back the bone, as we have said, then cut it with an appropriate instrument, whether an incisor or saw, to your ability;
then scrape away what remains in the bone of roughness and small shards.
And when the bone is put back and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural place.
so do so until it is in its place, then moisten the bandage with black styptic wine, and clean if necessary. and do not put on the wound plaster or anything else that contains oil, lest it cause putrefaction and corruption;
then apply bandages when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cut the covering all around according to the size of the wound, and be careful that the wound is not constricted with the fracture;
and many times this has been done by foolish doctors, and they have caused death to the patient or sometimes corrosion; and let the bindings be softer and looser than other fractures.
and if the wound is bad or large, and you fear that adverse accidents may come, as we have said, and you find pain in the area, then it is not appropriate to apply hot stones. but wrap around, instead of hot stones, hard cloths, and bind them.
And when you see after one day or two the wound oozing at the incision, remove what you have put on of pure wine, and apply a healing salve to wounds, such as the tetrafarmacon salve and similar ones.
And you must loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and in the evening, until it is healed and sound.
And it is necessary that the limb be positioned in such a way that the oozing flows down lightly.
And if many days pass and it cannot heal but continues to ooze, know that there are small pieces of bone, for which you must probe the wound with a tent, and remove all these loose pieces that cause the pain.
And if a fistula comes to the place, or another kind of corruption, then you must cure it, according to what he says in his chapter above.
And when the bone is broken and exposed on the limb, such as the bone of the thigh or the shoulder, and other similar large limbs, do not treat it, for often death results, but leave it until it putrefies;
perchance it will fall off by itself after twenty days or thirty, then treat the wound if you can;
and if you cannot, then leave it.
We often come across the health of the fracture, especially when it is near the joint, and it is a gruesome thing to see the shape of the limb; and perhaps the limb cannot perform its natural functions.
Be careful then if the wound is fresh: administer astringent medicines to it, such as aloes, frankincense, and myrrh, and sarcocolle, acacia, and similar others, so that you take any of these things, or all together, and mix them with astringent wine or with egg white or with oil; and places them on the head in bundles, and binds them tightly, and does not loosen them for many days;
and places them on the head in bundles, and binds them tightly, and does not loosen them for many days; and then dislocates it, and begins another one, until the knots are removed;
or you extract on a well-made piece of flesh; for the property of the flesh is that it removes all swellings above the limbs;
and if the knot has already hardened like stone and needs to be removed, then cut on it, and remove the apparent excess; or you shave it with a razor until it is removed, and treat it until it heals.
of the limb which is weak after the healing
When the bone fracture is restored, and the limb remains weak and delicate afterwards, it happens for many reasons: for one of the reasons is that it was bound too tightly, and was not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many bindings, and the nourishment could not reach the limb; or due to an abundance of bleeding; or because of excessive movements, not at the right time; or because he has little blood in his body, thus is weak.
And the treatment is that you make the patient eat, and make the body soft, so that the blood be multiplied in him; and the administrator gives a bath, and gives joy and relaxation;
then apply pitch on the limb, so that the pitch attracts the great nourishment, and often water it with warm water, until the nourishment flows to the limb; and it returns to its natural form.
of the limb twisted after the health When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bone is visible, and the form of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function:
Do not believe the fools who say that one must break the limb entirely anew, and many foolish doctors have done this in our land;
and this work is blamed, and great evils come from it, and perhaps death;
nevertheless, if the nodules and tortures are fresh, they should be soaked in hot water, or herbs that soften should be boiled, such as mallow leaves, and roots, and mallows, and similar things;
and make a softening poultice, as dyakelon does well, and take the mallow mucilage, and mix it with chicken fat or sesamum oil, and apply a poultice on top;
Where you take fat figs, and grind them with chicken dung, and similar medicines that reduce the swelling.
And sometimes the nodule is removed by rubbing continuously and for a long time with wet hands. And let the limb be moved every hour.
And if the tortuosity is awakened and hardened, like stone, and it is necessary to remove it with iron, then it must be cut until the bone, with a subtle light incision; and apply care and study in the treatment.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation comes to anyone, he must now bring it back without delay.
For if one delays, the wound swells, and perhaps it is reset with pins in its place;
therefore, it is not right to move it at the hour when it is swollen: many times brings spasm and other pains;
however, when this happens, make the patient sweat, then leave it until all the abscesses have calmed;
then bathe the limb with warm water and oil, then gently reset it, and treat each limb as necessary so that it returns to its place.
And I have ordered the chapters of the dislocations from the head to the feet.
It often happens that the jawbones are dislocated there, and the dislocation of both is according to two manners: or they are slightly displaced from their places, and somewhat softened; or they are completely dislocated, and hang downward, causing saliva to flow from the mouth which he cannot hold, nor can he close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped in speech.
When the dislocation is small, it returns by itself through various positions.
And if it is whole and complete, then you must reset it quickly, and do not delay at all;
and in such a manner that the servant holds the head of the patient, and the doctor puts his thumb into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is in two parts; and the other fingers of the hands should be apart, to make equal;
and instruct the patient to soften his jaws and move them in all directions. And the physician puts it equally, until it returns to its place.
And if the resetting is difficult, especially if both jaws are together, then wash them with warm water and oil until you reset them gently;
do not hesitate to return it, as we have said.
And when they are drawn evenly, and the mouth of the patient closes well without softening, then put on cloths moistened in an ointment made of rose oil and wax, then lightly bind it with soft bandages;
and let the patient sleep on his back, with his shoulders placed between two cushions, so that he does not move it to the right or left, nor exert himself to heal, but take light food until the pains are removed, and the jaws are healed;
and then let him eat what he wants lightly, and do not strain to open the mouth for eating and drinking until the jaw is well healed and healthy.
And if the two jaws cannot be perfectly reset within an hour and are not returned to their places, then fevers and customary sores ensue, and perhaps diarrhea occurs, and perhaps vomiting of bile.
And when you see this, then know that it is destruction; and many times the one to whom it happens dies within nine days.
The forceps cannot dislocate from the side within the continuity of the breast and the swelling, and it is sometimes dislocated outward, and this is well felt.
And the restoration is such that the patient lies alone on his back, and extends his arms; and then press the area firmly with your palm, and it will return;
then apply the plaster and bind it, and constrain it;
and the joint that is towards the side cannot dislocate; unless it does, and if it dislocates at any time, reset it to its place, as we have said;
then put on the poultice and bind it, and tighten it, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healed;
and in the same way is returned the shoulder of the back when it is dislocated from its place.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is not dislocated except according to three ways:
one of which is that it dislocates to the side of the armpit below; and the second is to the side of the breast; and occasionally it dislocates to the upper part, and this happens rarely;
and does not dislocate behind towards the shoulder, and does not dislocate inward towards the nerves;
and often dislocates downward towards the socket, especially in those who have little flesh, for it happens quickly and suddenly;
in those who have enough flesh, it hardly dislocates, and hardly returns.
And it sometimes happens to some men that there is a blow or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of this.
It is therefore necessary that you test it until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
And the dislocation is recognized when it moves downward towards the socket, and there is a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a clear distinction between them; and you will find at the head of the shoulder a hollow, and beneath the blade when touching the head of the shoulder, just as if it were a bone; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose, nor move it in any way;
and similarly, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you will find it clearly upon touching;
and this type of dislocation is not difficult to reset when it is new, or if the patient is young.
And the method is that the assistant lifts the patient's hand up, then places his thumbs beneath the blade, and raises the joint forcefully upwards to its place; and the minister lifts the hand, and extends it upwards, then places it below; it will come quickly.
And if it does not come as we have said within a few days, then the patient should be bathed in warm water; and the administrator uses a strongly soothing and tempering agent, such as a decoction of alum and fenugreek and melilot in water, and it should be administered;
then the patient should be placed on their back, and place under the board a cushion of wool equal, not too soft nor too hard, then the physician places his heel on the cushion, and lifts the shoulder joint forcefully, and pulls the patient's arm;
and another minister holds the head of the patient so it does not move down; that shoulder returns completely now, and if you wish to reset it in this manner:
and it is that you have a person present who is taller than the patient; and be straight against the side, and place his shoulder under the armpit of the patient, and lift the armpit up so that the patient hangs in the air; and another minister pulls the hand of the patient down towards the abdomen. And if the patient is too light, then he may with him some heavy thing, and the dislocation returns now.
And it is reset in another manner:
and it is such that one sticks the long stick into the ground, from which the shoulder should be as strong as a pistol, and neither too thick nor too thin; then it should be placed under the patient, but that there be cloths above, and the patient be lying along the long of the stick;
then his hand should be stretched out below on the other side firmly, and the joint will return to its place quickly;
and if it does not wish to return despite all these things that we have said, then do this treatment: take the stick of two arms in length and four hands in width, which has the head strong enough to move easily under the axilla, according to this form:
then tie over the head of the wooden post with soft cloth so that the wood does not injure the patient, then place it under the arm of the patient;
and extend his arm over the long post, and tie the shoulder to the post, and the arm to the wrist, then place the arm on a step of a wide ladder, and let the hand hang down, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint is now restored.
And when it is in place, in whatever manner that may be, you must put under the armpit a sphere of equal wool, then apply a plaster mixed with mill powder, along with incense and egg yolk, over the entire shoulder and around it, then strain under the armpit appropriately, and turn the bandage over the plaster, and bind the hand to its neck, and let the remaining hand stay thus.
And it is necessary that he eat little, until the limb is strengthened, for it will heal faster;
and then eat more after five or seven days, and move it; and if it is sealed and not softened, then it is healed.
And if the joint is displaced by moisture that has come in, or for any other reason, then you must apply cauterizations at three points, as it is set out in the chapter on cauterizations.
and if you do all this, and it loosens after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and he cannot lift his arm up, then know that the nerves at the top of the shoulder are cut or stretched or weakened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
The dislocation that is towards the breast or behind is done by pushing and stretching of hands, and it is administered in another place;
and treat until it is healed.
And if after the healing comes stiffness in the limb and slowness in movement, then the patient should take baths multiple times until that stiffness is alleviated and returns to its original nature.
of the dislocation of the rib
Know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated bit by bit, and bit by bit returns;
and it has been dislocated from all sides, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not put back, for one sees it well and feels it well; and dislocated according to each figure. And when you join the sick limb with the healthy one, then you can see it clearly. For the joint is locked, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch his shoulder at all.
And you must reset it before hot abscesses come, for if hot abscesses were to come, it would be difficult to reset;
and perchance it cannot be entirely reset, especially when it is at the back; it is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and perchance death may come from it.
And the restoration is such when it can be brought back, that you extend his hand with your two hands; And his arms should be spread out, and the hands of the healer according to the cut around, above and below, and push the joint at its ends together, or at the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is at the front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and trust in the root of the palm the thumb which is dislocated.
And if it does not want to return to its place, then administer strong extension;
and it is that two assistants extend the arm, and two assistants hold it so that it does not move during the extension;
then turn the arm on each side, after you have wrapped a long and wide doubled cloth;
and when the doctor joins the joint with his hand, he anoints it with some oil to soften the joint, then forcefully pushes the joint back, until it returns;
and when it is in place, he puts on a dry plaster with egg white, then tightly binds it, and hangs the arm around the patient’s neck, and leaves it for some days, then unties it.
and if the joint is firm in its place, then untie the binding, and leave it;
and if you see that the joint does not bind well, then repeat the plaster and the binding, and leave it this way for some days, until it is firmly set; then untie it.
and if he feels stiffness after the joint is reset, and it moves, then bathe and rub it well, and press until it is relieved; where you place on the joint a fat sheep’s salve, then leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and have him enter the bath; and when he sweats, rub the joint gently, then put the salve back on, and then enter the bath; and do this two or three times until he is healed;
and if you wish, put on cow manure mixed with butter, warmed up and applied on;
then it will return to its proper position.
the dislocation of the hand
The joint of the hand dislocates, and its return is light, more than the other joints. Nevertheless, it must be returned to its place quickly, in the same hour that it is dislocated, lest the area become swollen or a hot abscess form.
And the resetting is such that you place the diseased hand on a table, and the assistant stretches out the hand, and the doctor places his hand equally, so that he puts his palm on the surface of the joint, and pushes until it returns.
Nevertheless, you must check if it is properly in place; then place the patient's back of his hand on a table during extension and retraction. And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, then have the patient place the back of his hand upon the table, and the doctor places his hand upon that part of the joint.
If it returns now, it is good. If not, then apply warm poultices to soothe the abscesses and leave it this way without restarting.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot place it back in position after some days, then the joint remains twisted;
and it does not harm the patient's strength as long as the hand is weakened and cannot grasp anything at all: then you know that the nerves are cut, or the arteries;
so there is no other engine stronger than to constrict by cautery near the case, and perhaps there is nothing else that works.
And when the hand is in place, then put on the plaster that we have mentioned, then bind it and leave it for five days, then unbind it and leave it thus.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is any crack, then soften it with hot water, and rub it until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated on each side, sometimes on the back of the palm or on the front;
then extend the finger, and push the dislocation into your palms until it returns, then hold the tip of the finger, and bend it towards the part where it is separated;
and leave it for two days, and then straighten it on the third day;
and at night bind it as we have said, and unbind it during the day, and make it move, and bind it again at night;
and do this often, until it is tight, and do the same if it dislocates at the palm of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed;
and do the same when it dislocates from another side.
Of the dislocation of the vertebrae of the back
When the vertebrae of the back or neck are dislocated, or there are several dislocations, there is no treatment, for death quickly follows the patient.
And the signs are that the excretions jump out without will, and cannot be held back, and often some limb is weakened, or both thighs or both arms or one.
And often the shadow changes to four parts;
that which changes at the back is called "gilbositez":
The treatment is that you reward if the lameness has come from childhood: there shall be no treatment or healing at all.
And for that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient methods of treatment speak greatly in grand words, but they do not have much benefit at all;
but I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the lameness which comes to the front foot, there is no remedy nor health;
and similarly that which comes directly to both sides, and one cannot cure except properly the one that comes to the back, as I say;
and it is that the patient be stretched out on his face in an equal place, and have some padding beneath him, so he does not hurt himself;
then stick one end in the ground firmly at the head and the other at the feet, and tie one strap underneath the armpits of the patient, and the other at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles;
and two assistants hold the straps, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two stakes;
and they should be well secured, the stakes as we have said, and the doctor places his palms on the dislocation firmly, until it returns to its place.
And if it does not return by this cure, take a board of three arms long, and place it under the wall, and let the patient be on their side, and put the end of the board under the wall, then place the middle of the board on the spine; and let the physician put his feet on the other end of the board, and press firmly until it returns to its place;
and if you wish, do it with a wrench that turns by hand. And you should drive in two pegs at the head of the patient's body one arm's length apart, and two others towards the feet, and there should be between each peg, above and below, a palm's space in length;
and have in each stick a hole, where the drill turns, and let the sticks be firmly in the ground so that they do not move;
and between each two sticks have one rotating stick, on which the ropes turn, and in two rotations have two small sticks of one palm long, to rotate the drill;
and then tie the rope that is among the boards to the drill towards the head, and the other rope towards the feet to the other drill, and each of the assistants turns his drill along the whole rope, and the master places the point evenly as we have said.
And when it is even, then place a drying poultice with an abundance of egg, and then the wads, and then the stake of a tablet three inches long, which should touch the site of the swelling and the healthy part of the spine, then tie it with a rope as we have said, and let the patient use subtle nourishment until they are healed;
and if any thing comes at the end of health, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the stone that we have mentioned before; and sometimes a piece of linen is administered, and sometimes the appearance comes in the last vertebra of the back, and one thinks it is a dislocation; and it is the bone that protrudes, for which one should not be presumptuous: perchance it might bring death.
Know that in the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder only dislocations occur, and they do not happen as they do in other joints;
and the hip joint is dislocated according to four parts: inside and outside, and in front and behind;
and more inside than elsewhere, and slightly dislocated in front and behind.
And the knowledge of its internal dislocation is that when one joins the sick leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and the sick knee appears more open than the healthy one, and the sick person cannot bend their knee to the ground; and the area that is nearby is swollen with an abscess and hot because the head of the thigh bone comes there.
And the sign of those to whom it comes to decay, is that these accidents are contrary to those before.
and the signs of that which happens in front is that he extends his leg well according to the alignment; However, the knee does not bend without pain, and if one wants to make it go forward, it cannot move ahead, and it retains its urine, and the ankle swells, and when it goes, it passes over the heel.
And the sign of those to whom it happens behind is that they cannot straighten their knee nor bend it, and that leg is more bent than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the hip joint is in a lower position under the ribs.
The remedies for this kind of dislocation are that you reward if the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its position, there is no treatment; and it does not require any presumption.
And in the case where the dislocation is fresh, and it is one of the four types of dislocation, you must hurry to return the joint, stretch it inside and outside, and move it right and left; per chance it will return, and does not need another treatment.
And if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare the instrument strongly, and stretch the leg firmly with two hands, or with one binding above the knee; and another minister extends his hand above in such a way that he places his hands beneath the bones, then tightly binds a strong bandage on the thigh; and another holds the end of the bandage;
and they stretch up and down all at once, until the patient is lifted off the ground at once, and remains hanging.
This method of extension is common to the four types, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is well.
If not, then one must pay attention to its appearance.
When the dislocation is on the outer side, then you should lay the patient on his healthy side, then place the bandage at the root of the thigh, and the spot that is below the angle, then extend the bandage up towards the angle, and towards the kneecap;
then have another assistant take his arms, and embrace the thick part of the diseased thigh, and stretch it outwards strongly: it will return to its place now;
and this manner of dislocation is lighter than the others.
And if you cannot bind it in this manner that we have said, then you must tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong bond above the two heels, and above the two knees, and let the affected leg be stretched out twice as long as the other;
then let it be hung on top of a post, and let it be two arms' length off the ground;
then command the minister to grasp the head of the thigh, and let another minister hang with the patient, who firmly grasps the thigh, for the joint now returns quickly.
And when the dislocation is severe, the patient lies down, as we have said in the case of one who has rheumatism, and bind the bandage tightly on the affected leg properly, and on the weight also;
then put two brands, one at the head and the other at the feet, then place one brand between the thighs of the patient in the form; and have placed damp cloths around so that it does not hurt the patient, then extend each minister towards him, and the physician puts equal with his hand the dislocation.
If it returns, it is good.
If not, put it on the table, and press it as we have said in gilbositeit, and lay the patient on the healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the affected leg quickly, and according to what I have said; and the physician places his palm on the affected angle, then presses with the other hand, and stretches it down towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is behind, it is not necessary to extend the patient downward, nor lift up onto the ground, but it should be as if the hip were dislocated behind, just as we have said about lying on the two hips; and let it be on his face, and the bandage extended as we have said before, and one must press on the joint at the table; and it will be right when the patient stretches his legs, and they will be equal; then align the thighs, apply the plaster, and strap with a bandage so that the hip does not move; and let him rest for three or four days, then loosen it, and apply the plaster again;
and if you see that they are equal, then strap them as before, and leave it for three days;
then he unties it, and makes it move gently, until the limb is strengthened.
of the dislocation of the knee
The knee is dislocated in three ways: that is to say, inward and outward, and backward;
and it does not dislocate forward.
And the sign of this is that you instruct the patient to bend his leg at the thigh, and if it does not straighten at the thigh, know that it is dislocated;
and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit straight, and extend his leg if he can, and place your back against his face, and put his foot on your feet;
then take his knee in your palms, and pull between your fingers, then bend the two sides of the knee properly; and another minister extends his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he holds his leg lightly to his thigh;
and apply the plaster on it, and bind the leg to the thigh tightly, and keep them tied together for three or four days, then untie it;
and the patient does not strain to walk until the limb is strengthened.
And if the limb is not fully healed, apply strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is mended.
of the dislocation of the heel
The heel is sometimes displaced, and sometimes fully dislocated, both internally and externally.
and the sign is that the ankle is swollen, and you should examine where it has dislocated:
The movement is light, and it must be extended lightly by hand when it is merely awakened.
And when it is entirely dislocated, then you must make the patient sit straight, and have the assistant hold the leg by the ankle above the foot;
then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with the left two times, then stretch it upwards, and gently push the foot upwards;
and do this two times, as we have said, by pushing and pulling the foot;
if it returns, that is good;
if not, then repeat the procedure, for it will return;
and if it cannot return thus, make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and fix a peg firmly in the ground between his thighs, and wrap cloths around so that it does not hurt the patient;
then have one minister hold the thigh, and another minister extend the foot with his hands or at the joint that is tied above the ankle; then have each minister extend equally, and the peg should be between the patient's thighs to hold the patient when they are being stretched;
then let the physician place his hands equally on the dislocation, and another minister hold the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it is at the right point, put the plaster and bandages on, bind tightly, and tie the foot to the leg, and watch the nerves that are above the heel behind, so that the binding is not too tight;
then leave it for two days or three, and if the binding softens, then bind tightly again;
then untie it on the third or fourth day, and forbid the patient to walk for four days; and if he walks before that time, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
And if hot abscesses come, you must soothe them, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healed.
of the two When both are dislocated, they must be extended well without effort, and this is an easy thing to do.
And if the dislocation is in any joint of the foot's back, then you must make the patient sit on a flat place or on a table straight, and put your foot on what appears of these joints, then press with your foot firmly until it returns;
and when it is leveled and nothing appears, then put under the sole of the foot a board at two shillings, then bind it properly, and leave it for three days, then untie it; and make it rest until it is healed.
of wound and dislocation together
When a wound comes with the dislocation, and one wants to restore it, many times it happens that the patient dies:
do not be presumptuous in the care, if you are not wise in the art and have not practiced it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and cautious, not bold;
and begin with things that soothe the hot abscess, and leave the patient in God's hands if you see no hope of health; and when you see hope there, reset now the limb to its place, unless the abscess begins to heat up;
and when the limb is in place, administer soothing things for a hot abscess, and treat the wound as appropriate with drying ointments;
and if with the dislocation there is a fracture and small bones are displaced, remove them, and do what we have said in simple diseases;
and beware of entering the way of fear, according to what I have said, for it is worth moving according to your Creator, and for the wisdom of your arm and your body.
