To you, my very dear son, I have completed this book which is the last of the science of medicine along with its contents, and I have made an end through its explanations and by its declarations. And it came to me in a vision that I complete it with this treatise, which is a part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery.
And because the work of hands is strong in our region and entirely foreign everywhere else, the science has perished and been cut off, and nothing remains of it except the small descriptions in the books of the ancients that hands have turned. And from this have come the errors and the vanities, and closed are the attentions and alienated is the science.
Now it seems to me that I want to revitalize together the arrangement of this treatise according to the method of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and will come together the forms of the instruments of cautery, and of other tools of the work with the adjustment of the explanation and preparation of them, as is necessary.
And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is diminished. And it is necessary for one who engages in this to excel in the science of anatomy, as Galens says, so that he knows the judgment of the members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and brains and the number of them, and the movement of the moving veins and the resting ones, and the place of their origin.
And for this reason Hippocrates says that the name with the name is much, and with the work is little; and especially in the art of manual skills.
We say at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things previously mentioned should beware lest he fall into error and injure people;
Thus, I have seen many of those who engage in this science and abandon themselves to their knowledge and experience.
For I saw a foolish doctor who cut the abscess of scrofula on a woman's neck, and cut the arteries of the neck; for so much blood gushed out that the woman fell dead at his hands.
And I saw another doctor who was extracting a stone from a man's eye, and the stone was large; he carried away with it a piece of the membrane, and the man died within three days.
And I had already been called to treat him, and saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and knew well that if it was cut out he would die.
And I saw another doctor who took in charge a duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the break there was a wound;
and the doctors full of ignorance bind the fracture on the wound with splints by strong tie, and leave no padding to the wound at all, and leave it thus for a long time;
and he commands that he does not untie it;
and it remains thus until the leg is entirely swollen and the feet and comes to destruction.
I was called to come to him, and I hurried to come and untie the leg; and when I untied it, it was in peace and he felt no pain.
But nevertheless, the corruption was already confirmed in the member, and could not be healed;
and the corruption did not stop from spreading through the member until the member was completely lost.
And see another doctor who bursts the infected abscess and then inflames it due to the maliciousness of his rule.
For a chancre, when it is pure of melancholic humor, should not be touched with iron unless it is in such a place where one can completely remove what is corrupted.
And for that reason, dear son, you must know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: that is, work where there is danger in various positions;
and I will show in each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
For that reason, it is necessary that you be cautious so that foolish physicians cannot speak ill of you.
So take up your arms in discussion, and undertake your patients lightly yet firmly, and use the best method so that by the grace of God you arrive at success and be praised;
and leave the appalling diseases of severe illness;
and remove the weapons from that which causes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you may come from this world to the other world of glory.
Galien says in some of his warnings: Do not undertake a bad disease, lest you be called a foolish doctor.
I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapter is about fire cauterizations and medicinal cauterizations, and the chapters are arranged from head to toe;
and about the forms of ointments, and the instruments for cauterization, and everything that is necessary for the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about cupping and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things;
and the chapter is ordered and the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and torsions, and similar things;
and it is ordered from the head to the feet, and the forms of the instruments.
In order that we may remember the work, it is necessary that I speak of the quality of the aid and the harm of each temperament.
I say that the qualities of aid and harm are the longest discourse and subtlest science and the secret responses;
and many of the wise have spoken about this and agreed upon it;
and they mock a little with their words, for I fear the length.
I say that cautery universally helps all complexions where there is matter, except for two complexions: that is to say, a hot complexion without matter, and a dry complexion without matter.
In a hot and dry complexion together with matter, some have differentiated and said that cautery is of great help; and others said the opposite: that cautery is not useful for diseases that come from heat and dryness. For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be treated with heat for a hot disease, nor with dryness;
and says he who said the opposite that cautery provides great help to hot and dry disease that comes into the bodies of men. For when you compare the body of man and its moisture to the disposition of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this statement. For I have found it to be true through experience.
And in any way, let no one interfere except those who have experienced it and who understand through long use the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of human temperaments, and the conditions and causes of their diseases, and the occurrences and the span of time;
we have no fear of other temperaments, especially in cold and wet diseases. And all the physicians assembled and agreed on the cautery.
And know, son, that cautery together with fire is among the secrets of treatments, and of greater goodness than cauterization by burning medicine.
For fire is simple, and it only affects the member that is burnt, and does not harm another member unless by chance.
Burning medicines move from one member to another in the distant parts and cause severe diseases to come to the member. and perchance kill the patient.
The fire for its height and for the goodness of its substance does not do this, if there is not an excess.
And this have I found by experience and by the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it was on the truth of things;
and for this I excuse myself for the length of speech, for it does not please me that I remove the secret which is stored in the fire, and the quality of the work, how it cures diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; or receive it in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agreed on when the cauteries should be made, and chose spring.
And I say that cautery is appropriate at all times, because the harmful thing coming from below is removed by means of the cautery; and especially if the cautery is for necessary pains that are severe and urgent which cannot wait until a time when greater mischief does not come to the member.
And never think, dear son, as foolish doctors do; for the disease that is healed by cautery has no return; and they say it thus;
and they say it thus; but it is not as they think, for cautery is a medicine that changes the complexion and dries the humors which are the cause of pain, and it acts faster than other medicines because of its power and the virtue of its effect and its authority.
And it is a powerful thing that the disease may come sometimes according to the temperament of the patient and the site of the disease and its property;
and the excesses are gathered in him by the acquisition of foods and similar things, unless cauterizations are administered at a place where there is little excess and moisture, such as tooth cauterizations for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why cauterization is called the last of medicine, and it is true;
but they do not believe that cauterization is effective after medicine, but their understanding is false, and cauterization is the last of medicine because when we administer methods of treatment in any disease and they are ineffective, then we apply the cauterization, and it works.
Then it is clear that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish doctors.
The ancient said that cauterization with a golden instrument is better than with iron, and they did not say this except for the quality of gold and the excellence of its substance;
and they said that the flame of cauterization does not cause putrefaction, but this is not true because I have experienced it, and have found that it is true in some men;
and cauterization with gold is better than with iron, just as they said it to be. And nevertheless, when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it cools down quickly;
and if it is heated too much; so they do at the fire; and thus there is enough hindrance.
Or I have ordered this chapter from head to foot, so that the way may be easier to find.
This cautery is useful for moisture and cold on the brain, and it is used twice due to a disease called "soda," and due to many humors that descend from the head to the eyes and ears, and for numerous dreams, toothache, throat pain, and especially all diseases that come from cold such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by a dissolving medicine modifying the head for three or four nights, according to what the strength and age and habit of the patient can endure; and then shave the head of the patient.
And then have him sit between your hands crossed, and place his hands on some weight;
afterward place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and there where your middle fingers will come, bleed from the joint then heat the cautery which is called "olivary", of which this is the form: and place it on the marked spot with ink, and do so by loosening and tightening your hand little by little while turning it around; then lift your hand gently, and return to the spot if you see the bone slightly protruding; and if you do not see it, repeat the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you;
after take some tar, and put it in water and mix cotton within, and place it on the spot, and leave it for three days;
after put on linen moistened in butter; and leave on until the scalding is removed; after treat the wound with the ointment which is called "tetrafarmacon," until it is healed.
And the ancients said that the longer the wound remains open, the more it purges; and for this reason, it aids movement.
And some say that one should leave the cautery so long that part of the bone is burned, and then remove what is burned from the bone, and it should be cleaned.
And others say that the cautery should be left on for a long time and pressed so hard that it abates the bone as wide as the thread that women put in their spindles so that the humors are forced out;
and one must leave the wound open for a long time; afterwards it must be cleaned and soaked.
And these two methods of cauterization do not seem to be entirely good in every case, except in some people where there is reason for fear;
and it seems to me that I should leave it alone;
for the shoulder is weakened by the continuous dislocations of nature, as we testify in other limbs;
and likewise when the shoulder of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization is safer and better for me, and with this method I work towards a wholesome union.
When throughout the head comes chronic pain, and lasts for a long time, then the patient must use hyrises and pills which are called "cochie", and cleansing of the head and oils and plasters; and if one performs the cautery that we have mentioned before, and it does not work. Take care if the shoulder of the patient is of strong nature, and that it is not too cold; then cauterize below that cautery a bit as we have said above. After make cautery on each horn of the head up to the bone, as we have said before, and make a cautery in the place which is called "vasselz"; and there are places where one applies leeches; and hold your hand so that you do not see until the bone: the patient feels much greater pain in this cautery than in the others, and I will speak of it elsewhere;
and it is necessary that the cautery for the horns be finer than those used to cauterize the middle of the head, and this is the form:
Of the cautery of the head When in a part of the head comes sudden pain, and the disease extends to the eye, and the brain is cleansed with purgative medicines, and all other treatments that I have mentioned in the section on diseases are performed, yet none of this helps: then make cauterization according to two methods, that is to say with moist medicine and with fire.
The cautery with moist medicine is that you take a piece of fig, and remove the peel and cut it to one part in two parts for the shoulders, and then make an incision on the temple where the pain lies in such a manner that you can place the piece of fig under the skin;
and when it is placed, then bind it tightly and leave it like that for twelve hours; and then untie it and remove the piece of garlic, and leave the wound like that for two or three days; then apply cotton soaked in butter until the pus comes out.
After the treatment of anointing until he is healed;
and if you wish to use some of the burning medicines that I have written about in the eleventh treatise on burning medicines.
The cautery with iron is according to this method. Heat the cautery of which this is the form:
And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a ball where it has a bit of curvature, and in the middle has a small appearance;
and place it on the painful area, and hold your hand and turn the fire a little gently, until half of the thickness of the kerb is burned;
and lift your hand so the artery does not burn, which is on the outside, and let an abundance of blood flow out.
After put cotton in the eye of seil, and put on the place for three days; then put cotton moistened in butter, and then clean the place of ointment until it is healed;
and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery which is called "cultellare," at all the tip, and be careful not to cut the artery in this recent migraine.
of migraine
When you treat migraine as we have said before in the divisions of diseases, and it does not help, and you see that the cauterizations previously mentioned of medicine and iron do not suit him, then you must heat the cautery which is called "cultellare" until it is white;
and sign before on the painful place a line of half an inch long, and take your hand away once, and hold back so that you do not cut the artery and do not reach the bone;
and beware of the jaw that moves when one eats, and the nerve should not be looked at so that it moves and spasms do not come to the patient, and beware of the flow of blood from the artery when it will be cut, for cutting has great fear especially for those who are not knowledgeable, and who are not scholars and experienced; and leave the work halfway;
but I will tell you how to stop blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it applies in this book.
And if you see that this cautery does not help the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him in the middle of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it heals;
and if you see, administer the cautery that we have described in the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has two blades; and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
of the pain in the ears from cold
When pain from cold comes into the ear, and one has applied solutive medicines and other treatments that we have mentioned in the section, and the pain does not diminish, then heat this cautery which is called "point," of which here is the form:
After puncture all around the affected ear, or around both if the pain is in both, and move a bit away from the root of the ear once you have marked the spot to incise; and have ten points around each ear;
after treat the place until it is healed.
of the torment of the mouth
Torture which should be treated by cauterization is none other than those that move phlegm, as we have said in the division of diseases;
and do not apply cauterization to those that come from dryness and spasm of nerves.
When you treat this kind of torture that moves phlegm with hydrous and evacuations from the head and gargling, and if this does not work, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and the other a bit outside the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips;
and place the cautery on the part that appears healthy, and make a cautery directly at the top of the ear below the horn of the head by a bit, and another one on the temple as long as a thumb; and leave the cautery on top until the middle of the heart is burned;
and this is the form of the cautery:
And it resembles the knife that we have described before, but it is a bit finer and the knife must be a bit thicker;
after care the place as I have said before, until it is healed.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, and it does not help, and the patient does not have fever, then make four cauterizations: two on the two horns of the head, and one in the middle of the head, and one at the place called "vasselz" as we have said before, and the last cauterization on the mouth of the stomach;
and let it be treated as we have said before.
of lethargy
For this disease, it is necessary to give the patient large drafts and pills that purify the brain;
after raising the head of the patient completely, and place on the occiput the mustard plaster which is written in the treatise on plasters;
and this is the method of the cautery: do it as I have said.
if he is healed thus, it is good; and if he is not, then make three cauteries around the head descending to the neck, and have one inch of space between each cautery;
and treat it as the others, and if you see to adjust, and the patient is enduring, make one cautery in the middle; and if necessary, two others on the two corners, and treat until it is healed;
and let the cauterization which is called "olivare" be as I have said before.
It is necessary that the head be cleansed of sores and what we have said before;
afterwards shave the head of the patient, then apply cauterization in the middle of the head and on each corner, and one at the back and three on the spine of the neck;
and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is enduring, and the disease is strong, apply four cauterizations on the spine of the back; and he lets it until the most of the heat is burned, and lifts your hand; after the treatment until it is healed, and let the cautery which is called "olivary" that we have mentioned before be used.
of the epilepsy
The epileptics should not use cautery except those who are phlegmatic, and one must first modify the brain with years and other treatments that we have mentioned in the section when the patient is large and suffering from deep medication.
And if it is a child who cannot bear it, make him gargle and chew, frequently modifying the brain with good meats;
afterwards, cut the head in half, and make the cautery according to what we have said before, and the cautery on the basin, and on each horn; and if the patient is strong and enduring, make cauteries as I have said for one who has paralysis and weakening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cautery be olivary according to the method that I have described.
If the patient is inflamed, make a fine cautery according to this method:
When by the cause of melancholy the excesses or the moisture is corrupted and phlegm is thick, then cauterize with such cauteries as we have said to those who have paralysis.
And if by the cause of melancholy the superfluities incline towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him to drink something by which the brain may be purified, according to what is mentioned previously in the section.
After raise the head of the patient; after make the linen bandage well done, just like the circle, and put it around the head;
and the patient sits crossed, and be well held on all sides;
after present the ointment, and it is worth using wool of old barberry; and heat it with moderate fire, so that when the hand touches it, it can be tolerated; after empty the circle inside around the head, and let it cool;
and do this for the patient once each week with another good treatment, until he is healed.
For if you wish to cauterize it, make several points all over the cautery.
This kind of cautery moistens the brain equally;
and then put on wet cotton in butter and in goose fat.
of the eye ointment When the ailment first comes to the eyes by the signs that I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient drink that purifies the head, and protect it from all moisture, and make him sweat in the bath several times on an empty stomach.
After that, instruct him to lean his head back, and perform a cautery in the middle of the head, and make two cauteries on both temples if the tearing of the eye is in both eyes together, or one if it is in one.
and cut all the veins and arteries that are beneath the heart with the entire cautery, and let the cauteries be long according to the width of the temple;
and beware of blood flow, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stop it with whatever power you have.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision how you will probe it;
And sometimes a cautery or hot iron is used under the two rear bones.
and one sees that it is from cold phlegmatic excesses, then he makes the cautery that I have said at the beginning of this chapter below the eyes: One cautery in the middle of the head, and two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries with hot iron under the two bones; and if there is need for more, then cautiously cauterize above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
When you treat it according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give the patient to drink three nights of cochos. after the king's head, and make a cautery in the middle of the olive cautery; and make two cauterizations with the cautery called "clavilis" on the two eyebrows, a little below the hair.
and beware of the artery that you do not cut it.
And this is the form of the cautery which is called «clavilis»:
When the eyelid is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery which is called «olivary». of which here is the form:
And if you want to make two cauterizations on the two eyebrows as long as the eyebrows are;
and do not leave your hand there except until a third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner I have said.
of the hair that pricks the eye Sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyes turn inward and prick the eye, and a cautery is performed according to two methods: that is to say, with fire, or with burning medication.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they have grown and are even, then place the patient in your care; after place on the paper of the eyes a figure that is as if of the leaf of myrtle, and let the beginning of the sign be near the hairs;
then put moist cotton in egg white and marjoram powder on the eye, then heat the cautery of which this is the form:
after cautery on the figure that you have marked little by little many times, so that the hair is burned in that place;
and the signs of the health of the work are that you see the paper retract, and the hairs rise at the edge of the eye;
then lift your hand, and leave it thus for three days, then put moist cotton in butter until the burn is removed; after the treatment of anointing until he is healed.
and if afterward the hairs grow back and the scab softens, then restart the cautery on that same spot as you did first;
and if the hairs are weaker, then cauterize until the scab is lifted to its natural place, and they are even, and the hairs do not prick the eye.
The fire cauterization is when you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow until they are long and even, then make a shape of mirtle leaf from parchment;
then take French soap and quicklime, of each three parts, and grind them together well; and do it quickly so that it does not cool, then spread over the shape as you are made like the leaf of myrtle, and place on the paper of the eyes; and if the disease is only in one eye, then work on that one, and if in both equally; and place under the eye moistened cotton in egg white;
and the head of the patient should be in your hand and place your finger showing on the medicine, and press the pouch and the swelling every time the patient feels the sting of the medicine, for it stings as if from fire.
When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine properly. And when the stinging has passed, then remove the cloth, and check if you see the paper raised as if it were lifted by the constraint of fire or by an incision; and if it is thus, then it is well.
and if it is not so, then apply more of the medicine on the spot where the medicine has not worked, until your work is equal and your eyes are set properly;
then apply moistened cotton in butter until the burnt pus falls out, then treat the area of the ointment which is called "diaphoretic" and others, until it is healed.
And if it is necessary that you be careful with your work with great care that none of the medicine falls into the eyes.
and if the parchment becomes soft afterward, and the hairs prick in the eye, then reapply the medicine on that area which has been softened by the parchment properly, just as you did before; after the care until he is healed;
and this is the form of the myrtle leaf:
And know that the eyes of men are different in size and smallness, and according to this be your constraints;
and let not the right way be denied to him who studies this art.
on the treatment of fistulas by cauterization
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not help, then it is necessary that you apply cauterization according to this method.
Instruct the patient to place his head on your thigh; and hold the patient's head between your hands in such a manner that it does not move, nor does he remove his head;
after put moist cotton in egg white or in juice of solanum on the eye;
after heat the cautery which is blue:
and it is attached to the head like the form of an arrow feather, along with which should be the cautery;
if you want, it should be pointed from one end to the other, and if you wish, it can also be like a tent;
but nonetheless, this one that is attached is better for your work.
after press the fistula if it is open, and draw out the pus, and dry it; and if it is closed, then open it, and draw out the bowel forcefully;
after put on the cautery very hot, and hold your hand at the cautery at the part of the nose below the eye, so that your hand does not make foolishness; and put the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
If you come to the beginning of the cautery until the bone, it would be well. If not, then repeat the cautery once more, and again if you need to, and leave it for three days;
after put on moist cotton in butter, and cure it with the drying ointment until it is healed, and if forty days pass and it is not healed, then put on corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and heal it according to what would come in his chapter.
And there is a method of cautery for fistulas that some of the ancients mentioned. Understand about fistula, and open the place; after put in the cut some subtle camphor of this is the form: and add to the quantity of a .3. of plum; and hold your hand on the camphor firmly, and the patient must not move at all, until the melted plum does not run into his eye;
and it is necessary to put on the patient's eye cotton moistened in egg white or in oil;
the plum thus dries the area of the fistula and heals it with wonderful health.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have said, it is good. If not, it is necessary to administer a purge to the patient, and to bring the fistula back to its proper place in the body according to what is appropriate.
cracks in the lips Many times cracks appear on the lips which are called "hairs", and especially on the lips of children.
When you treat these cracks that we have mentioned in sections, and the treatment does not help, then heat the small scalpel cautery according to this form:
And place it hastily into those fissures until it reaches the bottom;
after care the area with cerote until it is healed.
When an abscess comes to the root of the tongue or in the throat, or in the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it becomes putrefied and rotten and is stagnant and becomes a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, and it does not help: then you must have the cautery according to the size of the fistula; then apply it to the opening of the fistula, and hold your hand until the hot iron reaches the bottom of it, and in the back area;
and do it thus once or twice after the treatment of what we have said in treatments until he is healed;
and if it is treated thus, it is good; and if not, it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines and that does not work, then place the head of the patient on your knee; after heat the cautery in such a way that you place a cane on the tooth;
and put inside the hot cautery quickly, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth;
after lift your hand and restart the cautery according to your will;
after the patient fills his mouth with salty water, and keeps it for an hour and spits out afterwards.
And in this manner, the tooth which was moving is confirmed, and the softened gums are restrained, and the corrupted moisture is dried.
of the pain of the teeth
When tooth pain comes from cold, or there is cold in the gum, and medical treatments do not work, then it is necessary to use cautery according to two methods: and cautery of butter and cautery of fire.
Cautery of butter is such that you take butter from a cow, and the end in a iron or bronze spoon; after take cotton and wrap on the tip of a tent, and anoint with boiled butter, and put on the painful tooth quickly and hold until it is cooled;
and thus do often until its virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and if you want, anoint wool and cotton with cold butter, and put on the painful tooth, and place hot iron over it until the fire reaches the edge of the tooth.
The fire cauterization is such that you take a cane of iron or bronze, and it should be thick so that the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient;
after heat the cauterizing tool, of which the form will be mentioned later, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cauterizing tool is cooled;
Do this often, for the pain will be removed that very day or the next.
And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good butter during the urgency of this cautery, and then forcefully spit it out;
and this is the form of the cautery:
And make a cautery on the head as you desire, and according to what you are able;
and this is the form of the cane:
Of the scrofula When the scrophules are of phlegm and cold moisture, and are not responsive to digestion through medicines, then heat the cautery as described hereafter comes the form, and have two openings for the smoke to exit from the other side of the cautery;
and place the hot cautery on the abscess once, or twice if necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess;
and if the abscess is small then place the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it like this for three days; and place moist cotton in butter on it until the burn is removed;
after care the area with ointments and bandages until it is healed.
When the moisture overcomes the nasal channels, and especially when this comes from a cold temperament, then it is necessary that the patient be purged first with dissolving medications;
after you make cautery at the root of the throat, and take care that you do not go as far as the throat itself, nor burn from the heart but a little bit.
after you make another cautery at the joint of the neck to the top of the spine, and let the cautery which is called "clavile" be as we have the form before;
and treat the area as we have said before until it is healed.
when all the diseases of consumption are from cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and the disease is long-standing, then make two cauteries on the shoulder in their place; and the other cautery between the two breasts;
and let the cautery which is called "clavile" be according to the form that was previously described.
And if you wish, make a cautery by pricking with the entire cautery which is called "poin" of which the form is mentioned earlier in the disease of the ears;
and let the points be up to thirty, or around there.
After treating the place according to what was previously said, let the cauterization be three inches according to this form:
And for that reason, the cauterizations are lighter, because you do three at once.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first treat the dislocation. After, place the patient on their back and on their side; after, lift the kernel that is inside the titillite with the fingers of your left hand;
and if the joint is dislocated inside, heat the cautery which has two horns thus is the form:
and cauterize the boil until it penetrates to the bone, and the shape of the cautery comes together with four cauters;
and for this reason, the cautery is made with the cautery which has three prongs, so the shapes of the cauteries are six cauters;
and the nerves are according to the subtlety of a tent and that is the form of the cautery which has three prongs:
And sometimes it is placed on this one nerve so there are eight cauters.
After put on the cautery pared pigs with fat; After make rest the patient, and do not move the limbs for a long time until they are well strengthened.
And if it is dislocated above, which rarely happens, then make a cautery on the thick part of the collarbone, or many cauterizations by pricking.
For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
When in the stomach come cold and much moisture that it alters its temperament, and are multiplied the catarrhs to him, and in the customary ways of treatment it does not profit, then it is necessary that the patient be placed on his back, and extend his legs and arms. From this point on, make three cauterizations: one below the nipple of the breast for the quantity of a bean, to the entire cautery clavicle, and two cauterizations outside the two sides such that the figure of the cauterizations be at three angles, and have such space between one and the other that they are not joined together when they cast pus;
and let the cauterizations be so deep that they reach the two parts of the lung, and let the shape of the cauterizations be according to this form without adjustment:
And if you wish to cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form;
and he who will have fear of this cautery, cautery by pricking and bleeding on the stomach one spot according to the quantity that you wish to remove; then cauterize with the entire cautery which is called "point".
After the treatment of the care that we have had before, until he is healed.
When the liver comes to have pain from cold and moisture and great windiness, so much that it is greatly displaced from its natural temperament by the excesses; and the patient is treated with what we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit him, then the patient must be bled from his hepatic vein; and bleed from three cauterizations according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, outside the hypochondria, where the ribs of the person come;
and there be space between each cautery the thickness of a thumb; and let the cauteries be long on the body, and do not press too much with your hand over the entire cautery;
and let only half of the heart be burned, and let the patient stand on his feet;
and if he cannot, let him lie down, and extend his legs, and lift his arms;
And if it is your will, then cauterize these cauteries of the cutellaire, if you are skilled and wise in the art, and beware that you do not burn the entire heart, for you would cause the whole body to wither; and that it does not reach up to the boil, for the skin is very delicate in that area, and you know this for certain.
When it has abscessed in the liver, and you want to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: if it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain but not too severe;
and if it is in the membrane, then the patient feels intense pain.
And when this treatment is necessary, the patient must be shaved on their head;
and then apply a poultice to the area where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which resembles the ray, of which this is the form: And cauterize with the cautery until the blood is burned, and comes down to the siphon, until all putrefaction is completely expelled;
after the treatment according to the treatment of the wounds until he is healed;
and it is not fitting that anyone should use this cautery except those who have studied long in the art of medicine, and through whose hands these diseases have sometimes failed.
Then he may boldly work, and yet it seems to me that sometimes it is better to leave it alone.
of the cautery ofpleurisy
The ancients said that one should make plasters from the roots of aristolochia, and in this manner: take a root of aristolochia, the longest that you can find, and it should be dry, and as thick and as long as your thumb; and the mortar in oil, and press it to the fire, and cauterize the cautery between the jaw and the neck, and two small cauters a bit downward in the part which is below the beard;
and two cauters between the fifth rib and the sixth, inclining slightly to the back; and one cautery in the breast, and another on the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two on the sides of the breast outside the cautery which is between the two shoulders;
and do not press your hand, but do it openly as in an unguent.
And some ancient ones say that some men use a fire cautery resembling a razor, and they heat it and place it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess; and the pain leaps out, just as we have said about the abscess of the liver.
But in this work, there is fear that the patient may die immediately, or an ulcer may occur which cannot be healed.
about the mouse
When you treat the disease of the mouse in the ways we have mentioned for the treatments, and it does not help, then there are three types of cautery that are all good.
and one method is that you make three cauteries, or four, along the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the liver cautery that we have said before;
and do not press your hand over the entire cautery, and let the patient lie on their back;
and another method of cautery is that you heat the cautery which has two prongs, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder;
and lift the area where the mouse is located, or where the side of the patient turns towards the left, and let the elevations by which you lift the area be according to the curvature, according to the length of the body, and the cautery should be according to the width of the body.
After you put the two burning nerves until the heart is pierced from the other side, and then pull out the cautery, and thus there will be four.
And if you wish, then cauterize the entire cautery to three nerves.
After the treatment when it has discharged pus for a long time, and this is better than the other treatments previously mentioned.
Cautery is not useful for a dropsical person, except in the manner which is called "asclytes.
When you treat it according to the methods we have said in divisions, and your treatment does not help, then you must make four cauteries around the boil, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one at the armpit. and let the cautery be close to the surface of the heart.
After leave the cautery open to expel pus for a long time, and do not neglect the patient’s treatment after the cautery; and healing would be hastened, and the two intents will be together with the help of God.
The form of the cautery for the belly is the key that we have shown before; and the one for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what is set forth above.
When the feet are swollen in one who is dropsical, and are full of yellow water, you must cautery on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring toe; and lift your hand with the cautery without turning.
And do not enter too deeply with the point, so as not to break through the yellow bile, and let the cauterization be according to this form:
After make on both legs two cauteries on each leg at the point of the kneecap; and let the cauteries be long, one below the knee in front and the other outside, midway on the leg;
and leave the cauteries open for a long time without cleaning, so that the pus may come out;
after cleansing with the other treatments that we have mentioned.
When the discharge from the stomach comes from cold and moisture, such that the retentive and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by means of treatments; and you see the patient well suffering and of great virtue, then make a large cautery on the stomach according to what has been spoken here before about the stomach cautery, the circular cautery; and four subtle cauteries around the buttock to every subtle claw cautery, and two cauteries on the thighs.
And if you see the moistures abundant and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the wrist, and a cautery on each thigh, and two small cauterizations on the stomach near the large one, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good aid.
of the treatment of hemorrhoids
When the hemorrhoids are in the anus, one or more, and are old and consist of large cold and moist corrupted humors, and are treated as we have said in the sections, and it does not help, then make cauteries: three on the spine of the back, those which are completely outside under the almandate, little by little in a triangular shape, and one cautery under the buttock two fingers;
and if you think that his stomach is cooled, and the meat does not cook, and swelling of the face is seen, then on the face one makes a large cautery on the stomach, as was said before, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen with the entire key-shaped cautery; and leave the cautery open for a long time. After treating the place until it is healed.
When you cauterize an abscess, heat the cautery that resembles a shaver, and then place it fully ablaze on the cut abscess; and keep your hand there until the cautery reaches the origin of the vein, from which the blood flows;
do this once or twice, and if there is much abscess, then cauterize each one as we have said; after the treatment of beneficial ointments until they are healed;
and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the alcatia, it will have greater help.
When the patient cannot endure surgery or incision, which we will discuss in its place, then such a disease comes that cannot be healed except by cautery.
When an ulcer comes to anyone, and it is old and discharges pus and corrupted moisture, then you should probe it thoroughly with a fine tent, and be sure to know the depth of the entire tent.
After heat the cautery that resembles a razor, and insert it into the fistula according to the amount of tent that has entered, and continue the cautery until the corrupted and putrid flesh is burned, once, or twice or thrice, according to the quantity needed;
and beware of burning the nerves that are inside, and the large veins.
if the fistula goes to the bladder and the intestine, then beware of these areas, and do not perform this outside the fleshy part, and consider that it is not penetrable;
after care the wound until it is healed, and if the wound is cauterized, and the materials are removed for a long time, then know that the wound is entirely healed;
and if the materials are not removed, know that the wound is deep, and the bone is corrupted at the root; and thus as one of those we will mention in its place.
When cold pain comes to the testicles, and from great windiness, and he shows no interest in women, then you must make a cautery on the testicles on one side and the other with the key cautery that we have mentioned before;
and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauters in a line, and they will provide greater aid.
of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient holds urine, then make a cautery on the outer part above the bladder, where the hairs of the groin begin, both to the right and to the left, and let each cautery be as long as the width of one thumb;
and make a cautery on the back if you need to do so;
and let the cauteries be made according to the form previously stated.
When the matrix is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their periods are delayed; and when they come, she feels great pain: then it is necessary to make three cauterizations around the boil, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder, and two cauterizations outside the back;
and let the cauteries be like a claw, as we have said.
When the viscous moisture descends into the hip joint, and for this reason it moves from its place, the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together;
and the site of the departure is found near the joint, then you should cauterize the patient on the hip joint with a cautery resembling a circle, and mark in front of the site around the joint as it turns, so that the joint is inside the circle;
and so let the cautery be such as those with which one has cauterized the stomach.
and if this cautery is not available to you, make three large cauteries from olive oil, and let the cautery be as perfect as all the others;
and treat it until it is healed.
of the pain of the hip When pain comes to the hip joint, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is treated with what we have said in the division and the treatment does not work, and the disease is old: then you must purge the patient of thick humors with foul pills, or other good similar pills. After you make cauterization;
and the method of the cauterization is according to two methods: that is to know together burning medicines, and fire cauterization.
Fire cauterization is according to many methods, of which one is as follows:
that you cauterize on the hip joint three triangular cauterizations according to this form, and make good depth and large, and have between each cauterization the space of a thumb's width, and let the cauterizations be olive-shaped;
sometimes one makes a cauterization in the middle on top of the head of the hip, which is why there are four according to this form:
And if you wish, then cauterize it with the circular cautery that we have mentioned before in the dislocation of the hip;
but do it in such a way that the circle contains the entire hip, and all the thickness of the thigh be burned.
And this is the method used for sciatica, when the pain remains in the hip, and does not reach the thigh or the leg.
And if it extends to the thigh and the leg, make two cauteries there where the patient says the pain holds them, and one cautery above the ankle four times, on the left side a bit;
and let the cautery be knife-shaped, and let the thickness of the thigh be burned;
and if the patient feels that the pain extends to the toes of the foot or nearby, cauterize where they feel the pain three times or four with the cautery which is called "point. And if necessary, do more to him;
And if he feels that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, make a cautery with a knife or circular cautery, and be careful in all your cauterizations that you do not leave the cautery so long that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause more harm and contraction to the patient.
And myself I have seen many who made a cautery on the ankle of the foot, and left it so long that the leg was entirely swollen, and the foot also, and all the foot became pierced and corrupted. After a purgative from which he got death.
And if the pain is in two parts together, make a cautery in one and in the other, according to this manner.
And the wise ones say about the cautery of the hip, here is the method: make such an iron and let it be at the head as thick as a date stone, or a little less, and let it be in sections and let there be between each section the space of a finger's breadth;
and let the splints be covered with two layers, and also let them be like knots, and there should be one well-made iron strap;
and this is the form:
and let it be heated until it is all red and emits sparks, and then place it on the hip joint of the sick side, and turn it towards the healthy side;
and cauterize it once with one cautery and leave it for three days; and then make a poultice of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; after the treatment of anointing until it is healed.
Albucasis says that we use little of this cautery due to the fear of its gaze, and we see few who use it;
and nevertheless this is of the good cauterizations, which he can endure, and where it applies.
The cautery of burning medicine is that you make the instrument to interweave in which descends the margin of the door, and it should be of bronze or iron with one side long, and in the height have two inches, and between each have the quantity of the thickness of a thumb; and they should be open below and above, and join together according to this form:
After place on the hip box of the patient lying on his healthy side, and press your hand much on the hip box; After put between the two circles of the hot awl which is heated by fire one pouce, and leave it for one hour of time, and let the patient bear the heat and the dryness of it.
For there he finds a burning as if from fire;
and when the burning has passed, lift your hand with the instrument and raise the hip with a gentle awl, and leave it this way for three days, and apply butter until what is black from the scalding is removed; and leave it for three days so that putrefaction may come out;
and this would be the final aid after the treatment of ointments until he is healed.
And if the pain has spread to the thigh or to the leg, make an instrument that adheres well according to what you have done on the hip equally;
and this is the method of hot water, and I have written it in the treatise on the rectification of medicine. Take alkali and vitriol, an equal amount of each, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot. where there is a small opening to allow the blade of a razor to enter;
where there is a small opening to allow the blade of a razor to enter; and put on top of that pot another well-sealed pot, and add alkali and heat and sweet water on top, until there is two fingers above the powders when you have well pressed it in your hand;
and let it be thus until the liquid drips down and falls into a pot, then take all that liquid and throw it onto hot coals and onto alkali as before.
And then it will be very liquid and is administered in many works of medicine and in cauterizations of other parts.
For it performs work like fire, and there are other medicines with which one cauterizes the hip well, such as resin and honey anacardium and heat with soap, all these things mixed together.
And Galien tells us of a treatment where a man was cured of the pain in his hip and sciatic nerve, and he praises it greatly, and says that no other treatment was done, and that he was healed all at once when this treatment was performed, and he bathed as it is taught hereafter.
And he says that you should take fresh and dry green litharge, and grind it well with a little fat, and apply it to the hip and thigh and leg where the pain is, and leave it;
and leave for three hours by the quantity that the patient no longer feels the burning.
And then make him enter the bath until his body is a bit warmed, and make him enter the bed, and the pain will completely go away and he will be healed.
And know that no one should use fire cautery of such medicines, if it is not after the evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's fat, it helps greatly;
and the cautery should be done in such a manner. Take wool and anoint it with old oil, and place it on the groove that is between the big toe and the other one which is called the instep.
After take dry goat's fat, and apply it to fire until it is charcoal, and put it on the wool, and leave it until it melts;
and do again in this way, and do not stop doing so until you think by feeling that it reaches to the hip, and the pain ceases;
and this kind of cautery is called "goat cautery".
of the pain of the back
When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or from percussion or from too great an evacuation, or from similar cold matter spread out, none of these appearances is suitable for cauterization, because it comes from the infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary after the patient has been emptied of foul pills or other similar things, that one makes on his back, where the pain holds, three lines marked with ink, and in each line five cauteries or more according to the strength and quantity that the patient can endure;
and let the cautery be done according to the cautery which is called "point";
and if you wish, make three or four cauteries with the medium-sized clamp according to this form:
Often this disease comes to small children, and the signs of the beginning are that they have tight groins when they rise, and fear; and you find at the back of the spine and in us the appearance which comes over the other spines.
When you see this and wish to treat it, then cauterize it with the circular cautery according to this form. So that the cautery marks each part of the spine equally.
And if you wish, then cauterize around the spine with a sharp cautery two lines or three, and let the points be close to each other.
After treat the area until it is healed according to what we have said, and beware that you do not apply cautery to swelling that is in spasms of a nerve.
of the pain of the joints
When the pain of joints is from moisture that has spread to each member of the body, and when pain comes in feet, which the physician properly calls "gout," and when it is of cold cause and treatments of medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauterization in this manner:
make many cauterizations around the joint of the foot, and let the cauterizations be olive-shaped according to this form:
And if there is need that you press on the sole of the foot, then make a cautery across the entire point called "point". And if the pains come down to the knees and other joints, and this often happens, then make cauterizations on each knee three or four in each part, with the entire cauterization being olive-shaped;
and if you have need of more, then make more, but do not hold your hand out any longer than it takes for the point of the heart to be burned.
And if the pains descend as far as the knees and to the back, then the administrator should apply the cautery that we have mentioned in our chapter.
and if the pains are in the hands, then make points around the elbow two inches;
and if there remains any pain in the fingers, then make points on each joint and on the palm of the hand;
and if the pains come down to the ribs or up to the shoulders, then cauterize each part, and give good care to the patient and prepare medications.
For if you give him good care and you purge phlegm, he will be healed by the grace of God.
When rupture comes in the groin, and the bowel descends to the testicles and this is newly occurred, then it is necessary that when you wish to treat it, he should not eat on that day; and he uses things that loosen the belly, so that the bile descends from his belly;
after he makes him sit on his back between your hands, and commands him to stretch his wrist until the veins appear, and you hold them with your fingers, and stretch downward from the joint above the bone of the wrist, and make a sign that resembles half a circle above the body;
then heat the cautery of which this is the form:
until it becomes white and gives off sparks. then return the veins to their place; and the minister stretches his hand so they do not retreat back;
and work well on the thighs of the patient, and put a cushion under him and a bolster on the thighs, and another on the part that holds the hands;
then put the cautery on the mark with your whole hand, and hold it straight and keep it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, then repeat again until you come to the bone; and be careful that the blister does not burst when you make the cautery; that you do not burn it too much; and that by this the patient does not die, or suffer other harms.
And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
And it is necessary that the cauterization of children be subtle according to the measure of eggs, and for large people likewise as big according to their measure;
After three days, treat the area of the cauterization with butter until the scalding is removed;
after treating with other ointments until it is healed, and the patient lies forty days on his back until the wound is well sealed;
and it is necessary that his nourishments be diluted for a long time, so that the scabs do not protrude when he begins to move around in rooms.
And after forty days, when he wishes to rise, let him be given a well-made bandage, and wear it for another forty days;
and let him have good rest, that he labors little and guards against too great fullness of drink and food, and of too loud shouting;
and when he follows this teaching, then is he entirely healed.
And I will say hereafter the treatment of cutting in his chapter.
When ruptures occur in other parts of the body and are known, and you see that they do not grow larger, then make a cautery according to its size, and let a third of it be burned; afterwards treat it according to what we have said;
and some of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized with a three-cornered cautery according to this form:
but mark first the place to join and make a line across the width above the rupture, and another outside, and hold your hand right in the middle of the key-shaped cautery.
But the first cautery is lighter and more gentle.
of old pain in any limb When pain comes in any limb, whether from falling or striking, and that pain lasts a long time, and medical treatment does not help, then it should be cauterized with the cautery called "points," and the cautery should be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and virtue and location of twists and its pain.
if he is healed by the first cautery, it is good;
if that name, begin another cautery on that spot, for such is the custom that it must change to the part that is closest, therefore you must make the cauteries until the patient is healed.
The mixtures are sometimes aided by cautery with great help, and especially the diseases that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
When you see to cauterize, beware if the disease is in its beginning, and if it is treated according to what we have said in the division, and does not spread nor remain, and you fear that the corruption may spread throughout the patient, then make five cauteries on the head: one in the middle of the head, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hair; and two on the two horns, and one behind on the nape;
and keep your hand there until the cauterization reaches the bone, and until the scabs come out so that the vapors from the thick humors can escape;
and cauterize on the joint according to what is mentioned before.
And if the miliaria is spread everywhere; and if it is clearly present, then you should cauterize it with these cauteries that we have mentioned at the head, and one cauterization on top of the neck, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and six cauteries on the spine of the back, and one large one on the rump and another nearby, and two on the two shoulders; and two on the ribs, and two on the tendons of the breast, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands;
and beware of the nerves that are on the last heel, that you do not burn them;
and sometimes one makes a cautery on the bone of the wrist, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that when I do more cauteries, I provide more help, and it benefits him;
and know that the patient does not feel any pain from the cautery as the healthy person feels it, because the body is already entirely corrupted.
And it is necessary that the cauterizations be large and small according to the limbs and the joints, according to what you will find in methods of the irons.
After treatment, apply the place with flour of Veronica and honey and other treatments until it is healed.
When swelling comes to any limb and is treated with medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healed, then make cauterizations on the limb according to the size and smallness of the limb;
and let the cauterization slightly penetrate into the thickness of the skin; then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
And sometimes cauterization is done to the hand and foot and back, at the nerve endings that move the limb, and thus the swelling is removed;
and in any case, no one should intervene if they are not knowledgeable about the limbs and the nerve endings that move the body.
When the disease which is called «albaras» is awakened, and medical treatments are of no use, then cauterize it with a cautery a bit thoroughly, according to the quantity of the thickness of the tumor, until the swelling is removed, and its color changes;
then treat with flour of vetches and lentils with rose oil and leaves of plantain, and blood of pigeon and blood of lark, of each one part; and mix everything together, and bind it with a cloth, and apply it to the place until it is healed.
the treatment of chancre by cautery
When chancre comes at the beginning, and you wish to stop it, then cauterize it with a cautery that resembles a circle, all around the edge of the chancre.
And moreover, the wise say that one should also make a cautery in the middle of the ulcer;
and all the same this does not seem good to me, for I fear that it might become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already seen it happen at times;
and it is more advisable that it be cauterized around with the cautery which is called "circle", as we have said much about cauters.
When someone has a disease which is called "adubelati", and it lingers in dying either due to the excess it causes or due to the age of the patient when they are decrepit (that is to say too old) and have little blood, or due to the season; and you wish to hasten its end: then cauterize around with many small cauteries while pressing; afterwards leave it thus. For she will hasten to moisturize.
And if you wish to pierce it with the entire cautery, then heat the cautery in this manner which is its form:
And place your hand in the middle of that disease which is called "adubelati" until the cautery has pierced the heart, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels it externally in such a way that the course of the putrefaction is alleviated.
After the treatment until he is perfectly healed.
Another kind of disease there is which is called "corrodens," and it is nothing other than a consumption of the limb, for it consumes the limbs as fire consumes dry wood.
If you see this disease in a place that can withstand fire together with cautery, then heat the key-shaped cauteries both small and large, according to what is appropriate for the location where the disease is;
afterwards cauterize all around until you reach all the corruption, and none of it remains, so that everything which is corrupted is removed.
And then leave it for three days, and put on the cauterized places boiled wool with oil until the burns from the fire are removed, and all of the corruption.
After that, apply ointments that promote flesh growth.
And if you see after three days that healthy flesh does not grow, it is good;
and if not, then repeat the cautery on what remains of the corrupted areas.
And this mangling has sometimes been cured by medicine applied instead of fire cautery;
but nevertheless fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already stated the treatment with medicine in the section: take it when you need it.
of the veins that come to the feet Very often, a disease called "clos" according to our understanding arises on the feet from the outside, and it is a large, inflamed thing that hurts the foot.
And the cauterization for this disease is according to two methods. That is to say, fire cauterization, and hot water cauterization.
Fire cautery is such that you heat the cautery to the length of a goose feather, and it should be made of good iron in a size that can surround the nail on all sides, and that there are fine edges;
afterward, place it completely hot on the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it reaches the root of the nail; and leave it thus for three days until it begins to expel pus; then make a poultice of wild mallows crushed with tar, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail will fall out and be uprooted from its roots.
Then clean the ointment area by greasing the flesh until it is healed.
And if they turn inward on the body, and this often happens in hands and feet, then you must apply a cautery of hot water; and it is done in such manner: take a reed of boxwood or iron, or a goose quill, and place it on the nail and the wart, that is to say, corns or warts; and put the cane on so that it wraps all around, then put a pot of warm water on it, and hold your hand well, and press your hand while turning so that the edge of the cane comes to the root of the nail, and can find the way deep down to the root;
and let the patient endure the bite of the hot water for an hour; then leave it thus, and it will be uprooted entirely from its roots.
So do one after another until you strengthen all those that are in the body, then treat them with ointments that generate flesh.
When someone shivers from cold or nerves, or from a quartan fever or another, then you should make four cauteries or four on the spine of the back, one cauterization between each vertebra; And for the cautery with a weight, and on the stomach with the olive-shaped cautery;
let it shake, and the health hastens from the cold disease.
Sometimes there appear on the outer part of the body baths, or smelly pus-filled boils, which come from corrupted large materials.
and it is necessary at first when they appear to make a cautery on each head of the pustule: a fine cautery of myrtle wood, with which the tip is held to the fire, or of a long root of aristolochia, or a lentil-shaped cautery.
And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear, in this manner, and they cannot grow any further, but the excess from which they come is broken, and they are healed;
but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
Often there are great flows of blood from the artery that is cut in the wound that comes to the surface, or in the incision of an abscess, or in the cautery of the limb, and similar things; and it is a very difficult thing to stop.
And whenever this happens to someone, you must quickly place your index finger on the wound of the vein and press very hard until the blood is calmed beneath your finger, and no drop comes out;
then put the olive oil cauterization tools of various sizes over the fire until they are all red;
Then apply the cautery, whether large or small according to the wound and the place where the artery is cut, and put the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cautery so long that the blood is restrained.
And if it jumps out when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cauterizer is extinguished, then quickly take another of the cauterizers that are in the fire.
And do not stop doing this one after the other until the blood is stopped;
and be careful not to burn the nerve that is nearby, and that no other harm comes to the patient;
and know that when blood flows from an artery, it cannot be easily stopped unless by one of the four methods we have mentioned: either by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by tight binding with thread, or by applying medications that have the power to stop blood; and let it be tied and held firmly.
Who will administer compression by tightly binding with cloths or placing burning substances on it, or other similar things, does not help if the pus is not.
And if this happens to anyone and there is no doctor or medicine present, then he must put his index finger on the vein wound as we have said, and stretch well until it remains over the wound and over the vein; and he should not move it, but moisten it with cold water often, which should be very cold, until the blood is frozen, thickened, and congealed;
and make preparations in advance for what he may need of cauterization and medicines.
We have told you in the first chapter about all diseases in which fire cauterization or burning medicines are needed, and the indications and causes and the ingredients and forms of the cauterizations;
and I have placed this chapter from head to foot, and I will proceed in this chapter by the same method so that one finds more easily what one wants.
And before I begin this, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of cauteries, and for that reason greater caution is required.
For in the work of this chapter there are many times evacuations of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and treating wounds, and extracting arrows, and incising stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and from it comes death to many.
And I warn you that you do not undertake folly. For many kinds of people come to treatments. they come from those who hate themselves so much with their illness that they change easily because of the madness they find in their disease, and the greatness of its malice; and of these one must have fear.
And there are some who give their sense and say: wait, I am a surgeon"; and the disease is spiteful.
It is not fitting that you consent to those who come to you with this manner, but place greater trust in your honor than in your desire, and do not open foolishly but wisely about that which you are certain, and from which you can gain praise;
and use prognosis and indication in the treatments of your patients to whom health is to be restored;
and this will help you to acquire good reputation, and glory, and memory of praise.
Very dear son, May our Lord grant you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to breathe of the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Or I have ordered this chapter by dividing it into sections, according to what is before in the chapter of cauterizations, that I have divided from head to foot, so that you may find more easily what you will need.
and you know that this disease often comes to children at birth, and when it gives too strong a pull on the child's head;
and sometimes this comes from a hidden cause that is unknown.
And I have never seen this disease except in children, and in all those I have seen, death was swift; and for that reason, it seems to me that I should not leave the work in such cases.
And I saw a child whose head was filled with water, and the head swelled each day until it could no longer support it;
and so wet with moisture that it was dead, and this moisture is gathered under the bone on the saphenous vein, between the heart and the bone;
and the work is such that if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscess is small, you should split down the middle of the head a wide cut;
and let it be as long as two fingers, until the moisture flows;
and here is the form of the spatula:
If the moisture is thicker, and the abscess is larger, make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
and if the moisture is under the bone, and the signs that you see are the openings at the top of the head from each side, and the fluid jumps out forcefully when you press it with your hand from inside, and this does not return to you: so you must split the head in three splits according to this manner:
And after the incision, extract all the moisture out. after extracting the cloths and powders, put wine and oil in them, and leave it this way until the fifth day;
then untie it, and treat the wound with tents and ointments, and continue to bind the head evenly, and give the patient dry meat with little moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed.
And another method of incision is to look where the swelling of the abscess is most prominent and where the fluid has gathered;
for sometimes it is in front; sometimes behind; sometimes on the right; and sometimes on the left.
Cut then the abscess when it is open, and the filling of the pus, and slit it according to what you are able;
and beware that you do not cut the artery; and if a flow of blood comes, so that the patient dies from the loss of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
When it happens to someone a disease which is called "catarrh" in the eyes or nose, and the illness is old, and the medical treatment does not help, then the final treatment is cauterization along with cutting the two arteries.
It is therefore necessary, when you cut the veins, that the patient tilt their head back; afterwards he rubs the area with a coarse cloth until the arteries appear, then the patient tightens his neck around the entire cloth; then look where the vein is located, and the areas from one to the other are behind the ears, and they are positioned there;
then mark the areas to incise, then cut one and the other with a sharp two-edged spatula until the cut reaches the bone, and this should be done across the width of the head.
And if you wish, place the knife under the artery and cut above it, slicing also in two parts across.
And when the vein is cut, the blood will spurt up continuously forcefully.
and if the artery does not appear upon feeling, then you must measure the space of three fingers, then mark to incise and cut until the bone;
and the amount of blood that should be let out is six ounces, and perhaps a little more or less, according to what the patient can bear, and the replenishment of the artery;
then look at the wound: if any of the abscess remains on the bone, cut it so that no hot abscess comes, then drain the wound and tie it up, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
of migraine When an old migraine comes with a sharp catarrh, due to the moisture of tears and the heat in the temples and the old snot forcefully emerging and similar things, and it is treated by methods of medical treatments but all that does not help him, then we draw the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have described.
And the method of extracting them is that the patient should pull back the hairs from their temples and pay attention to the artery that appears in the temple, for it shows well by its pulsation, and it is slightly set outward than in some men who are too cold;
and if it is replaced, then the patient tightens its neck with some cloths, then rubs the area with a rough cloth, and rinses the area with warm water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatula of which this is the form: then lightly peel the skin until you reach the artery, then pull it up to the tweezers, and carefully separate the tissues that are beneath it on each side;
and if the artery is delicate, then turn it with the tip of the hook, then cut it from that part according to the quantity of two fingers. For if it is not cut, then the sinew does not jump entirely throughout.
and draw blood from six ounces down to three;
and if the artery is large, then you must tie it in two places with a strong double thread of silk, so that corruption does not come before the healing of the wound, and bleeding occurs;
then cut off the excess that is between the two ties at the same hour, and then, if you wish, cauterize it with a knife cautery until the head is cut to the bone;
and it is the most difficult work if the patient does not have fever and is of a hot temperament. For cauterization is a help to finish the moisture: for that reason, it is of greater help to the moisture.
For the extraction of arteries, it is necessary to fill the place with old cotton and put well-made bandages on top;
and when they are untied, be careful with dry medicines that promote flesh growth and bandages until it is healed;
and if there is bleeding from the artery as long as you work on it, hasten to cut by cautery, or use verdigris in the place and press with your hand until the blood is stopped; and if you do not have that available, put your thumb on the place until the blood is congealed, and wash the place with cold water until the bleeding stops, and press as necessary;
and there should be one inch of thickness between the two blades, and then when you have marked where to join the two places, and you place the burning iron until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in two parts; and they should be separated between the two shoulders because it is not fully soldered with this cautery throughout;
and this is the form of the cautery:
and that which is better and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this sharp cautery of two parts, but let the blade be well thick to retain its heat longer. For when the instrument is too thin, it holds less of its heat.
tears and when the tears of the eyes are descending from the veins that are on top of the head due to fire, and medical treatment does not help, and you see the face of the patient redden, and feel a trembling on the forehead as if shaking; and on which are swollen and moist so that the hairs of the eyelids fall out, and the eyelids are heated, and scorched by the heat of the tears, then this treatment is needed. And the ancients called it "treatment for contusion," and it is that you make behind the patient who has this disease the hairs which he has on his forehead, then make III cuts on the forehead equally according to the length of the forehead;
And the ancients called it "treatment for contusion," and it is that you make behind the patient who has this disease the hairs which he has on his forehead, then make III cuts on the forehead equally according to the length of the forehead; and let one of the cuts be like two fingers right in the middle of the forehead going down to the nose, and the other two at the sides above the eyelids, and beware of the arteries that are on both sides above the eyelids;
and move your hand away from the joining of the two jawbones, and let each wound be the quantity of three fingers across.
and have prepared a piece of sponge and much cloth to wipe the blood, then put the sharp spatula in two parts where this is the shape:
from the incision which is below the temple up to the second incision; and peel all the heart that is between the two cuts to the whole surface which is on the bone, then make another cut from the middle incision to the other second one, and then extract with this spatula. so place in the first cut the instrument which is called "cultellaire", and it is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is blunt, not cutting, and this is its form:
And place the sharp side towards the diseased flesh of the heart, and the blunt side towards the bone, and insert it until it reaches the middle cut.
And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes so that the incision is continuous up to where it opens from the heart, and then make another one in the middle cut up to the other side;
and then draw the blood evenly, and press the area for the captured blood;
then place in each incision a wad of old cotton, and put on cloths moistened with wine and oil and ash, and be careful that hot abscesses do not come;
and on the third day loosen the bandage, and apply a great deal of warm water, then treat it with basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other treatments used to heal wounds, until it is healed.
When acute catarrh often comes to someone, and you see the eyes dull and small, and weakening of sight, and the eyelids burned; and the hair falls out, and on the head it causes acute pain, and the patient sneezes; then you know by these symptoms that those materials and the catarrh come from many veins, and the best treatment there is, is this.
And you instruct the patient to lie down on his back, then make a large incision in the middle of the forehead, and another one on the wide temple. And start from the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision go as far as the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move during eating;
and when the bone is exposed, wipe all the blood with a sponge, and then separate the two edges of the wound and put old cotton and linen threads in it; then bind above with cloths moistened in wine and in oil, and beware of a hot abscess;
when it is removed, you must rub the bone until cartilage begins to grow, then treat it with drying substances, which promote the hardening of the cartilage.
In such manner: take two parts of flour of wheat, and four parts of colophony, and make a plaster; and apply it to these wounds to promote the hardening of cartilage throughout.
of the deafness of the ears
Everything that falls into the ears is one of the four things: for grains, for beasts, for stone from mines or similar things such as iron; for seeds, such as lentils, beans, peas; for flowing things such as water and oils and similar things.
When a stone or any other kind of thing that does not fit in the ear and does not grow in the ear falls into it, place the ear in the sun.
If you see the stone, then distill a bit of violet oil or flaxseed oil, then apply extraction; and make the person sneeze with condiments, and plug the nostrils when the sneezing comes, and place pieces of cloth or wool around the ear; and pull the ear upwards.
Very often force comes from this treatment;
and if force does not come, the administrator should perform extraction with subtle tweezers, of which here is the form:
If force comes with the tweezers, it is good;
if not, then perform the extraction with a subtle needle of small double edge;
and if it does not come out by this means, then make a tube of lead and insert the end of the tube into the opening of the ear tightly, and plug what is around the tube with soft wax so that air cannot enter with the tube; then draw the force strongly, for often comes the force as we have said;
and if it does not come out by force in such manner, then take glue of egg and use some instrument that is sharp for this purpose, and put a piece of cotton around; then press the glue on the stone or whatever it may be, and draw out by force.
and if it does not come out by force from all these things that we have said, then hasten to split the ear before a hot abscess and spasm comes.
and the method of the incision is that you first bleed the patient from the cephalic vein, and withdraw blood according to the measure of his strength, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear in the fat where it hangs. and let the cut be like a moon, until you come to the stone, then remove it according to your power, and suck it hastily with your mouth;
and treat it until it is healed.
And if it is grains that are inside and it swells, then administer extraction;
and if it cannot come out, then administer the spatula gently according to this form: and to administer an incision of that grain.
But do not do this when you think the grains are moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces;
then extract it with fine tweezers and the suction tube, as we have said, so that the extraction may be light.
In the case of fluid that falls into the ear, it is necessary for the patient to use sneezing with condiments first, and plug the ear with old cotton. And lie down on that same ear where the fluid is. If it jumps out through that, it is good.
if not, then take many stones according to the length of your finger thin and light, and warm them a bit in the fire; and have the patient place one in the opening of his ear, and jump up with one of his feet from the other side, and strike with another stone upon the stone that is in the ear; and do not stop doing this from stone to stone until the pain goes away completely, and thus it will all go away;
and if you want to, take some reed, and put one end in the ear, and the other end into fire until the softer part of the reed is burned;
then make another section with other incisions until all the pus comes out, just as we have said about the stone.
In the extraction of the creature, if it is of small body, like a flea and similar things, treat it as we have said in the section on division;
but if it is of large body that can be felt, then apply the extraction with tweezers; and it is the lightest thing to remove that may be in the ear.
In the extraction of earwigs from the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the section and in the treatment of distillations, and the treatment does not help, then you must look into the ear toward the sun: If there are any hairs there, pull them out with subtle tweezers, and if they do not appear, take the tube that has this form:
And let it be narrow below and wide above. And insert the finest end into the ear according to the extent of the patient's suffering, then suck forcefully on the entire tube; Do this often until all the worms come out.
And if they do not obey to come out, stuff around the tube with cotton as I have said in the stone;
and if they do not come out as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have tested in the excision of worms, and you will find them in the treatise on distillations;
and then distill your oils and your medicines into the ear with all this instrument, of which here is the form as you see: and whether it is of silver or brass, narrow below at the small openings, and above wider for distilling;
and to press inside for the distillation, an instrument of brass well made for this purpose, and if you want, take the rasp and wrap around the point appropriately with cotton; then pour your oil or your juice, and what you want of your medicines into the cane, and the cane should be in the ear;
then insert the rasp into the cotton completely, and press your hand moderately until the oil is distilled into the ear canal; and the patient feels it inside, and let the distillation be slightly heated over fire before you distill it into the ear; and be careful that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
of the deafness of the ears
Some children are born who have no openings in their ears;
and the same thing happens to adults due to obstructions from wounds or foreign objects inside the ear, and these obstructions sometimes occur deep within the ear so that they cannot be seen;
and sometimes the opening is slightly blocked, and one can see it well.
Then the one that comes in perfect, if it cannot be seen, is of grievous healing in many conditions, and in that which can be seen you must place the patient's ear to the sun; and look inside: if you see the obstruction apparent, then the work has all this space wherein is the form:
And let it be sharp and cutting on both sides entirely smooth, so that it does not hurt the ear;
if the obstruction is of flesh or body of the ear, then hold it with fine tweezers and cut lightly until all the flesh is removed.
And if the obstruction is fully in the ear, then take a fine light scraper and warm it slightly over fire, then place it in the core of the ear.
If you feel the wax that causes the patient to have difficulty hearing, pierce lightly, and be careful not to harm the nerves of the ear;
then put in the ear a plug according to the width of the opening, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment. Do this for several days until the wound is sealed, or you take a plug and moisten it with rose water, and sprinkle powdered vitriol on it;
and if you see the ear swollen, then you must remove the plug and insert another moistened with an ointment made of rose oil and wax until the swelling is gone; then treat until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs, dip a sponge and cloths in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the bleeding which are in the treatment of distillations.
This eyelid that comes over the eyes when they are moist and dry, you must stretch it with forceps and tweezers, and cut it from its roots with a spatula; then put ground vitriol on the area.
And if it does not heal, then cauterize it with a fine lenticular cautery, and the cauterizer after the incision is very good;
and they often recur if any part of their roots remains; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
of the hailstones Many times come into the eyes things that resemble hail in their form and hardness, and for this reason this disease is called "hail", and it is a gathering of moisture thickened above and below the eye. the work is such:
the work is such: be wary if the hail moves from one side to another, and this is an easy thing to know;
then make an incision widely, then gently peel each part, then take it with tweezers, and cut it.
if you cannot cut it without piercing a little the eye membrane, it does no harm to the patient;
and if the wound is large, then it is sewn with a stitch, and treated until it is healed;
and if it is small, then do not apply force, for the ointments restore it quickly and promote flesh growth.
And if the earwax is descending inside the ear towards the upper part, then invert the paper, and extend the earwax with tweezers, and cut and press it from both sides;
and if the paper is pushed away by the incision, it does not matter;
and when the earwax is cut, then apply salt water, and treat the area with flesh-growing medicine until the patient is healed.
of the fat of the eyes Exinach is a fat that is wrapped in the webbing of the eyelids above, and this happens more to children than to any people, and it greatly troubles their eyes, and they get catarrh in the mornings, and cannot bear the light of the sun because tears rush to their eyes;
and because of this they lie on their faces immediately, and sleep there, and their eyelids under their eyebrows are wet which swells and the appearance is covered by the exinach that appears in the eye. And when you press the place with your hands and feel the protrusion between them.
And the method of the work is that the patient places his head on your healthy [part];
and then take a linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity of exinach contained in each part, then place it on top; and press with your hands from one side to the other so that the protrusion is gathered within the circle;
then cut into the moisture with a sharp spatula a wide slit, and let it not be larger than the wound one makes at the edge of a vein;
and cut through the skin thoroughly until you reach the protrusion; and in various positions, the protrusion comes out of the slit, according to the form of a white fatty piece.
Then extract it with a piece of coarse cloth held between your hands, and turn your hand right and left until it is spread out;
and guard that you do not apply to the fissure, that you do not come all the way to the spleen until the eye, that you do not wound it.
and if the abscess does not open at the beginning of the fissure, enlarge the fissure slightly until it opens;
then extract it as we have said, then moisten cloths with oil and water, and place them on the area, and bind with bandages.
And there are such people who grind coal and put it on to corrupt the moisture that remains.
Then treat until it is healed.
And if an abscess comes to the place hot, then treat it with soothing plasters until it is healed.
the hairs of the eyelids When on the eyelids hairs grow in a manner different from natural, and they are irritated, they harm the eyes, and cause various diseases such as habitual tears and softening of the eyelids and leukoma, to the point that it can lead to the destruction of the eyes;
and the treatment is according to four manners: or by cautery with fire, or by medicinal baths according to what is mentioned in the chapter on cautery, and it is done either by incision and suturing or by splints, according to what I will say.
It is necessary that you place the head of the patient in your hand, then turn the paper of the eye to your left hand;
if it is turned, it is good; if not, then put a needle with the entire thread on top; and let it be near the margin of the paper where the hair grows next to these hairs, and draw the thread across the entire paper, and turn it to the razor;
then cut into the part below the parchment, below the attached hairs, cutting all the spatumile, from the large eyelid to the small one;
then pull out the thread, and place below the parchment a small tent of cotton and cloth, then apply on the parchment a figure of henna, like the leaf of myrtle, and it always befits that the figure should according to the quantity you wish to lift the divided parchment.
And there are cases where it is necessary to cut a large quantity of the parchment according to how softened the parchment is;
then cut through the entire spatumile along the two lines that you have marked, and begin from the large eyelid to the small one; and let one of the cuts be near the natural hairs with a thickness of a root, then insert the lancet into one of the two corners of the circle, then peel it all;
then bring the two lips together with a stitch of one needle using fine wool thread, and wipe the blood, and apply heat to remove the excess threads on both eyebrows using some sticky substances, if you wish to do this;
and if not, then do not bother, then leave the stitch and the threads for three or four days;
then treat the wound without stitching with drying and binding substances, for the bandage rises with the closing of the wound and its joining, but the stitch is weaker (as the ancients say), and this work is without fear; and there is another manner:
and there is another manner: and it is that you mark the paper with a figure which is like the leaf of myrtle, as we have described, at three inches apart according to the form which is here:
then cut what protrudes above the small forces equally according to the form which is here:
And if you are not able to hold the tweezers, and the thing is not even, then take a needle with a thread, and insert it through the figure; and place one thread next to the large eyelid, and the second thread next to the small one, and gather the threads evenly between your fingers;
then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin that you have marked, as we have described, then bring together the two lips of the wound by stitching, and care for it until it is healed;
and if an abscess comes to your incision, then soothe it with poultice and similar soothing ointments;
and sometimes it happens that the hairs of the paper are inverted:
then you must use what we have said about the incision;
but the suturing in one and the other is more intricate.
The treatment of the veins is according to this form: and it is that you invert the paper and cut into it according to what I have said, and then make two veins by art, and two subtle threads as long as the paper and as wide as the spatula is; and cut at the two shoulders of two parts where you hold the threads;
then carefully join one and the other above what surpasses of the paper of the eye, and extract the two canals from the two parts completely; and leave it this way for some days, and the skin that was constricted will die, dry out, and rot until it falls off by itself.
If it delays, cut it with force, then clean it until it is healed;
and when the wound is sealed, and the paper is lifted, the hairs will no longer prick;
and this is the form of the two canes that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:
the work is such that you take a fine needle, and put in it a thread of silk smooth and fine; then gather the shoulders and tie one to the other subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm long;
then arrange in the case another fine thread of silk briefly, and tie the ends of the thread;
then have the patient place their head on your knee;
and be near the sun so that the work is illuminated, for this is delicate and fine work, then insert the needle entirely into the case at the root of the hair adjacent, and pierce it quickly into the parchment until you pull it over the natural hair;
then pull out the hair up to the socket, and place that hair into the socket if there is one or two or three or more;
then withdraw your hand until the hair comes out entirely from the socket into the paper with the natural hair.
And if the socket is pulled and the hair does not come out with it, then pull the socket downward along the entire thread that you have arranged, until the socket comes out of the hole above and you can see it with your eye;
then pull the socket and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hair burns in its place and new flesh grows over;
and if the hair is short, then accompany the long hair from the natural hair, and lift it with that which you leave, until it is extended and then raise it.
of the pus from the eye When this disease which is called "aleacrati" or the corruption comes to the eye, it happens in two ways:
one natural, and the other unnatural.
And it happens by the suddenness of a wound, or of a cutting or of a cautery, and by similar things.
And the method of treatment is that you cut open that swelling, separate its lips, and put linen threads inside, and leave it until it heals;
and it is not appropriate that you use in the treatment of it things that dry and constrict. For if you do this, then the illness returns worse than before;
but use softening things, such as fenugreek; and the ash of water or earth and flaxseed should be cooked, and unguents of aquilon melted in any of the oils, and it is wrapped in a cloth, and it is cured with this.
And the treasure of your care is that you take heed that it does not heal in the same form as before;
and these works that we have mentioned are only remedies for this disease, so that it does not return in the same form as before.
This disease that is beneath is truly called "axacrati," and it is natural and accidental.
The accident comes from wound and cut and cautery and similar things;
and the method of the work in it is that you take a needle, in which there is double thread, and stick it into the flesh, and make it pierce from the left eyelid to the right, so that the thread comes out two fingers from the flesh;
then stretch the flesh above all the needle, and cut it to one spatula wide. And if the shape of the paper returns according to what is appropriate, it is good;
if not, then take a scraper and put it in the cut, and turn the paper, and make two cuts on the sides inside the paper;
and let the points of the two fissures of the two corners of the incision that you have made be such that when they are brought together, the shape should resemble the form of a letter called “I Greek”;
then remove that flesh according to the quantity that its edges are sharp below, from what lies under the skin, then join the two separated parts, and sew them with a thread of wool;
then treat it with what we have said about softening medicines and bandages until it is healed.
And if the disease comes from a fissure or a suture or a cautery, then you must make a clean incision below the hairs of the skin, according to what is stated above; then separate between the two leaves of a tent, just as I have said;
then separate between the two leaves of a tent, just as I have said; and one must perform the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters devise ingeniously to the best of their ability how they might restore the figure to its natural state;
and the patient himself, according to what is required of work and instruments in various arrangements.
When this soldering happens to men in such a way that the eyelid above is fused with the white of the eye, and cannot move nor perform its natural functions, then you must put the point of a razor under the eyelid, and lift it up;
and you stretch with pincers until you cut what is near the subtle spatula, which should not be too sharp nor too cutting, so that the patient cannot bear a too sharp spatula to hurt the eye;
and let your incision, with which you peel that assembly, be slight, so that the parchment returns to its natural form;
and it heals all that assembly, and they sometimes use salty water in the sharp eye, and raise with sweet water, and of collar.
then place between the parchment and the eye a linen tent, and put on the eye wool moistened in egg white; and after the third day use the collar and the sudatory things until he is healed.
Know that the nail grows in two ways: it is nervous and similar to hard skin, and another that is not nervous, but resembles white frozen moisture, which when one touches it with iron and tries to pare it with tweezers, one cannot.
and both appearances begin near the large eyelid, and grow little by little until they cover the entire sight and all the light and movement of the eye.
And the method of the incision is that the patient place his head in your hand, then operate on the eyes; and lift the paper to your hand, then curl the nail with small double-edged tweezers, and stretch it above; then take a needle, and put horse hair, or cow hair, or ox hair, and strong thread; and double the tip of the needle a bit and insert it into the nail, and pierce all the way through the nail, and tie the nail with thread and stretch it above, and shave all the hair next to the nail which is near the pupil and attach the silk to the hair until the top, then cut the remaining part at the root of the tear duct very finely and gently, and leave the natural flesh of the tear duct so that by the incision the usual flow of tears does not come from the eye;
and sometimes the nail extends only to the ounce, and to the thread, as we have said; then one peels off all the sputamile [likely a misspelling or archaic term, possibly meant to be "peritame" or similar], from which this form comes;
and be careful that the sputamile does not touch the flesh membrane and break it, and that the pupil is not pierced;
and after the incision, put a bit of ground seal and some collyrium made of litharge in the eye, and leave it until the next day; then clean it with what is necessary until it is healed.
And if the nail is not firm, and you cannot push the needle, and the forceps cannot enter, this kind of nail is often treated with medicine;
and they grow as I have described in the division, and if you wish to cut it, work on the patient's eye, and take the lightly sharpened spatula according to this form: And raise the nail above subtly, and if you see that it does not thin out and the quick is pressing in, then distill from your mouth into the eye collyria made of litharge and of red collyrium and well ground, and plug the eye until the next day;
If any thing does not oppose you in the eye, like a hot abscess, then leave it alone and first treat the hot abscess until it is healed, then resume the work as before, until it is healed.
then restart the work according to this same method, until it is all removed.
And if the appearance of the flesh from the eyelid harms the eye with great damage, suspend it to the lancet, and cut part of it and not all, so tears may come.
then distill red collyrium into the eye which is made from litharge.
In the eyes of some men, red flesh sometimes grows, covering the pupil and spreading over the membranes and turning them outward, and it resembles a rose of balausteon;
and the procedure is that the patient puts his head in your hand, then you operate on the eyes, and cut all that flesh with suitable tweezers for this, and hold it firmly;
then cut the first part, and keep cutting close to the skin until the end, and be careful not to injure the eye during the work;
and the incision of the spatula that we have mentioned in the incision of the nail and for small forces from which one removes the splinter, just as the form after this chapter demonstrates;
and when the incision is completed and all the flesh is removed, then apply oil of selenium ground to which you add red collyrium and similar corrosive medicines, and put on top cotton with egg white so that it secures a hot abscess;
and if anything remains and the skin swells above it, and you fear a hot abscess, then leave the oil and treat the abscess with things that soothe a hot abscess;
then return to your work until it is healed, and thus do when shards are set in the eye by this likeness.
but nonetheless you must lighten the treatment of each weak eye by the natural way; and by the accidental way in iron work;
and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this limb is able to endure that work.
Sebel are red veins that cover the eye, and they hinder sight's work and weaken the eye all day.
It is then necessary first that you look if the eye in which the cataract is, is strong, and there is no other disease besides the cataract; then treat it in this manner:
instruct the patient to place his head in your hand, then suspend those veins for all the ancyons according to your wisdom, and let the ancyons be twice as fine according to this form:
And let there be two incisions by degrees on the body according to this form:
then you coil with force those fine veins, and wipe the blood hour after another, until you see those veins move out of the eye;
and be careful not to injure the eye with the points of the spatula, and do this work at noon in the sun, and be very diligent in your work so that you do not cut outside those veins;
and when you have done this, distill into the eye green and red collyria to corrupt what remains of the bile.
And if you do not have the power to gather all of this in that hour, make a plaster on the eye with things soothing the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is soothed and assured of a hot abscess, then restart according to this method which is before until he be healed;
and this is the form of the forces:
The doctor calls a fistula "arissati":
when you cure it with cautery and with fiery medicine according to what I have said before, and if it is not healed, then there is reason in it that you cut into the abscess, where it must die, and draw out all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is uncovered, and you see the corruption and the blackness, then clean it all with this instrument of which here is the form;
and it is called "harsh head," and it should be made of iron to the head round, and pointed like a file as it is in the present form:
And place it on the area of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand a little until you know that the corruption is removed;
and do this several times, then restore the area with drying medicines.
if the area is sealed, and flesh grows, and the core of the bone is sealed, and remains this way for forty days, and it does not renew or become abscessed, and no harmful accidents occur, know that it is healed;
If not, then there is another method to return the fistula to the opening of the nose according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone a second time by iron and with medicinal waters, and when it is uncovered then take the forceps according to this form, and let the head of the iron be three-angled, and let the handle be tapered up to the top as you see here:
then place it on the bone near the tear duct, and move your hand away from the eye a little, then turn the forceps entirely until it penetrates the bone and the patient feels it because air comes out if they hold their hand over their nose;
and then restore the place with dry medications, as I have taught you, and when the flesh grows and the wound hardens, the matter will go to the nose; it is a lighter thing for the patient.
When the eye is completely open in its entirety, and there comes no obstruction to the nose, nor any diminishment, then you must bind the patient;
then heal it, then apply cupping or leeches without piercing to draw out, then place on the eye a mixture of acacia and aloe and frankincense and storax, and then extract the eye, and plaster over it with bandages and cloths;
and the method of the cloths is that you take cloths sufficiently soft, and double each one four times, and then place one over the other according to the amount the eye requires;
then strain over a hard bandage firmly, and begin the cupping to suction without pricking;
then remove the cupping and keep the eye strained day and night, and if the ligaments soften, you must strain them greatly;
then remove the bandage after the day and night, and if you see the eye returning to its place, it is good;
if not; then restart the plaster and the bandages and the binding and the cupping until it is healed.
Of the breaking of woven cloth When disruptions come to the uvea tissue, then it opens, and small pieces like grains of resin appear, and it is astounding to see;
then if you want to cut it off, the work is such that you insert a needle at the root of the part below up to the one above, then insert another needle where there is the doubled thread from the part of the eyelid; and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to the position;
then cut at the place of the doubled thread and tie a part of the grape around, and tighten well, then remove the needle and apply moistened wool soaked in egg white to the eye;
and leave it until the thread falls off with the grape, then clean the eye with comforting substances until the wound is healed;
And sometimes the wound is restrained by a hoop of cloth around it on all sides until it is healed.
And if the eye shows great opacity, pierce it with a fine spatula that comes in through the pupil, and draw out the white moisture and lower the eye, and insert it thus immediately;
then extract it until it is healed.
This disease which is called "alcunnati" is nothing more than a bow that is gathered in the eye, resembling descending water, but it is not water;
and the manner of its appearance is that you make the patient sit on the prepared and straight seat, then take his head in both your hands, and move it until you see the bow come up to your eyes; then it is fixed, and does not descend and the light is dispersed, and the patient sees things as they were before;
and if it does not descend below, know that it is acute, and if the descent of the pus is not regulated as we have said.
then seat the patient between your hands, then take the fine spatula and cut on the corneal membrane a spot by continuing along the conjunctiva with the cornea and the corona until the pus comes out;
and when it is out, then drip into the eye hot water mixed with honey, or water in which fenugreek has been boiled and honey, then clean it with other treatments until it is healed.
of the eye waters We have seen the similarities of the waters in the division, and what is necessary to pierce; so we work according to the health.
It is necessary that you seat the patient between your crossed hands, away from the sun's light, and bind the healthy eye tightly and hold it very firmly;
then place the paper of the eye in your left hand if the eye is left, or in your right hand if the eye is right;
then take in your right hand, if the eye is left, the instrument which is called "almond," or in your left hand, if the eye is right;
then place the tip of the instrument near the crown by the thickness of a nail in that membrane of the eye at the part of the lower eyelid, then insert the instrument which is called "almagda" forcefully, and turn your hand until it pierces through the membrane of the eye, and feel that almagda comes to the empty space;
and it is necessary that the length of the path of almagda be exactly to the measure of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the black part; and that is the crown of the eye;
you will see the bone through that membrane because of the clarity of the corneal tissue, and then place the instrument until it reaches where the aqueous is, then press it under one path after another.
If the aqueous humor is now deficient, the patient sees something before him and the instrument in his eye.
After rest a little, and if the liquid rises through the second way, apply force with the instrument, and when it is well inserted and it does not rise, then extract alum lightly by turning your hand bit by bit;
and then put in water a bit of seal jewel, and wash the eye with that. Then apply to the eye tufts or wool soaked in rose oil and egg white, and bind with the healthy eye.
We, and those of our time, apply ground cumin mixed with egg white.
And if almagda cannot enter into the eye due to its hardness, for there are such men who have very hard eyes, then you must take the instrument which is called "alberit", of which here is the form:
And pierce then only the conjunctive, and do not go too deep, but make the place delicate, then put alum in it, as we have said;
and at the completion of the work prepare for the patient a comfortable place to sleep, where he sleeps on his back in a dark place;
and be devoid of all movements, and take light foods, and do not move his head to the right or left, and be tied according to his condition until the third day;
then untie him in that same dark house, and test his sight, and make him see some things, and then bind him again until the seventh day;
and it is not fitting that you do this at the time of the treatment or after the incision immediately, but it is necessary that you lighten this, because the humor rises quickly.
if warm abscesses come, that you untie the eye before the seventh day, and address it with what alleviates abscesses;
and when it is calmed, unbind the gaze and place on his face a patch to cover for some days, and let him be immediately in that dark house.
and then leave the house little by little, and get accustomed to his case;
and know that no disciple should intervene in this case. And one came to us who was from Yemen, who told us that in his country they make a device pierced, to which one draws out water, but nevertheless I have never seen any in our land, nor have I ever read about it in the books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the likenesses of the forms of almagda, for those who do not understand them see;
and let them be properly made of brass: And let the head of the axes of this same fineness, and the back in three acute angles.
Sometimes diverse kinds of charred attachments are born, from which some resemble scorpions with many legs;
and there are such where the char is embedded in a fox color, and it has smooth skin of good color. In that case, with the smooth char and not embedded, you should make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun;
In that case, with the smooth char and not embedded, you should make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; and work his nostrils, and apply the ointment to those charred areas, and pull them hard; then cut what you can support with a subtle sharp spatula on one side, until you know that all the flesh is completely removed.
and if there remains anything that cannot be cut, then open it completely with fine light instruments gently, so that nothing remains; and if it swells up on you, or an abscess becomes hot, then treat it as appropriate;
and if it is malignant abscesses, then hurry and cauterize it until the swelling is subdued and all the flesh is removed, then apply crushed henbane and vinegar or wine. if the henbane works and moisture comes up to the palate, know that it is healed;
and if moisture does not penetrate as it should, know that there is flesh grown in the bone above, to which the instruments do not reach to cut:
then it is necessary that you put in a thread of linen somewhat thick, and be knotted by our hands, and have between each knot a space one inch or less; and have the patient place the head of the thread in their nose with some force, and draw it through until it comes from inside the mouth;
and often do children in schools do this, and it is an easy thing for those who wish to do it;
then hold the end that comes out of the nose with one hand, and the other end that comes out of the mouth with the other hand, and pull them apart little by little along the thread.
Do this until you know that the gnats have corrupted that flesh, then pull out the thread, wipe the blood, and moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back on the nose as before;
Do this for three days or more until the ointments corrode all that remains of the flesh;
and then put on the nose a bandage of linen for some days until it is healed, and if it needs drying medicines, use them;
and this is the form of the instrument for cleansing the head, to which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose:
And it should be made of silver or brass, resembling an open lamp, like a tube, and the conduit is similarly;
and if you wish, make a closed cane, and let the instrument be full to cleanse the head;
and have the handle at the head to hold it when you heat the oil or any liquid.
of the flesh on the nose
Often, a disease called "telul" arises on the head of the nose, and it grows and becomes large quickly, to the point that it is noticeable when looking at it;
and for this reason, you should cut it at the beginning and remove it completely, then apply the cautery or burning medicine to the area;
and if you delay cutting it until it is large, beware if it is hard, of a dusky color, or lacks sensation:
Do not touch it with iron for it is an infected abscess, for when one cuts into it sometimes, great harm comes to the patient;
and if the abscess is of a white appearance, not of a bloody color, and you see that it can be completely cut out, then empty the patient and cut it out without fear, and treat the area with drying and binding substances.
Know that when solutions of continuation come in one of these cartilaginous works, it benefits little, for in some men.
Therefore, when this happens to anyone, one should examine if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then join the two edges with a suture, then treat it until it is healed;
and if the edges are already separated on one side and the other, then you must peel all the parts of their surface until they heal, then join the two edges with a suture, and bind it tightly, and sprinkle powdered dragon's blood and ground incense over it; and put the powders on a piece of plaster of Paris or another adhesive plaster, and leave it until it falls off by itself, then treat with ointment until it is healed.
The method of the suture is that you bring together the edges: or with needles, as we have said in the suture of the belly; or with thread, as I have made known to you.
of abscesses of the lips
Some men have within their lips abscesses that are hard, resembling grains of sand, and smaller and larger;
then you must turn the lips inside out, and cut into each knot, and take them with forceps and cut in each part;
then apply the place after the incision of ground vitriol, until the blood is stilled;
and then wash with oil, and clean the area of dry matters until it is healed.
Often flesh grows on the gums, which the ancients called "albulus";
so it is necessary that you hold it with tweezers, and cut it at its root, and let the pus or blood flow;
then apply ground vitriol to the area, or other binding and drying powders;
and if that flesh returns after the incision, which often happens, then cut it a second time and cauterize it: so it does not return after the cautery;
Sometimes there are gathered at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, bark-like things that are ugly and rough; and sometimes the teeth are black and yellowish and decayed, until the corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth stink;
so it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands, and his shoulders be in your lap, and remove the teeth or the bark-like things that appear, until nothing remains; and thus do with the blackness and the greenness, and the yellowness and other spots, until they are cleansed;
and if one removes what is there at the first reason, it is good; if not, then start again the second day and the third, until you have it all clean;
and know that teeth require various forms of instruments for cleaning, according to what the work demonstrates, because the scrapers used to clean between the teeth have different shapes than those used to clean the surfaces of the teeth; and these forms and others should be prepared with you.
It is necessary when you treat the tooth for its pain that you delay drawing it as long as you can, for no one should do so at all; for this is a very high quality substance so that one has no excuse for failing.
Then when the patient is forced to extract, you must be certain of the painful tooth. Many times the pain is on the patient, and they think it is in the tooth, and they pull out the good tooth; and nevertheless the pain does not leave because of this, until the bad one is extracted, for we have already wanted to do this to these saints;
and when you are certain of the painful tooth, then you must peel around the tooth for about one finger's breadth strongly to protect the gum on all sides;
then move it with your hands or with fine tweezers little by little until it is well loosened, then firmly grasp it with the tweezers; and let the shoulder of the patient be in your hands between your knees, and hold it well so that it does not move.
After extract the tooth straight without breaking, and if it does not come out easily, then take one of these instruments and push inside on each side lightly, and move it as you did first.
and if the tooth is pierced and eaten away, you should fill it with cloths where the holes are; and then grasp it carefully with tongs so that it does not break when grasping;
and you must work very carefully around the gum to loosen the tooth.
And be well wary that you do not break it and leave a part behind, which may return to the patient through the mischief of the root causing greater pains than before.
and beware that you do not act as the ignorant surgeons do, who by their haste and boldness sometimes break the socket, and do not administer what we have mentioned;
but sometimes cause great illness through the extraction of those because of the roots that remain, or for the channels they break, as we have often seen;
and when the tooth is pulled, wash the area with wine or oil and salt;
and if bleeding occurs, which often happens, then apply the area with ground vitriol;
and if that does not work, then cauterize it.
The forms of the instruments, with which one pulls teeth first, should have long points and thick handles, so they do not bend when you pull the tooth;
and these are the forms: And they should have thick parts so that they do not bend when pulling, and they should be made of well-made iron, and they should be toothed to hold the teeth firmly.
of the root of the teeth When the root remains outside, it is necessary that you put on the spot cotton moistened in butter for one or two days until the area is softened, then use the forceps which are called "algefri", from which the head seems like the beak of a goose;
and let them be made inside like a file and this is the form:
And if the roots do not wish to come out entirely with tongs, then you must uncover all the flesh around the root, and put in the instrument which is called “althali”, that is to say a lever, of which this is the form:
And let it be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root comes out by this means, it is good;
if this does not work, then use all the instruments, whose forms come after here:
And one helps oneself with this instrument which has two prongs, of which the form is here: and other tools which are mentioned earlier in the discussion of teeth, and of this instrument which resembles large tongs, of which the form is here:
And let this instrument be strong so it cannot break, and know that many dental instruments are; and also of other instruments, which are not counted;
and the wise subtle masters find their own instruments according to what their works and the diseases show them, for there are such diseases where the ancients taught no instrument due to the diversity; and if one breaks a cartilage or other bones where it could, then search for the suitable instruments that I have told you about, and help with gestures, of which here is the form:
And let them be thick and well grasped to hold the bone so it does not slip but can be held and removed;
and then restore the place with medicines suitable for this, and if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, then scrape it all with this instrument:
When the teeth appear not according to the natural body, and the form is ugly, especially in unmarried women, then you must know if the tooth has grown after the other teeth, and it is not in the right place, and cannot be smoothed or filed:
then pull it out; and if it is loose with the tooth, then take this instrument whose form is shown here, and it resembles a small beak, and let it be of iron and sharp at the tip:
And the cutting little by little over several days because of the hardness of the tooth, and so you do not move the others, and if it appears that it can be filed, then file it with a file like the one shown here:
and it is also like the steel with which needles are made;
and file the tooth little by little over several days lightly, so that it does not move until it falls out;
then flatten it at the end for any razor, and if the tooth is too sharp and it wounds the tongue, then it is necessary to file down the roughness until it is even, so that it does not wound the tongue nor corrupt the speech.
When the front teeth loosen, either by impact or by falling, and the patient cannot bite on what they eat without them falling out, and you have treated them with constricting medicines, and that does not work;
then they must be restrained with a gold thread, for silver thread turns green and rots, but gold never changes;
and let the thread be neither too thick nor too thin according to the quantity of space between the teeth;
and if you wish to align the teeth, take the thread and place it double between the two healthy teeth, then insert the threads between the loose teeth, whether there is one or more, until you reach wisely up to the other healthy tooth; then begin the wrapping until the part where you started, and withdraw your hand subtly and wisely, so that it does not move at all;
and let your ligature be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Then cut the head of the thread with some forceps, and join them, and place them between the healthy tooth, and set it so that it does not injure the tongue;
and then leave it so tight as long as it can stay, and if it loosens or the thread breaks, tighten it with another thread;
it will remain and serve in this way for its entire time, and this is the form of the teeth and the alignment of the two healthy teeth, and the two defective ones, as you see:
And when the tooth falls out, it is reset in its place, fresh to fresh, as we have said;
and let no one interfere who is not wise and patient, and sometimes the shape of a cow's bone tooth is made, and it is placed in the place where the defect is, and it is held tight as we have said, and remains and serves for so long.
Sometimes this ligament comes under the tongue naturally, which one is born with; or by accident of a sutured wound;
and the work is such that you operate on the patient's mouth, and have his head in your hand, and lift his tongue;
then cut the nervous ligament widely so that the tongue is separated from its natural position, and if there is hardness or knotting, which is from a wound's suturing, then use a hooked instrument and cut widely at that ligament;
and take care that the cut is not too deep, for the artery which is beneath;
and when you have done this, lift the area with rose water and salt, or cold water, then place under the tongue a linen cloth;
and the patient should comb each night so that the area does not become sealed.
And if bleeding occurs, then apply ground vitriol to the area; and if the skin resists, then cauterize it with a lentiginous cautery, which is good for this; then treat it with another treatment until it is healed,
and if you see it of a pus color or black or hard, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it at all, for it is cancer;
and if it is declining to the throat, and there is moisture, then apply a poultice, and cut it with a fine spatula, and deliver it from one side to the other; and if the sweat hinders your work, then apply ground vitriol until it is dried out, then return to your work until you draw all the force out;
then raise the place from ash and soil, and cure it with other treatments until it is healed.
of the abscesses of the throat Sometimes come into the throat lumps which are called "godath", and they are properly called the two almonds, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, then take care:
if they are hard abscesses of little sensation and of flesh color, then do not touch them with iron.
And if they are red and the root is large, then do not touch them with iron, also to prevent blood flow; but leave them until they are ripe, and then you shall divide them, or they will break on their own;
and if they are of white color and the root is delicate, then have the instrument ready to cut, but first check if the warm abscess has settled and calmed.
Then have the patient sit before the sun, and his shoulders be in your hands, and work on his mouth and take hold of the sergeant between your hands, and press the tongue below with all the instrument, which is its form;
and it should be of silver or fine brass like knives:
When you press the tongue with all this instrument, and you see the abscess, then take the lancet and put it in the center, and pull it out above as much as you can;
and pull something from the cloth with it, then cut it with the instrument, which is its form, that resembles forceps; and the head is curved all the same, and one part to another, and they are very sharp, and it is made of iron or steel:
And if you do not have this instrument present, then cut it with pliers, of which here is the form: and it is sharp on one side, and dull on the other;
and when you have cut one of the almonds, then cut the other in the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with warm water, and water mixed with salt, and if bleeding occurs, then gargle the patient with water in which pomegranate peels or myrtle leaves have been boiled, or similar things, until the blood is stopped; then cure it until it is healed;
And sometimes other abscesses grow in the throat besides the two almonds, so cut them then just as you would the two almonds equally.
And I treated a woman who had an abscess grow inside her throat, that is to say one small-sensed abscess;
and it had nearly closed her entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe because the passage was blocked, and she could neither eat nor drink, and she would have died if she remained thus for one or two days.
And the abscess had risen so high that it had put forth two streams through the two nostrils.
I then hurried and inserted a lancet into one [side], then pulled it out, and drew out a large portion of pus;
then repair another part in the other nostril hole, and work the mouth and press the tongue;
after I inserted the lancet into these abscesses, and cut off a part, and no more than a little blood came out; and thus the conduit of the woman's throat was cleared, and she began to drink water and then wine, and I did not stop cutting into this abscess for a long time;
and the abscess grew again, filling the place that I had emptied, until it became very large;
then I diagnosed it and cauterized it inside the throat: thus remains without growing;
and I departed from those places, and do not know what God made of him after me.
of the grape
When the vein descends to the grape, and it is swollen and elongated, it is called "perpendicular";
and if it is below, thick and round, it is called "grape".
When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, and you see that the red abscesses are calmed, and they are subtle, then you must cut it;
and that which is round and compact and is not elongated; and it is blood-red or yellowish color or black, then you must avoid making an incision on it. For there is great danger to the patient.
It is then necessary, when you see it according to the manner I have said, of its blueness and its length, that you make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press his tongue with the instrument we mentioned before; then insert the needle into the grape, and pull it down, and cut it with one of the two instruments I mentioned for incising the two almonds.
And you must not cut away more than the excess which is beyond the natural limit;
for if you cut more of it, you harm the voice, and the speech;
and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two almonds, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the patient fears the cutting, then you must use ingenuity in the cautery of his fearful sense.
And the manner of the cautery is sharp water. And it is that the patient puts his head in your hand, and then you press his tongue with the instrument we have mentioned in the chapter of cautery, and clean with hot aqua fortis so that it is not too thick nor too thin; and use the movement of this instrument, of which here is the form:
And it should have on the head a spoon-like part where one puts the medicine, like the scoop of a spoon, and place the instrument with all the medicine on the eye;
and the patient be lying on his side, so that the saliva and mucus flow from his mouth with the medicine inside, so that it does not go down to the throat, and he is wounded;
then hold your hand on all the medicine and press it on the eye, for a duration of half an hour, until you see it swollen and the irritation from the medicine be calmed;
and if you wish, take cotton and wrap it around some instrument, and moisten the cotton with the medicine, and insert the instrument wrapped in the cotton into the canal above, until the cotton burns on the eye;
and do this often until the cauterization is complete, then let it dry, and it will fall off after four or five days.
And if you need to restart the fire of the medicine, then restart it, and after the cautery wipe around the eye with cotton dipped in butter, and clean what is around of the medicine;
and let it be soaked in cold water, and treat it with gargles until it is healed.
This treatment is more beneficial than the incision, or the cautery;
if it is treated with fumigation according to this method, take calamus and hyssop and oregano and rue and chamomile and horehound and similar herbs, and gather all of them or some of them in a pot, and put oil in it, and make it boil;
and the pot should be well glued with strong clay, and in the middle of the pot have the instrument arranged according to this manner: and whether it is of silver or bronze, and one of the pipes should be placed in the patient's mouth so that the vapor rises to the eye through the tube until the eye is mortified;
after that, repeat it often until the eye dries out, and be careful not to do this at the beginning of the warm onset of an abscess, for many things can happen; and do not do this except when the warm abscess is declining.
and if this instrument is not available, take a tube and put inside the head an eggshell so that the patient's mouth does not become too hot; for the eggshell does not cause the breath to trouble the mouth, and this is a good treatment together healing.
Many times, a bone or spine of fish, or some thing, sticks in the throat;
so you must pull out what you can see, and press his tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you can see the thing move;
and that which is not apparent and is hidden in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the food is cooked in the stomach; and perhaps the burned substance will be expelled by vomiting;
or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navelwort, or a root of lettuce, or a morsel of dry bread; and tie a string to the sponge, and then have it swallowed; and when it reaches the place, it will catch fire, and then you will pull it out;
and if it does not come out by what we have said, then take the suction instrument according to this form:
And let the instruments be curved at the head so that they may more easily enter the throat, and have the head raised up; and beware that you do not touch the epiglote, lest it all come out, nor push the bone inside;
and it is better that the patient put in the instrument, so that they may move where the matter is pierced; so put it down and pull evenly with the entire instrument until it is firm.
of the mucus of the throat
Sometimes the blood is medicated, as I have said in the division, by the treatment of medicines; and when this does not help at all, then look into the patient’s throat in the sunlight, since you press their tongue with the instrument that I have told you about.
And if you see the sinew, then draw it out entirely with a small hook, or with fine tweezers that are suitable for this.
And if this does not work, then take a horsehair cord, and insert it into the patient's throat, then heat the end of the horsehair cord, and do this often. And if the patient sweats with water all day.
then take a full glass of cold water, and work it in the mouth, and throw it inside to swallow, and move it often with his hand; and as soon as the blood tastes the water, it falls.
And if it does not fall as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asafoetida, with the instrument that I have mentioned for the fumigation of the eye;
do this many times, for it will fall without delay.
And the method of fumigation is that you take a pot in which there are live coals, and let the pot be covered with a perforated lid in the middle, and through that hole be the head of the instrument;
then you throw your fumigation in, and the patient puts the head of the cane in their mouth, and closes the mouth so that no smoke escapes, but goes down to the blood;
and the blood will now fall, and if it does not fall, then repeat the fumigation several times;
and let the patient feel thirsty, and eat salty and sour things, and not drink water;
and then it will be necessary for it to come out through this treatment.
and the form of the instrument with which one draws the blood, when it can be seen, resembles curved tweezers to easily enter the throat; and it resembles the beak of a bird, and has the roughness of a file, so that what it grasps, it cannot leave;
There are many kinds of abscesses, according to what the descriptions come afterward one by one in this book, and they differ in puncture and size;
and it is in two ways of which one is in its own likeness, and from what it holds moisture.
And the second way is for the places where they are on the body.
for the abscess of the head is different from that of the fundament, and the abscess of the fleshly part is different from that which comes in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
and there are abscesses that one should not puncture until the pus is fully mature according to its completion;
and there are those that need to be punctured when they are hard, and do not mature according to their completion, such as abscesses that are near joints.
For when abscesses come near joints, and it is left until it swells around, perhaps the ligaments and nerves of the joint are corrupted, which causes contraction in that limb.
When the abscess is near the principal member, and if you delay the puncturing until it is mature, it will harm the principal member;
when it is near the fundament, then it should be punctured before it becomes mature;
and it is not right that you pierce an abscess hard without completed digestion, except for the one near the anus, which could not be perfected, and would extend inside, and a fistula comes. and cannot heal in a long time.
And you must know the time of piercing the abscess which is ripe according to its completion, and this is when the pain is calmed, and the departure of the fever, and the lessening of the pain and redness, and of the swelling and sharpening of the top of the abscess, and the other signs;
and you must make the piercing at the lowest part of the abscess, and where it appears soft.
and let the puncture of the long body be, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all equal places where there is no pus. In those that bend, according to that limb.
And when an abscess is in a fleshy area, it is best that you leave the perforation until it is confirmed after complete digestion, as we have said.
For if you pierce it before that, the body of its venom will be prolonged, and it is full of much filth; and perchance harden the lips and the depths of it.
And for some abscesses that are pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the limb requires.
And you must treat small abscesses, small perforations; and in large abscesses, large perforations, and many slits according to the size of the abscess;
and there are such abscesses where it is necessary to shave the heart, and cut; when it has become yellow like a flag, and is softened, then it should be treated as one treats buboes:
and there are such that are split into three angles, and there are such that are cut like the leaf of myrtle, as abscesses of the armpits;
and there are such where one makes a round incision, and other cuts and similar incisions.
Those that have no head, like a superficial abscess, you must pierce them completely;
and it is necessary when the abscess is large, and it has collected much pus, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus at that hour, but draw out a part; then plug the abscess until the next day, then draw out something again; do this multiple times gradually, until all the pus is released;
especially if the patient is of weak vitality, or pregnant women, or small children, or old infirm men. For the sneezing sometimes occurs with the discharge of pus, which might cause the patient to die, and you would not be aware of it.
Avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced the abscess, wipe the wound, and check if the abscess wound is small; and if it is a smooth wound, then apply pieces of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many openings, then you must place a tent in each one so that they come against each other;
and if you have cut into the abscess a part of the skin, and you have spread it around, then you must fill it with old cotton or linen cloth shavings without moisture, and bind it until the third day;
then remove it, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs in your work, then bring cold and light water and wet the cloth, and place it on the bleeding area multiple times.
and if the discharge of blood persists, then apply treatment and care, and the powders that I have mentioned in this book, and if it is winter time, and the area or the abscess is very nervous, then you must put on tents and cloths moistened in warm wine and oil;
and if it is in this state, and the wound is fleshy, then you must put on cloths soaked in water and oil, or in wine and cold oil, up to the third day, as we have said;
and then open the abscess and wipe it and treat it as appropriate until it is healed.
And this must be known universally in the treatment of abscesses:
for I have told you how one should proceed in the treatment of abscesses, and here is the chapter.
When small abscesses come from the head, they are like fibers that are in webs, just like the down of a chicken, and there are many similarities.
There are some that are fatty and such as have moisture like pus;
and some are so hard and stony to cut that there is no doubt if the artery does not hinder.
And the work of the waist is that you test with all the instrument which is called "intromissory," from which the forms come after, what it contains.
For if it contains moisture, then cut it open on top of the length.
And when the moisture is emptied, then peel without leaving any of the skin that contains that moisture, for it returns immediately when something is left.
then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; if not, in water and ash, and apply it to the wound, and leave it until the next day; and this will remove what remains from the night.
and then repeat with the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know that nothing of the night remains;
then treat the wound with anointing as appropriate, until it is healed.
And if the abscess holds hard fat, then cut it according to this form, from the length; and sprinkle your medicines on it, and scrape it from all sides, and apply all your care to draw out the matter where it lies;
and if the artery acts contrary, then do what I have told you after this.
And do the same for the abscess if it is stony, and in cutting and cleaning as I have told you.
And cut into the stony and moist abscess, it is lighter, for they are of little blood. And there are some of these abscesses on the head that have no moisture, and among these was an abscess that I cut on the head of an old woman;
and found the abscess like a dull stone, rough and white, and could not break it; and if one had struck any of them, it would have made as much of a wound as from a stone.
In other abscesses coming to the head, for those that come to the top of the children's heads and at the roots of the ears, the opening should always be at the lowest point, so that the pus may flow out;
and treat them as appropriate.
Often this abscess occurs on the neck, and under the jawbones, and in the glands, and sometimes they appear elsewhere on the body, and they are large, and they cluster together.
and each scrophula is properly within its coat, like the knot and the abscess of the head, as we have said; and the likenesses of these scrophules are many.
and the likenesses of these scrophules are many. There are such ones that contain moisture, and there are harmful ones that do not wish to obey health.
in that one then which you see of good disposition to the touch, and is similar in color to the skin, and moves on both sides and is not adhered to the nerves of the neck nor to the artery nor to the windpipe, and is not deep;
then you should cut it from above, and peel it on each side, and spread the two lips of the wound with forceps, if you need to, just as we have said in abscesses of the head;
and draw it out little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, and let not the spatula be sharp or cutting, so that your hand does not slip, and do not go too deep, lest you cut what you should not.
And if you cut the vein or artery, and this does not stop you from working, put in the wound ground vitriol or some powders that staunch blood, and hold the wound; and leave it until the abscess is calmed, and the wound is softened, and begins to pus.
And when the blood is stanched, return to your work until you complete it;
then examine closely if any small scrofula remains, cut them and clean them.
And if there is a large vein at the root of the scrofula, you should not cut the scrofula at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it hang down without harm;
Then apply the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then treat it.
And if you cut away the entire scrofula, then you must bring together the two lips of the wound, and sew them now, since there is no remaining excess due to the size of the scrofula. and you must pay attention to cut the root of it, and pull hard, and sew it as we have said.
and you must pay attention to cut the root of it, and pull hard, and sew it as we have said. Those scrofula that hold superfluity, pierce them where it appears to mature;
and pierce it in the same way as the one mentioned before, while hanging, then apply bandages with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, then treat it with ointment that promotes flesh growth until it is healed.
The ancient ones spoke and talked about the incision of the throat; but I have never seen it done in our land, and this is the writing of their words.
For those who have a tracheal weakness, it is necessary that the fold of the throat which is called "epiglottis" be removed; and no help is provided by this, because all the veins and the pulse of the patient are affected by those who have a hot abscess in the mouth, or in the throat, or in the tonsils.
When the disease is in the channel of the phlegm, it is necessary to cut the epiglottis to avoid the danger that comes from strangulation.
Therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, we should make a small cut across below three rings or four, between the two rings or by the quantity of the surface cut, not in the cartilage;
and it is necessary for the section of the epiglottis that there be no flesh there, and the vessels are long to reach.
And if the master is fearful, then he must stretch the skin of the throat to the full inch, then split the heart until it comes to the membrane; and avoid the vessels of blood, if you see anything, and then cut the surface, as we have said;
and it is demonstrated by the division of the phlegm from the membrane that jumps out through the place which is broken, and by the lack of voice;
and leave the wound open for a while.
And when the hour has passed in which one suspects strangulation, bring together the two lips of the heart wound, and sew it entirely except for the cartilage;
then administer medicines which cause flesh to grow, until it is healed.
Albucasis says that one should not do this until the throat is entirely blocked, and the patient is judged to be dying, and the defect becomes apparent. Then cut the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is saved from death;
and for this reason the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease has passed, and it passes in three or four days. And then they commanded to suture the wound and cleanse it, until it was cleansed;
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw that a maiden took a knife and stuck it in her throat and cut part of the windpipe;
and I was called to treat her, and I found her as if dead.
I uncovered the wound and found the blood that had come out of it, and I knew that she had not cut a vein or artery but only the throat, and air was coming out through the wound.
I hurried, sewed the wound, and treated it until it was healed;
and nothing happened to the maiden except that she lost her voice, and later recovered her health;
for which I say that in the surgery of the epiglottis there should be no fear.
This abscess is called "throat hernia," and it is a large abscess of a bluish-black color, and it often occurs in women;
and it occurs in two ways: natures, and accidents;
for natural things have no design.
And the accident is according to two manners, of which one is similar to fatty substances, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from our artery; and there is fear, and it does not befit to work with fire except on that which is small, and it proves and searches throughout the introduction: if you find it like fatty tissue and it cannot enter any vein, then cut it as one cuts the tissues, and remove it all together, if there is any; and search thoroughly all around, and treat it as appropriate, until it is perfectly healed.
Many methods we have, of which I will speak all the likenesses;
and now it is necessary that I say all the difference that exists between knot and discharge.
I say that discharge is heat and fever lasting until the boiling stage has passed, and putrefaction is completed; then the fever and heat subside.
With the knot, there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains a surface, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins like a blister, and becomes large;
and they are according to two appearances, oily, or moist, and very colorful as I have said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to treat the wound, that you test and inquire first about all the instrument which is called "introducer", according to what its form will come in the chapter which follows.
And the method of investigating abscesses in the nose is that you take the moistest place you find in the abscess, and turn your fingers little by little, until you know that the instrument has pierced the center, according to the size of the abscess;
then extract the probe, and be careful in this that it does not slip.
If running moisture comes out, whatever color it has, cut it open as I have said for other abscesses;
and if after the probe no moisture comes out, know that it is fatty, then cut it in a cross shape, and take it with tweezers, and lightly peel it from each side and watch the spot where it lies so you draw it out clean with the nose;
and if you cannot pull it out whole, then pull it in pieces so that nothing remains.
For if anything remains, the pain returns many times;
and if a little of it remains and the skin troubles you, then apply to the wound some corrosive powders, bind up the wound, and put on things that soothe a hot abscess, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed;
and if the pain is great, sew together the two lips of the wound, and treat it with what promotes flesh growth.
and if the pulsating vein opposes you or something else makes you hurry, then use ground vitriol, and leave it there for two days or three, until the wound becomes putrid, and stop the boiling of the blood; then return to cut what remains of the knot.
See here the forms of the introductory instruments, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small;
and there are three squares which are called "albaret," and one which is called "breb," and there are of three kinds: large, medium, and small, to encircle the abscesses of fistulas;
and they are also like the needles used to stitch sores, and they are made of amber citrin, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are more valuable, and those proven with black pitch are better for encircling the swellings of fistulas;
and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the pores.
The forms of tumors are very diverse, as you see here:
and there are tumors that have two curves in three ways as well;
and there are tumors that have three curves, and they are also of three kinds;
and there are tumors that have two curves, and tumors with only one curve, and they are of three kinds;
and all these are necessary in their place.
The heads of these that we cut are sharp, and there are some that do not cut strongly except from one side, for which we scrape the skin, so that we do not cut the vein or the nerve;
and of these introducers, the needles are placed in tubes so that the patient does not feel them during the opening of abscesses;
and they are of three kinds: large, small, and medium, as you see;
and they are not used except in fleshy areas, such as legs, arms, breasts, and armpits, and similar places;
And sometimes another small instrument is made, resembling onion skins, according to this form, with which blood is drained: and it is placed sometimes at the site that heals with cutting of veins, and arteries, and sometimes according to this large form:
Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to be corrupted, so that they resemble a woman's breasts;
and remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wants to treat them must sew according to this form from this line 2 up to 8: then remove the fat, and apply a medicated salve to the wound, then sew the two edges of the wound together, and care for it until it is healed;
and if the breast sags downward and is softened due to its size, as often happens with women, then cut it open in two places on top, with two similar incisions; of which one is held to the other at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line 2 up to the line g; then peel the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitching and powders, and what is necessary for the treatment until it is healed;
and if it is not healed, or the incision is not fully made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to bleeding, then you must fill the wound with moist cotton in a corrosive ointment; and leave it until it consumes the remaining flesh and fat, then clean it until it is healed.
These abscesses that come under the armpits are kinds of hard scrofula with edges, and some contain moisture.
Those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line .b. up to line .g.: And when all the pus that is in the abscess has been drained, apply the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with an appropriate ointment until it heals.
And if the abscess is of the kind of scrofula, then cut it as we have said for incisions of scrofula, and if the wound emits pus, then apply cauterization as we have said before.
When the artery is cut, and the skin above is sewn, often abscesses result, and similarly it happens to swollen veins and abscesses;
and one knows it thus for the artery, the abscess is long in appearance; and when you feel it with your hands, you sense the constriction;
and when it is for the vein, it appears soft and more visible;
and it is foolish to cut this abscess, especially when it is under the ribs and in the angles and on the neck and in many other places, and it is very large. It is necessary then to avoid the iron treatment, and that which is at the head should also be avoided, and in that which is swollen from the artery make a cut above the skin of the long;
then work the size at the incisions, and carefully separate the artery from the tissues until it is exposed;
then place a needle underneath it and make it pierce to the other side, and tie the artery with a double thread in two places, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples;
then puncture the area between the two ties with an introducer until the pus comes out that is there, and let the abscess be drained;
then administer the treatment that induces vomiting, until the bile flows; then treat it with an ointment suitable for this, until it is healed;
and if the abscess is the size of a vein, then you should stain your hand with what you can from the abscess to all the skin, then insert the needle under the area that you hold in your hand, and pierce it, and have double thread so that you pull it from the other side; then tie the abscess, as I have said, with the thread of one of the two ends of the doubled thread;
and if you fear that the thread might come out, then insert another needle through the entire thread under the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and tie the threads in four places;
then cut the abscess until the excess flows out, then cut the excess of the heart and leave what is attached;
then put on the wet cloth in wine and oil, then administer treatments of bandages and ointments until he is healed.
As abscesses come in the artery and vein, so do abscesses come to the nerves when they are wounded, or by too much labor, and similar things.
And this happens more often in the shoulders and hands and all joints, and it is a severe abscess, and its color resembles the color of the flesh, and it is in many positions without pain;
and when it is pressed firmly, the patient feels pain, and it is not part of the flesh, but beneath the heart;
and it moves well on all sides, and does not go forward or backward, nor below or above, and the one that is in the joints should not be cut with iron: by chance there might be contraction; and for those on the head or forehead, cut the skin with a spatula.
and for those on the head or forehead, cut the skin with a spatula. If the abscess is small, hold it with tweezers, and cut it at its root;
and if it is large, suspend it with a lancet, scrape it, then remove it and suture the wound, and treat it until it heals.
Sometimes it happens in the abdomen and not elsewhere, and it is a disease called "fungus" due to its resemblance to mushrooms, and its roots are subtle, and the head is large;
and there are small and very large ones;
and I saw a man who had two in his belly that were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had a small root, and were deeply split, and moisture immediately flowed from them.
I cut them and found that one weighed eighteen ounces, and the other six and a half, and in the work of the incision you must observe if the patient is moist, and the color of the joint is white and moist and has a fine root; so you cut it with a broad spatula, and have the fire cauterizer present.
so you cut it with a broad spatula, and have the fire cauterizer present. For in cutting there often come too great outflows of blood, and if the blood overcomes you, then hasten to cauterize;
and if you see the patient is fainting and fearful of the iron incision, then take a well-made thread of linen, and bind the joint as we have said, and leave it for two days;
and then bind it, and do not stop straining the thread of linen until it cuts through the joint, and it falls off without effort;
and if the roots are large, there is fear in cutting, especially for the abdomen, but you can cut off half of it, then cauterize so that it does not return;
Then treat the wound, and be careful not to cut the tissue which is of reddish color and has poor sensation and looks like milk when examined.
For this is an abscess infected, and I will come to the treatment of the sore afterward.
When the boil is about to burst. If the appearance of the pus comes from the cautery of a wound or a split in the surface, and it is on the belly and some of the pus comes out, as it happens in other ruptures, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what was mentioned before, or from flatulence;
and if it is due to the rupture of the surface and the discharge of pus, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the flesh, and it is a light matter without pain, and it discharges through various outlets. And if it is due to the discharge of the intestines, then it is more varied, and when one presses it with their fingers, it sinks in and then returns, and sometimes it becomes hard, and greatly enlarges at the entrance of the bath and from strenuous labor.
And if it is due to moisture, it is a light matter, and it discharges well when you press it with your hand, and it does not resist;
and if it is for blood, then the abscess opens with these signs being large and hard, and is fixed according to a quantity; and if it is for wind, then it is soft to the touch, and the work is such that you look to see if the appearance is due to artery blood, or vein blood, or wind.
and if it is for wind, then it is soft to the touch, and the work is such that you look to see if the appearance is due to artery blood, or vein blood, or wind. And it is necessary that you leave the treatment. For there is doubt and fear with it, as I have said in the chapter about abscesses, concerning the artery and the vein.
and if the appearance is due to the intestine or the bile, then you must instruct the patient to soak their shoulder, and lie stretched out straight, then apply a poultice all around the swelling; then command them to lie still between your hands, then go around the area you have poulticed with all the spatula, then stretch half of the abscess above with the entire large needle; then bind around it with a strong thread, or a cord of strong silk firmly, and let the knot of the binding be secure;
then apply half of the abscess extended over the binding, and put your index finger in it, and squeeze the interior; if you find it caught in the binding, then untie it, and push the interior outward from the belly;
and if you find the boil, then take it with the lancet, and cut off the excess;
and if the artery or vein resists you, go around gently, then return to your work and take two needles, and insert two strong threads, and place the two needles around what you have done in a cross so that you pierce it;
then extract the abscess in four places above the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the area until it becomes pus-filled, and the dead flesh will fall off by itself; when it is thin and rotten, then cut it out, and treat it as necessary, and the abscess will fall off as we have said;
when it is thin and rotten, then cut it out, and treat it as necessary, and the abscess will fall off as we have said; and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the area as necessary, and sew up the area.
of the ulcer We have discussed in the division the similarities of ulcers, and how one should work with medications, and how one should avoid iron treatment;
and we speak of the ulcer appearing in the marrow, and great caution is needed in its treatment, and the ancients said that when ulcers are in a place where they can be scraped off like ulcers on mammary glands, and in the thigh, and in similar places, they should be completely removed when they first begin;
and no one ever heals from it before me.
And the work, when it is in a place where it can be removed, as we have said, is that you purify the patient of black bile;
then make him sweat if there is evident excess, then prepare the patient in a good place to perform the work;
then place your poultices on the ulcer, and cover it entirely with hair, and remove it from all sides without leaving anything;
and let the blood flow freely, and mark well the place with your hand or some object, and if the continuous flow of blood prevents you from making an incision in the artery or vein, then cauterize until the bleeding is stopped; then treat with other treatments until it is healed.
of dropsy We have said before in the division the types of dropsy, and in what manner the accumulation of water is formed, and the signs of each type, and the treatment performed by medicines, and that which is treated by iron:
and one should not use iron in these two types: It is to know, tympanites and hyposarcia, for these are mortal things;
then when you treat this kind of dropsy which is called "eclites" with medicines, and the treatment does not help, look if the patient is weak, or if they have another disease besides dropsy, such as fever and diarrhea and similar things; do not use iron, for there is danger;
and if you see the patient is of strong vigor, and they have no other disease but only dropsy, and they are not too young nor too old, then you must proceed thus: lift the patient upright on your hands, and have the assistants press the abdomen to push the water to the lowest part of the body, then take the spatholite spine according to this form: And let it be cutting of two parts. the tip, and nevertheless it should not be so penetrating that it can reach the intestine when inserted, and it should not injure;
then look if the dropsy is spreading towards the intestines: then you must make three straight cuts below the tumor down to the wrist; and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, then your incision should be on the left side of the tumor three fingers wide;
and if it is due to mucus, then it should be on the right, and it is not suitable for the patient to lie on the incision so that the excess fluids do not flow to the weak area;
then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and insert it, and lift your hand to spread the spatula between the skin and the surface as in flaying to the quantity of one inch or so around;
then pierce the surface until the spatula reaches the hollow place, which is where the water lies, then pull it out forcefully, and insert this instrument of which here is the form: And it resembles a thin silver chain, and it is made of bronze or light iron, and at the lower part, there is a small perforation; and on one side, three perforations; and two from the other side, and one from another;
and the shoulder is cut like a quill, and this is the form of the incision with which the scribes cut the quill:
at the top above is the alembic, so that when the instruments come to the water, they now rise up on the instrument;
empty then half or a third part, for if you empty more than is appropriate at that hour, perchance the patient may die from the resolution of his spirit from the wound, or he falls into a stupor, or he approaches death;
but empty according to the quantity of its strength, and according to what the conditions of the patient's strength signify, and his pulses;
then draw the instrument and hold the liquid, and it is held now for the plug that stops the opening which is on the surface, of which I have spoken, that you pierce according to this manner;
then use the instrument again the other day, if you see the patient tolerating this, and draw a small amount of liquid;
do this for several days, and be careful not to remove so much that only a little liquid remains.
And if you doubt about the patient, and you leave a lot of liquid, then treat with burial earth or hot sand, and by sweating a lot or bathing in the sun, and dye from drinking; and the treatment with drying medicines until it is healed, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the water, as I have said before.
Sometimes children are born who have no opening in the penis, or the opening is small, or it is not in its proper place.
It is necessary to pierce it immediately with a very fine instrument throughout according to this form:
then put a fine cloth on the wound, and bind it and keep it that way for three or four days, and when he wants to urinate, remove the cloth, let him urinate, and then put it back;
and perhaps none is needed, because the urine that comes out forcefully does not leave it closed.
He whose opening is small is treated with the plug of lint, as we have said, so it will widen.
Those who do not have the opening in its proper place are defective, because some are born with the opening at the tip of the penis, which prevents them from urinating unless they lift their penis up; and they cannot menstruate because the matter cannot reach the uterus, and it is a bad disease.
And the manner of the work is that the patient lies often on his back, then stretch the head of the penis and cut it as the length of a feather, so that the opening falls in the middle, as it befits;
and be careful of the bleeding that often occurs, and if it happens, stop it with what stops blood, and treat the wound until he is healed.
pustules of the penis Often this albathe comes in the penis, and it is an ugly appearance of flesh;
and there are malignant and non-malignant [ones];
and you must take them with a subtle knife, cut and clean them all, then put on moist cotton with Egyptian ointment; then treat it with diafinicon ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess is malignant, of putrid color and stinking, then you must apply cauterization to it.
When you have cut it, and if the ulcer is at the tip of the penis, with part inside the skin and part outside, then you must remove the part of the ulcer that is inside first; and when it is sealed, then treat the part outside.
For when you treat it all at once, the head of the penis is not secure and may be pierced, leading to blackening and corruption in the penis and the testicles;
so it is necessary to scrape off all that is black and corrupted, then apply the plaster of honey and flour which is made from pomegranate peel and vetches, then treat with other treatments until he is healed.
And if bleeding occurs, then apply the lunar cauterization according to this form:
The cautery thus helps in two disposals together: that is, to the discharge of blood, and to corruption;
and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, then you must insert a cane of polnt into the urethra of the penis, and let the patient urinate through it;
and when the skin is swollen at the head of the penis which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or it happens due to a wound or an abscess, then you must peel it with a sharp instrument until the tissues are loosened, and the head of the penis is freed on all sides;
and if it is a difficult thing to discuss this, then you must scrape with the spatula a little bit from the head of the penis and the skin;
then gently separate them between two, and place a thin linen cloth moistened with cold water, so it does not dry out again.
Circumcision is not a separation of continuity like other wounds; nevertheless, when we perform this act of our will, and especially on children, it is necessary that we do the best work, and the least harmful to their well-being.
I say that the ancients did not practice circumcision on their children, for it is not used in their law, and we have nothing more than what we have acquired through experience.
For I have seen the majority of masters and surgeons who performed circumcisions around the edge, with force, and with an entire novacule;
so flee the cuts because there are two layers, and by chance one might cut the top one and leave the bottom one. or the recovery is worse, and the pain is doubled, and in the cleaning which is of the wound, the tip of the member is not securely treated;
and in the cleaning of the nail, by chance the iron might slip, and ruin the work, and many times they grow back without needing cleaning, and I have wanted it so.
Of the cleaning that is done with force on all the thread of the ligament I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the force cuts exactly as well above as below.
For when you press your hand, you cut evenly in one continuous motion; but that the thread be tight around the skin;
and the manner of the first work is that you make the child think, if he understands, that you do not do him harm by tying the thread around the penis only, and then give him hope in every way that you can;
then make him stand between your hands straight, and respond to the forces between your hands or under your feet that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments;
then put your hand on the penis and blow on the groin, and pull it up until the head of the penis is inside; then clean it well of the filth that has gathered, then tie the marked place with a double thread, then tie it under one point to another tie;
then clean it well of the filth that has gathered, then tie the marked place with a double thread, then tie it under one point to another tie; and hold it with two hands by the second ligature at the pouch and index finger, and cut between the two ligaments, then quickly lift the heart up and pull the head of the rod; then let the blood flow little by little, for it is the medicine; and put powder on and on the powder, one cloth glued with a mixture of an egg white dissolved in rose water, cooked with good and fresh rose oil, and leave it on until the next day, and cure it again as needed until it is healed.
The form for the forces in purification is as follows:
the two shoulders should be held tight and be sharp, and the shoulders should be as large as the sleeve evenly:
The error of the purification is when the pus inside flows at the incision;
then it is necessary that you extend it with your nail, so that the area forms an abscess;
and cut it evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your nail, then hold it with forceps, and then cut it.
And if it passes three days, and what is under the penis is swollen, then leave it until the heated abscess is calmed, and lightly scrape it;
then cut it as much as you can move it, and be careful of the part of the penis, for this will not harm it.
Treat then the area of things with a powder that we have mentioned in the treatise on powders, and if one cuts from the heart excessively, and it goes above, it will cause no harm;
Treat it then, as we have said, until it is healed.
the retention of urine
The retention of urine is due to the obstruction by stones, or frozen blood, or feces, or dead flesh, or similar things that we have mentioned in the section;
and if the urine is not released, and you see that the retention is due to a stone in the neck or at the mouth of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be bent over their knees; and let his feet be placed on his back, and stretch his belly from the part above the back, and restrain the patient as tightly as possible; and then the neck of the bladder is forced for the expression of the stone above, which loosens the urine;
and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer extraction with all the instrument which is called "catheter", of which this is the form:
and let it be of fine light silver, like the feathers of a bird; and let the tube be one and a half palms long, and let it be fine at the tip.
And the method of urine extraction is that you take a double thread, and tie at the head a ball of wool or cotton, and insert the end of the thread inside the urethra;
and cut the excess wool and insert it to the end of the urethra, then anoint the urethra with oil or butter and egg white, and have the patient sit on a chair, and wet his bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and warm water;
then gently insert the urethra into the penis until it reaches the base of the penis, then double the penis upwards towards the belly;
then push the urethra forward until it reaches the bladder, and the patient will feel it reach the empty space, and this is not done forcefully according to this method because the conduit through which it goes is twisted;
then the thread is applied to all the wool little by little, and the urine follows the wool, then extract it forcefully, and make the urine flow;
and repeat the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and the patient is relieved.
When blood comes into the bladder, or corruption is gathered there, and you see aqueous and medicinal substances being distilled into it, then make use of all the instrument called "clepsydre," and this is its form:
It is closed, and has three openings: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see;
and the end is made such that the medicine is suitable to plug the penis well without addition, so that one may draw out moisture and insert when necessary;
and when you want to insert your medicine into the bladder, put the head of the container in the moisture, and draw with the syringe that is inside;
so you will draw out the moisture with a scraper, and then firmly reattach by drawing inward; so the moisture will enter inside, and it will reach the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it;
and this is the form of the subtle clyster with which one performs an enema on the bladder:
And it is made of silver or bronze, and the head is higher;
and below the breast where the limb lies;
then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture in it with which you wish to perform the enema on the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts tightly with a strong doubled thread, and heat that moisture over the fire;
then insert the head of the clyster into the penis, then draw your hand over the bladder as all the moisture comes in, until the patient feels that this moisture has just come to the bladder;
and if you do not have the bladder, then take a piece of parchment, and make a circle, and pierce it roundly around; then insert a strong thread into these holes, then close the circle as one closes a lid, and put inside what you wish of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument;
and do as you have done with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
about the stone
We have said before in the division the ways of stones, and the extraction together with medicine;
and I have said the difference between the stone in the reins, and all the signs, and in what kind of stone one should operate with cutting; and in the bladder, and in the penis;
and I will tell you clearly and briefly.
I say that the stone which forms in the bladder occurs more often in children, and the sign is that the urine jumps from the bladder resembling pure urine in its fineness;
and there appears sand, and it irritates the patient's penis, and it can happen many times, and then it constricts; and often these foundations shift;
and the healing of children is quick until they are four years old, and it is very difficult in the elderly, and it is moderate for young adults, for those who are between youth and old age;
and the treatment is easier for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
And when we come to the treatment, it is first necessary to cleanse the patient with a cathartic, to draw out all the bile that is in the intestines. For it sometimes hinders seeking the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet, and lift him up and move him downward so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes it leaves its higher position;
then make him sit between your spread hands, and his hands should be below his thighs, so that the bladder is completely inclined downward;
then seek it and touch inside;
if you feel the stone in the space, then hurry now to cut into the stone.
And if it does not fall at the full touch, then moisten your index finger with oil from the left hand, if the patient is an adult, or your middle finger, if the patient is a fully grown youth; and insert it into his anus, and seek the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, then pull it towards the neck of the bladder;
then press with your finger, and push it out where you wish to cut.
And instructs the servant to press the bladder with his hand, and commands him to extend his right hand upwards towards the testicles, and with his left hand lift the skin that is beneath the testicles in the area where the belt is fastened;
then he inserts the catheter cutting, which is of this form: And make an incision between what is between the testicles and the anus, not in the middle but to the side of the left thigh;
and be straight on the stone, and your hands should be near the anus, and the incision should be wide at the top according to the size of the stone, and narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large;
by chance the pressure on the tooth which is in the foundation, that it jumps out without effort;
and know that there is such a stone in which it has angles, and edges: it is difficult to remove;
and there is such one that is smooth, resembling an acorn, and round, from which the extraction is easy.
For those that have angles and edges, make the cut larger;
and if it does not jump out, then you must grasp with tongs that are like a file at the head, to grip the stone so that it does not escape; where you place under the eye a delicate curved instrument at the tip;
and if you cannot manipulate it thus, then widen the small hole, and if the sinew is dry, then tighten it with vitriol;
and if there is more than one stone, then place the largest one first at the neck of the bladder, then cut above it, then pull it out forcefully, and the smaller ones after if there are several.
And if it is very large, then you must saw it and make a larger incision. For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or the urine comes immediately through the opening that the incision cannot close;
but nevertheless exert yourself in pulling it out, or in breaking it with forceps, until you pull it out in pieces;
and when you have completed your work, then dress the wound with incense and aloes and dragon's blood, and bind it, and put over it a cloth moistened in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then have the patient rest on their back, and do not loosen the binding until the third day.
And when you dislocate it, wash the area very well with oil and water, then treat it with ointment diaphoretic and basilicon ointment, until it is healed.
and if hot abscesses and corruptions, and clots of blood in the bladder come to the wound, and the urine is retained in such a way that it is formed without passing with the urine: then put your finger in the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder, and cause putrefaction;
Then raise the wound with water and ash and salt, and aid it in every way that you know, until it is healed;
and it is necessary that every time you treat it, you bind the two thighs, and apply the medicines to the site.
And if the stone is small and it is in the urethra of the penis, embedded inside, and the urine cannot pass; then treat it as I said before, that you cut it multiple times, and one is relieved by this treatment through cutting. I have already proved it thus.
Take an iron bar according to this form and let it have three pointed ends fixed in one piece.
then take a thread and tie it around the penis below the stone so that it cannot move back into the bladder;
then insert the drill into the shaft gently, until it reaches the bone; and turn the drill with your hand in the bone little by little, until you can pierce through the other side of the bone;
the urine will come soon, then press your hand on what remains of the bone that is inside the shaft. It will break soon, and it will come out with the urine, and the patient will be healed;
and if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then tie a thread below the bone and another above, then cut the shaft where the bone is between the two ties, then extract it forcefully, and untie the thread, and clean the congealed blood in the wound; and treat until it is healed.
of the stone of women
It sometimes happens that a stone is lodged in women, and if it ever happens, the treatment is difficult, and is forbidden for three reasons:
one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin;
and the second is that one cannot find a woman who is well-informed and exposes herself to midwives, especially when she is chaste.
And the third reason is that perhaps one cannot find a woman who is well-skilled in this art with her hands;
and the fourth reason is that the stone in the woman is more embedded than the stone in the man, which requires a deeper incision, and there is great fear. And if necessity demands this, then you must take a skilled midwife, who is hardly found, and if you do not find one, seek out a clever chaste midwife;
and presents a wise midwife in the lives of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and commands her to do what you command her for the examination of the stone; and look very carefully if the woman is a virgin:
and look very carefully if the woman is a virgin: then he must insert his finger into the fundament and seek the stone;
and if she finds it, she should press it beneath her finger, and she is advised to insert her finger into the patient's vagina, and to grasp and press firmly with her left hand on the bladder.
If she finds it, then she must move it gradually from the entrance of the bladder downward until it reaches the root of the thigh;
then cut into the stone at the root of the thigh opposite the middle of the groin, where it is pressed together, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move his hand above or below the stone, and let the cut be small at first;
and do not move his hand above or below the stone, and let the cut be small at first; then insert the probe into the cut, if you feel the stone increase the wound until the stone can come out easily, and know that there are many kinds of stones:
that is to say, small and large, rough and smooth, long and round, and those that have edges.
and know the similarities to understand the outcome.
and if the pain overcomes you, put ground vitriol at the site and keep it there for an hour until the pain subsides;
then return to your work, until the stone is strong, and have the instruments that I have told you in the extraction of the stone from men to help you in your work;
and if the blood overcomes you, and it is from the artery that is cut, then put the powder on the place and bind with cloths and bandages, and do not begin this again, and leave the stone and do not extract it, lest by chance the patient might die; then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is calmed, and the limb becomes strong, return to your work, until the stone is removed.
Aquous ramus is nothing other than an assembly of moisture or white substance, which is beneath the cover of the testicles, that contains the egg;
and it is called “syfac”, and sometimes it is properly in the web of the eye, if one thinks that it is another egg; and it is the skin of the groin between the white syfac that we have mentioned;
and this does not happen if there is no pus. And the generation of this ramice is due to the weakness that comes to the testicles, and that material is spread out.
And sometimes it comes from a blow to the groin, and this moisture has many colors: or it is a color tending to yellow, or it is without red, or black, or white watery, and this happens more often;
and these are the signs to recognize this assembly, for if it is in the white syfac that we have mentioned, then the abscess is hard, the pus long like the shape of an egg, and the groin does not appear, for it has moisture all around.
And if it has moisture in the inner fabric, then the abscess is hard with part of the yolk, and because of this people think it is another egg;
and if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white surface, then it can be felt well;
then when you wish to know the color of the moisture, test all the inserted area carefully, of which the form is described above. According to what comes after the introduction, judge of what is within.
And when we cure it with iron, then it is necessary that the patient be bled according to our ability and the fullness of his body;
then place him on his back, on something quite high, and put under him many cloths;
then sit on his left, and instruct the assistant to sit on the right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs of the heart of the testicles;
then take the sharp knife, and cut the skin of the testicles from the long part down to near the wrist, and let your incision be straight, dividing the skin of the testicles until the white surface, and peel it carefully according to your ability;
then pierce the surface full of water with a wide hole, and draw out all the water, and then place your fingers, and stretch the surface upwards;
and do not touch the heart of the testicles, but only the surface; cut it all or piece by piece especially the subtle part of it, that if you do not cut it wisely, the ailment will return;
and if the eye jumps during your work, reset it in its place when you have completed the work on the surface;
then sew the two sides of the scrotum together with one stitch, then treat it like other wounds until it is healed.
and if you find the eye corrupted by another disease, then you must tie the vessels that are suspensory, out of fear of blood flow;
then cut the testicle at the suspensory ligament, and remove the eye, and treat it as we have said.
And if the fluid is gathered in two parts together, know that these are two branches; cut the other part as you have done the first equally, then wipe the blood, and put in the wound wool moistened in rose oil;
cut the other part as you have done the first equally, then wipe the blood, and put in the wound wool moistened in rose oil; and put over it more wool moistened in wine and oil, and place on the two groins, and put over that doubled cloths, and bind it tightly according to this form:
Then take two cloths, and apply shredded wool according to this appearance and have them sewn together at the waistband of the breeches, and one of the shoulders should extend from the anus to the back, and the other to the part of the groin;
and the other two heads on the two angles, and let the entire constriction be gathered into the loop of the strap;
and sometimes this branch of cautery is used instead of iron branding, and it is that you take a subtle knife-like cautery, and cut the skin of the testicles, and heat it as we have said, so that the white surface containing the fluid is exposed;
so take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that surface with tongs, and scrape it with this hot subtle cautery:
and cut it in every way that you can, until you clean everything;
and be careful that the fire does not touch the egg;
and know that this work is more healing; and watchful of the flow of blood, and skilled in the works of circumcision;
and if anything opposes you, whether an inflamed abscess or a flow of blood or something else, then treat what opposes you according to what has been said before.
And if the patient is fearful and does not wish to undergo this work because of its horror, then use perforation, as I tell you, and it is that when you are certain by the signs we have mentioned that watery phlegm is present, then make the patient sit on the elevated seat; then pierce the abscess in the part below all the swelling width, and apply the perforation from the long of the body;
and let the pores be wide, so that all the water flows through;
then put cotton on the area, and bind it, and leave it to drain the remaining water, then clean it until the wound is healed;
and if the white cloth does not allow water to come out of the mouth of the wound, then you must insert a quill or the instrument used to draw water from dropsical patients, the form of which is described above;
and widen the wound little by little, and know that the water returns and gathers after about six months or so, and when it has gathered as before, thus will the patient spend his days.
Know that in the section of this branch there is fear in many positions, which is why it seems better to leave it alone;
and I will tell you the work and the similarities of the abscess.
I say then that many abscesses come to the body, especially to the testicles; and it is by much chance.
It is to be known by an excess of sour and watery humors, which spreads to the testicles, or from trauma;
and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body; and finds no pain, and it is a severe abscess;
and by chance some abscesses are severe and fearful and stony, and of a fox's color, and sometimes come from artery pus, or swelling of the vein.
When it is from artery pus, it is known by the condition of the abscess being hot when you press it with your fingers; and you should not touch it.
The one caused by swelling of the vein is known by its condition upon touching with the fingers, and one can properly perform the incision on this appearance, and on other parts; and it is that you cut the core of the testicles, then the egg rises up, and the thread from the white surface, and free the suspensory ligament from all sides of the egg.
if the egg is already cooked with these new veins, then you must draw out the egg and cut it;
and if it is airy on the surface, or in what is inside the vessels, then you must free all of that tissue, and cut it roundly.
And if the birth of the flesh is at the rear place, then you must cut it all off and extract the egg, just as we have said.
And when your works are completed, then apply the wound with wool moistened in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
This is an abscess wrapped in a covering similar to a boil, with the softening of the testicles, and the patient suffers greatly when urinating;
and the treatment of this disease is as frightening as the one mentioned before, and nevertheless we will tell you its procedure according to what the ancients did.
You must make the patient sit on the raised chair, then place the suspensory of the scrotum down with your hands, over the vessels that are close to the penis, and grasp the main ones, and stretch them firmly;
then cut with a broad sharp knife across the vessels until they are exposed, and then peel on each side, just as we have said in the extraction of the arteries in the temples;
then insert a needle with double thread, and tie it at the first place where the vein emerged, and tie it again at the other end; then cut them straight through the middle, according to the length of the body, and draw out the corrupted moisture;
then treat the wound like the others where we cauterize blood, so that no vessel leaks which nourishes one of the testicles;
for by this no harm comes, and if pus comes to all the vessels, then it is necessary to draw the testicles from all the vessels; so that the organ does not lose its nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and they dry out and cannot help each other.
The effects of this procedure are by the section that comes to the groin, or the extension on the belly in the area of the thighs, so that the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the testicles;
and this rupture is at the level of the thigh or from the stretching of it, and these two types come from many causes:
or from impact, or from jumping, or from crying, or from lifting heavy loads, and by similar things;
and the signs when it is from the stretching of the thigh, are that it happens little by little, over a long time, and does not come suddenly; and the abscesses are equal up to the point of perfection, because the thigh presses on the intestines.
And the sign is when it is from the rupture of the spleen, that it causes sudden pain at the beginning, and the swellings appear varied under the skin nearby, and this is due to the protrusion of the intestines and the body beyond the spleen.
And sometimes the hernias come with the intestines, and are held there, causing great pain to the patient, especially when they are pressed.
And in these iron treatments there is fear, therefore one must avoid them.
And the method of the work is that you instruct the patient to keep the intestines in place with their hand inside the wound, if they can reach in; then remember on his neck. between your hands, and lift the thighs;
then bring the heart upward, and cut all the skin of the scrotum lengthwise; then insert into the edges of the wound hooks according to what you need to open the wound, and they should be such that the pus may come out;
then peel the surface that is under the skin of the scrotum until the white hard surface is exposed on all sides;
then insert your index finger into what follows the testicle, between the white surface that is under the skin of the egg, and the second surface, and separate what is behind the egg, and between the second surface;
and then move the right hand inside the core of the testicles, and stretch the white part upwards with your left hand, and lift the eye to all the surface towards the waist; and instruct the minister to stretch the eye upwards, and loosen that which is air behind the bandage;
and feel with your hands if there is any intestine wrapped around the hard white surface, and if you find anything, put it back into the abdomen;
then take a needle on which there is thick thread made of several threads, and insert it into the back part of the surface, which is behind the skin of the testicles; After the cutting, then cut the shoulders that appear from the threads, until there are four threads; then gather them one upon the other in the shape of a cross, and tie the superficie, which we have mentioned that is under the skin of the scrotum, with a strong binding of two parts; then wrap the shoulders of the threads, and tie them firmly with two parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish them can enter within, to prevent a hot abscess from forming; and place the binding according to the first binding long two times of that one, and after these two bindings leave from the superficie which is under the skin of the scrotum the length of one thumb; and after all the other according to the roundness that the eye bears;
then cut in the part that is below the skin of the testicles, as much as the sinew and the vein, just as we have said before;
then apply moistened wool in oil, and place it on the wounds, and apply the bandage that we have mentioned. And sometimes the white surface that we have mentioned is cauterized after the incision, out of fear of blood flowing. For this often happens, and leave the bandage until it falls off by itself;
and if it takes too long to fall off, let it be soaked in warm water, and put on what we have said until it falls off;
then treat the wound with another treatment until it is perfectly healed.
of fleshy hernia
In this branch, I have never seen anyone who dared to perform the treatment with iron.
And the ancients said that it is made like the twig which is together with the vine, in such a manner that you tie the vessels, after cutting lightly underneath;
then cut in the middle, and treat the abscess of the one who works until the vessels fall out;
and treat it as we have said until it is healed.
Sometimes rupture occurs in the groin, as we have said, and the lump appears;
and none of the intestines should descend into the testicles, and if they do descend, it is bad, and recurs frequently;
and if it remains too long at this stage, the wound or abscess grows, so that the intestines descend;
and this happens by the extension of the abscess which is in the veins, as we have said, for it is extended, then the blood is softened and swollen and opens;
and the treatment is by cautery, as we have said before;
and sometimes it is treated with iron in this manner: and it is that the patient lies down on his back between your hands, then cut the swollen area of the rupture according to the width of three fingers;
and then extract the sebaceous substance that is under the skin which follows, then take the ointment and put it on the area where the sebaceous substance appears;
and press it perfectly on the belly, then sew the two areas where the sebaceous substance appears at the head of the ointment, and sew one and the other;
then extract the head of the ointment, and do not cut into the sebaceous substance nor stretch the egg or any other thing, as I have made known to you in the treatment of the removal of the intestines; then treat it according to the treatment of wounds.
then treat it according to the treatment of wounds. And when you cut the abscesses, dress and treat the wound until it is healed.
The suture is tight, and there is no appearance in the rupture, and the cauterization is milder in this area, and closer to healing.
of the softening of the skin of the testicles
often the skin of the testicles in some men is softened because the semen inside is liquefied, and it is noticeable;
and it is necessary, when one wants to treat him, that the patient lie down on his back, and cut the skin which has softened on the natural skin;
then bring the two lips together with a suture, and if you see, first sew the excess of the softened skin with three or four firm sutures;
then cut between the sutures, and treat it like other wounds until it is healed, and remove the thread.
from the chastisement
Know that castrations are condemned in our law, and for this reason I would prefer not to speak of it in this book;
and it is not necessary except for two reasons:
where one is that the physician should know how to answer when asked, and know the treatment;
and the other, because we often need to use certain animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and cats and other animals.
I say then that castrations are performed in two ways: either by attraction, or by incision.
In the one that we do by attraction, we make the animal sit in hot water until the testicles are softened and hanging; then take them in your hand until they are repositioned and you no longer feel them.
Of the chastisement of gout: you must dye the animal, and press the skin of the testicles with your left hand, then tie the suspensory ligament, and cut on each egg with one cut, when you have thoroughly skinned them;
and leave some of the fat from the intestines and the fine fat that is on the vessels;
and this method of castration is better than that which is done by attraction, because in the attraction sometimes something of the testicles remains, by which the animal desires lust;
then treat the wound until it is healed.
about hermaphrodites
Hermafrodite exists according to two ways among humans: one of which is that between the two testicles there appears as the figure of a woman's anatomy, where it has hair, and sometimes it passes urine through it.
And another manner is in women, and it is on the wrist like a rod and two eggs.
And the treatment for the man and the woman is that you cut away all the attached flesh, and treat it like other wounds;
in the second way, for men whose urine passes through the skin of the testicles, there is no treatment.
Tentigene is a piece of flesh attached to the natural part, such that it is too ugly to see; and some women have it as large as a hand, and that is the treatment.
You must dye the excess of the tendons to your hand or with needles, and lightly cut it away;
and do not go too deep, so that bleeding does not occur, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed;
and to another growth that appears at the mouth of the molar, and it spreads, and perhaps grows large, and resembles a cup, and for this reason the ancients called it "cup disease". So you must cut it off, as we have said about the tendon, and treat it until it is healed.
It is erratic when the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the opening is small; and it is caused by birth, or accidentally by disease that has come;
and it is caused by birth, or accidentally by disease that has come; or it is by a car attached, or from the surface subtle or thick, and is done in perfection in the marrow, or on the sides, or below, or wherever it may be;
and defend the conception, and the childbirth, and perhaps the flows to have;
and the knowledge of this is by the regard of the bile.
If the swelling is closely appearing, then grasp it with your hands or with a cloth.
if it is from the surface subtle, and it is close to the two temples, then you should hurry, and do it thus:
put your two index fingers together, and the woman should be on her back, with her legs spread apart;
then stretch the two temples properly, until the subtle surface is rounded, and it covers the swelling;
Then take wool, and anoint it with oil, and place it on the area, and have the woman lie with the man each day so that it does not heal.
And if the surface is hard and thick, then you should scrape it with a spatula shaped like a myrtle leaf.
If the swelling is from a new growth, then suspend it at the onset and cut it off;
and have the blood-stopping medicines, such as acacia, dragon's blood, frankincense, all mixed with egg white;
then apply a wide bandage to the wound so that it cannot heal closed;
and let it be for a long time, and apply a linen cloth to it;
then treat other treatments until he is healed.
And when new flesh comes in the wound, it must be cut according to this method, unless they are infected abscesses. For an infected abscess that is in the wound, one should not touch it with iron.
hemorrhoids Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that without cause usually occur, and when hemorrhoids are old they become hard.
and we have said before in the division the similarities of them, and the signs, and I will say here those that receive cure.
I say that the hemorrhoids and the withered parts, when they are perfect in the anus, and they do not appear to the touch, are not cured by iron.
Those that are at the mouth of the anus, which can be felt, are those that can be treated.
Therefore, you must put the woman in a cold house, then stretch the altar with tongs, and cut it at its roots, then powder on blood-stopping medicines, such as agaric and dragon's blood and frankincense, and similar things;
then place her feet to the wall for an hour, then put her in cold water;
and if there is an overflow of blood, then have her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate peel and galls and similar things, and then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and salt, and make a plaster on her back.
And if it is stopped, it is good. and if not, have leeches applied to the back and breasts without pricking;
then take wool, and boil it in plantain juice or in elder juice with old wine, and apply it to the area.
And when the abscess has subsided, treat the area with ointment until it is healed;
and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a hard head, so it must be cut as I have said for the thelul; and then treat it until it is healed.
Many kinds of abscesses occur in the jaw, such as ulcers and stony abscesses and herpes and aphthae and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the classification.
It is then necessary that I speak in this treatise about the hot abscess that comes in the marrow, which is not one of the abscesses collected by the bow.
and if you wish to know the work of iron, then observe if the abscess is sharp at the beginning of its appearance, and full of heat and fever, and if it turns red if you can see it. Then do not hurry to pierce it, but let it ripen until the pain is calmed;
and then make the patient sit on a chair, and have two small stools where he can lean, and support his back and bring his feet together below the leg;
and let his thighs be spread apart, and place his arms beneath his knees, and bind them well with a good binding;
then the servant turns it towards the right side, and applies the instrument with which one works the mouth of the maris, from which comes the form;
and it is necessary that when you apply this instrument, you first insert the rod to know the depth of the maris, so that what enters inside the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and it does not injure the patient; and if the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the maris with cloths, so that the instrument does not cause pain;
and it is necessary that he place the cone of the instrument above, and that he stain the instrument.
and when the abscess is opened, and one cuts it with a soft hand, then it must be cut at the top, with the spatula lightly;
and when the boil is emptied, then you must put into the wound cloths moistened in rose oil, or in dried green oil;
and place the cloth firmly on the wound at the center of the poultice, and put over the poultice and on the bandage clean wool moistened in water or in which mallows have been cooked;
then treat it after two days of anointing in this manner, until it is healed;
and sometimes lift the wound and the sore by aclyster of water and honey, and then with water or roots of lilies and long fennel being cooked; then return to the ointment.
And if the wound is embedded in the flesh, then you must beware of using hot iron, but treat it as we have said in the section.
of childbirth It is necessary first for the midwife to know the signs of natural childbirth, and these signs are when you see the woman pressing downwards, and desiring to smell the air.
then the infant hastens to come out; then you know that this childbirth is according to the natural form, and the exit is under its head, and the afterbirth with it;
and when you see these signs, then it is necessary to lightly press his belly, so that the infant comes out quickly;
for when he urinates on his head, the afterbirth comes with it, and the mother is cleansed of her excesses through proper cleansing;
and he who comes otherwise does not come naturally.
For sometimes he comes on his feet, and the body or the shoulders, and the hands come forward, or he comes on his belly, or his buttocks, and is turned by chance on his neck, and in other bad positions;
it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and skilled in these matters, and to beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the positions how one should assist them.
If the fetus comes onto its head by natural passage, and the woman gives birth with difficulty, and the strength of the woman is weak, then have her sit on a saddle, where the women hold her;
and her natural oils or fenugreek be cooked, and then the midwife puts between her fingers the small spatula of which this is the form: and cut through the amnion, and scrape with her nail until the moisture inside comes out;
and grasp the woman's belly until the fetus descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to administer an enema to the woman with a mixture of fenugreek and sesame oil;
then have her sneeze from condiments, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: the infants will now come out.
And if the two hands come out forcefully, then you must reset them gently little by little; and if they cannot go in, then put the woman on a stool and lift her feet up; then place the stool on the ground, and support the woman so she does not fall when it is lowered;
and if the hand cannot enter and the infant is dead, then cut the hands with the knife that was previously placed there, extract the infant, and reset equally.
of the birth of the child on its feet When the infant comes on its feet, then he must be pushed up; and then turn it little by little until it is even;
then take the feet and stretch them little by little.
When it reaches up to the thighs, then command to take hold of it, and make it sneeze with condiments; if it is strong, if God wills.
And if it does not become strong as we have said, then turn it little by little until it is according to the natural shape. For then it moves lightly.
And if it does not come strong as we have, say take musliage of altitude, and oil of sesame, and dissolved gum, and grind all in the mortar; and put on the nature of the woman inside and remove this ointment, then have her sit in warm water up to below the ribs;
and when she is moistened underneath, make her a necklace of myrrh, and put it underneath, and leave it for an hour; then have her sit on the seat, then make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose, and gently grasp her belly, for the infant is now jumping.
of the birth of the child upon its knees When the infant comes in this manner, then the midwife gradually places her hands; then let it be held by its neck, and its feet dangled down, and let it lie on the bed; and bends his hands little by little, and then takes hold of the hands on the belly, and removes the cushions underneath, until she is aligned downwards; and if the infant does not jump, then take its feet and move them forcefully, then move its belly upwards, then put your hands there; and wash the child little by little; and command the woman to strain until the infant comes out.
of the birth of the child who comes with one hand extended wide It is necessary to devise a way to bring back the hand: if it cannot be brought back, then make the woman stand up and walk;
If she cannot walk, then make her lie on the bed, and raise her legs properly;
then administer the massage that I have described;
and if she does not give birth, then make her sit on the stool, then try to guide the hand; and take the child according to its natural position, and make her sneeze, and command her to strain until the infant comes out.
from the birth of the child on its neck, and have its hands spread out, and its face turned towards its mother's back. it is necessary that the bailiff hold his hand, then turn it little by little, and take it gently;
and when it is aligned, then apply the natural massage with fat and oil, as we have said, then command her to move little by little;
and when you have done this, then make her sit on the chair, and command that she holds herself; and make her sneeze. in this same manner to all the secondine
in this same manner to all the secondine When it comes to this manner of fullness in the sinew, cut the sinew with your nail until the moisture is emptied;
and if the swelling can be on his face and neck, then cut it from the boil so that it is not retained, and reduce the swelling;
then place the child inside, until you have put it in the proper position, and command the woman to hold herself firmly;
of the birth of twins Know that abscesses often occur, and sometimes three or four may develop; and this is not an unusual thing, and it often happens. Two are unusual things, and they do not live much, if at all;
Two are unusual things, and they do not live much, if at all; I know that they multiply, and are separated by the surface that divides them, which is tied to the knot;
and sometimes they come out as naturally as any other bodily fluids, as we have said.
And if they come out forcefully, then treat it as we have said, and let the bandage be fine, and do quickly and lightly what needs to be done; and do so as it moves to salvation. of many children
Sometimes they are formed in the womb I or II or III or IIII or V or VI or VII, or more up to XV, and are all shaped like children by the measurement of the wise glorious, and it is necessary that the midwife knows all this, for perhaps similar things happen to her; and do according to what is appropriate.
of the dead child
When you treat the woman for a dead child in her womb, as I have said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are constrained to manual work; you must know if the woman is of sound health, and has no condition where she fears death;
so that the woman must lie on her back, and have her hips inclined downward, and her legs raised;
and the minister holds the thread in two parts, tied to the bed so that it is not pulled during the descent of the child;
then rub the mouth of the mother with moist oils mixed with alum and fenugreek and flaxseed, then anoint her hands with these oils and these mixtures;
then place them lightly on the mother, then apply the places where you should place the ointments that are suitable for this, and be careful if the infant is positioned that it descends head first;
so insert the needles in his eyes or in his neck or in his mouth or in his palate or under the beard or in the throat or near the sides, and if the condition is on the feet, insert them in the ankles and the middle sides;
and it is necessary that he holds the needle in his right hand, and places the ball between the fingers of his left hand, and gently applies it to his entire hand, and inserts the needle into any of these areas that we have mentioned until it reaches the empty space;
then insert another needle opposite it, or a third if needed, so that the extractions are equal;
and then stretch it evenly by moving from one side to the other, to make the teeth come out, and let the bone be toothed to hold the teeth, as is shown here:
and if part of it remains, he anoints one of his fingers with oil, and puts it in that part, and pulls the other part;
and if any remains, place this bone at the higher part, and do this until it all comes out completely.
and if one hand comes in front of the other and cannot be brought back due to constriction, then you must wrap it with a cloth until it all comes out; then cut at the joint of the sole or at the toe, and thus you must do in the other hand, and to the two feet.
And if the shoulder of the child is large and it is stuck in the birth canal, or it has a pointed head gathered together, then you must put the sharp spathouse between your fingers, cut the head and draw out the water; or you round it with the instrument which is called "almidach," from which the form comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this one;
and in the same way do it if the infant has a large head naturally;
and then pull the bones with tongs, and if the shoulder is tight inside and it resists with strength, it should be split until the moisture which is in the swelling comes out;
and if she cannot come out, then cut her into pieces with the tool you can use;
and if it is swollen in the belly or below the ribs, then you must pierce it until the moisture flows.
And if the swelling is on his feet, then the attraction is light, and the adjustment to the mouth of the wound is light.
And if it is tight in the belly or the breast, then you must stretch it with a cloth wrapped around the hand; and cut open the belly or the breast until the moisture that is inside flows;
and if the other limbs are removed and the head remains, then the healer puts his hand into the fontanel of the skull, and pulls it until the mouth of the skull; then place one lancet or two, and draw forcefully;
and if the opening of the ear is narrowed due to a hot abscess that has come there, one should not work on it, but instead administer moist and greasy substances; and the treatment should be plasters, and sitz baths in softening and moistening water.
And if the infant is on its side, and you can make it lie flat, then administer what we have said for the living child;
and if one cannot do so, then draw forcefully piece by piece, and leave nothing of the second skin.
And when you have done this, if the attendant removes what we have said about hot abscesses that come in the groin;
and if bleeding occurs, then apply constricting water, and the attendant should perform other treatments.
And I saw a woman in whose womb one fetus had been dead, then another was placed on top of it, and the other also died. After a long time, an abscess came upon the boil, and swelled so much that it burst open, and began to have great pus.
I was called to treat, and I thought long about it, and could not heal the wound.
I put on a strongly attracting poultice, and an bone came out, and after some days others did as well. I was very amazed, because the belly has no bones.
I thought that they were the bones of a dead child.
I stitched the wound, and pulled out many bones, until the woman was in better condition; and the woman lived for a long time this way, and would occasionally discharge a bit of pus from the site;
and I have recalled this chapter for the reason that when a master finds something unusual, he should add help to it.
Here comes the form of the compressor, to which one lifts the books;
and to two wheels at the two shoulders of the two limbs. Nevertheless, the horn should be finer than the restrictive part, and it should be made of ebony or boxwood;
and the mouth of the staff should be one inch wide, and the margin of the branches one inch, and in length one and a half palms; and between the two limbs should be two adjustments of this same staff, which are fixed at one end and the other, half a palm in length or a little more;
and these two adjustments are inserted into the mouth of the marrow to open when one turns the two horns.
Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, should be made of ebony wood or boxwood, according to the shape of the forceps; and let it have at both ends two adjustments, as you see, one palm long, and two fingers wide;
and when you wish to open the uterus with the entire instrument, make the woman sit on a bed, feet hanging and legs spread, then insert the two adjustments together into the uterus, and hold the head of the instrument below between her thighs; then work your hand with the entire instrument, just as you have done with the forceps equally, according to the amount that you wish to open the mouth of the uterus, until the loose part does what it wants.
These instruments are all coated, and their appearances are multiplied; and when the doctor has prepared them, he is more eager to work, and they are more valuable to people because of their quantity.
Do not despair of the instrument that you have prepared, for their necessity is not excusable.
When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold back her flow, and then make her sneeze with condice, and hold her hands to her mouth and neck; and if she succeeds by this means, it is good.
If not, then take a pot, and make holes in the lid, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the womb inside, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia lignea, and centaury; all these herbs, or some of them, be cooked in a pot with water over the fire;
then put one end of a cane or tube into the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the patient, and have them inhale until the vapor comes inside the patient;
then make them sneeze, as we have said. The sinews move swiftly.
And if it remains after this treatment and does not come out, then instruct the nurse to moisten her left hand in sesame oil or in a mixture of altitude, and then place it on the area, and rub gently; and when she has found it, then grasp it and extend it little by little straightly, so that the patient does not fall during the extraction;
but there it is necessary to move lightly to the right and to the left, and then pull; it will come and dislocate.
And if the opening of the ear is too narrow, we have mentioned the treatment of sneezing and the fumigation of herbs;
and if it does not go through all of what we have said, be careful that you do not follow in pulling;
but it is necessary that what is at the opening of the ear be tied to the thigh of the woman, then cleanse it with an ointment of four drugs; it will swell and reset, and come back strong;
but nonetheless, when it ferments, a bad odor comes to the stomach and head, and hurts the patient. then appropriate fumigations are needed for this:
some of the ancients have experienced fumigations of watercress and dried figs.
The form of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman for the retention of the flows and the secondina is thus:
And it resembles glass, with a thin head placed in the affected area, and the wide ends over the fire;
and let the fumigation be over the coals, and continue until it is consumed, and start another one.
Many children are born who do not have a perforated anus, but it is plugged with a thin membrane: then it is necessary for the nurse that she pierces that surface appropriately, and does not pierce it with an acute spatula, and takes care of the stitching so as not to touch it;
then put wet wool in wine and oil, then the treatment of anointing until it is healed.
And if you doubt that it will not heal, put a pin of silver in the puncture and leave it for several days, and remove it when the child wishes to go into chambers.
And sometimes this swelling comes from the suddenness of a wound or an abscess; then it is necessary to cut that sudden swelling: it should be treated, as we have said about the splinter.
Fistulas that come from beneath the anus are nodulations, and enlargements that come near the anus or in the space between the two parts, so there is one fistula or more;
and when that knotting is old, it acts, and still moisture causes white or subtle sores, and sometimes these fistulas are perforating;
and they are known by what comes out in excretion or flatulence when the patient excretes, and sometimes one jumps out.
And there are fistulas that penetrate as far as the bladder, and up to half of the penis; and they extend as far as the hip joint, and up to the knee pit.
And thus one knows the perforating fistula at the anus, and the non-perforating: and it is that you put your index finger in the anus, and insert a fine needle of brass or iron into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
and if there is tortuosity, then insert a thin lead probe or horsehair until you feel the probe or hair at its proper place;
and if you do not feel it, and there is no discharge of feces or wind or worm from the opening, as we have said: know that it does not penetrate; do not hurry to treat it.
And when the fistula extends all the way to the bladder or to the urinary duct, then the urine leaks out and cannot be sealed with medicines.
if it is penetrated up to the junction of the thigh, then the probe reaches the site; If there is no curvature and the source of the pain around it, then it immediately causes swelling, and neither medicine nor salve by ointment is effective;
and in these Persian fistulas there is no cure other than work, and the vanity of foolish doctors who interfere with them.
In the one that is not Persian and is not old, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on their back;
and the legs are lifted up to his thighs, and his thighs are inclined toward his abdomen; then insert a probe of silver, or of bronze if there is curvature, until you know where the probe goes.
If the patient feels it around the anus, then you must put your index finger there, and if you sense that the tent has pierced through;
and it is uncovered where you feel between your finger the surface or the flesh, then you know that it is pierced through; do not tamper with it, for it cannot be healed;
It is said nonetheless that some can be healed well, but this happens rarely;
and the aid that is done consists in heating the fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as was previously stated; and he inserts it entirely hot into the fistula until it comes near the anus; and do this two times or three, until you know that these charred remains are burned, which look like the feather of a bird;
and then clean with moistened tents in butter, until the charred parts come out, then cleanse with an ointment that heals and binds the wound.
If he is thus healed, it is well.
If this is done, no other healing can be achieved;
and if the tent enters and does not penetrate to the bone at the base, and between your finger and the tent there is a thick covering of char or scab, and you see the fistula beneath this covering of the wound; cut from the beginning of the fistula, and immediately push the tent further in, then cauterize afterward until you reach the head of the tent; and the tent shall be delivered, and fall;
then purify those stained charcoals that resemble a bird's feather, and leave nothing behind.
And if the sinew overpowers you and cuts between you and the work, then cauterize it with fire or medicinal heat.
For the fire cauterization brings together two good things: that is to say, the binding of these charcoals applied, and the stopping of blood and the drying of moisture;
then treat the moist tents with butter or ground substances until the place throws out pus, and let the burned charcoals be expelled in the pus;
then treat the wound with sudorific ointments that soften hard flesh, and these medicines are dry.
For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
And if a fistula comes up to the perfect part of the anus and is away from the body, put your finger in the anus and probe it.
If you feel the tension, and between two is the thread or the sinew or flesh, where it is close to piercing, there is no force but the way of faith and hope, by the administration of one of the three ways:
or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it to the bottom, or if you can, place threads and treat it as first mentioned;
and do not go too deep that you do not cut the tissue holding the foundation, and excretions come out involuntarily; then treat it as we have said;
then treat it as we have said; perchance it will be healed, or you remove that covering and clean it after it is cut near the foundation, whether by thread or by another sharpened instrument; then cleanse that dirty flesh which is in the wound, as much as you can; then study to restore the wound, and to keep the fistula in the part outside the anus:
then study to restore the wound, and to keep the fistula in the part outside the anus: it is a lighter thing for the patient.
And sometimes the fistulas are according to this manner: and it is when you insert the tent into the fistula, and it is on the side of the anus near the skin above, then take a tent pierced at the top according to this form: And you put the twisted thread in two, and insert the tent with all the thread into the fistula until it reaches the head.
if it is passing through the margin of the anus inside, then pull the thread from that hole, as you insert your finger into the anus;
and pull the head of the thread, and bring the two shoulders together, and press one against the other, and leave it for one day or two;
and restrain it sometimes until the thread cuts these tissues that are between two and fall out;
then treat the wound until it is healed and sealed.
If the fistula does not drain, then have it pierced in every way you can, if it is not too hard. For it is not right to cut so hard for the lancing, and then clean it, as we have said, until it is healed.
The form of the sharp spatumile spine, with which one makes the fistula, is very sharp on one side and cutting; and on the other side it is not, so that one does not cut what should not be cut, as you see here:
Emorrhoids are according to two manners: where they are inside the fundament, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and they bring immediate blood, and if there is one or more, and they are below the fundament and at the top of the fundament;
but those that are below have little moisture, and still bring a bit of yellow water or a bit of blood, and they have the color of the flesh;
and the treatment for those who have them inside the fundament is that you instruct the patient to strain to go into chambers, until the fundament comes out, and the threads become visible; then you hurry and grasp it with tweezers, or hold it with your nail, then cut it at its roots;
and if the forceps cannot hold them due to their moisture, then they take them with a flag, or with cotton, or with a piece of camlet; and pull them out with your fingers, then cut them, and sprinkle some hot powders used for cautery on top; or you cauterize them as it is said in the chapter on cautery, then treat them with other treatments until they are healed;
and if the fundament cannot expel [the matter], then purge the patient with a sharp and harshclyster to wash what is in the fundament so that it may be expelled easily; when the patient purges, and if the contents are strong from the fundament, then the treatment is light;
when the patient purges, and if the contents are strong from the fundament, then the treatment is light; and it is that you take them with your nail or with tongs, and cut them, then clean them as we have said, until they are healed, and the incision by iron is feared. and you must treat the stitch according to this manner:
and you must treat the stitch according to this manner: take the twisted thread, and put it in a needle, and then pull the thread above and make the needle pierce from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread under the needle, and let it be wide;
and tighten the thread firmly, then knot the thread, and remove the needle, and do this for all the others, and leave one to draw off the excess blood;
Then put on the fundament a moist cloth in rose oil or in ointment, and put it on the fundament, and instruct the patient to rest;
and then leave it until they defecate, and when they have done so, treat them with ointment and other treatments, until they are healed.
from the dryness of the feces or wound Often it happens that dryness of phlegm occurs in the intestines, and by constraint of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help. You must use the tip of a spatula or your nail to remove the outer layer that should not be allowed to become damp; then treat it until it is properly cleansed as appropriate;
and if it does not heal, then repeat the shaving more forcefully than before, until it heals well and is peeled; then treat until it is healed.
from the trembling Formice is a small spotted appearance around the body, and it causes much harm;
and sometimes the cold affects it, and it is felt like a numbness from trembling, and it comes over the whole body, more so in the hands than elsewhere.
And the treatment is that you take a quill from a goose feather, or a strong vulture feather, and place that quill on the trembling, until the circle fully encircles the trembling; then turn your hand around the quill until you cut all around the trembling, and it stops the harm, and removes the trembling from its roots.
And if you wish, do this with a quill of brass or iron according to this form, and let it be sharp below and broad above. and does not perceive, to keep the eye still, and to press on it.
And if you wish, cauterize the tremor, as it is described in the chapter on cautery.
Sometimes a clyster is made of silver or archaut, or of melted tin or lead;
and sometimes these substances are made small and large, according to those to whom they are administered. Those that are administered in the treatment of children and those who are weak and painful, are small.
Those that are administered in the treatment of children and those who are weak and painful, are small. The form of the clyster, whether small or large, is wide at the top, where the belly is tied according to this manner:
and there should be an opening where the belly is tied, as you see, and the inside of the cheeks be pierced;
and it should have two holes on one side, and one hole on the other;
and let the belly where one puts the medicines be of a beast's bladder or of parchment, and be pierced all around with small holes, and have between each hole one inch of space, then put in these holes one strong thread of raw silk twisted ten times around, and gather the belly so that it is like a bag; and when the medicine is inside, tie the instrument tightly with a strong thread, then use as an enema;
and this is the form of the circle:
and let the medicine not be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the enema with oil or egg white, or a similar thing, then insert it gently; then the minister heats it with his two hands together until it is all hot, then draws out theclyster, and lifts the patient’s legs to the wall, and if the medicine wants to come out, holds it as much as he can; and if he sleeps all night, it is greater help.
And if you clysterize in a disease of diarrhea, and the medicine rushes to come out, restart it until it is absorbed.
and if the hemorrhoids are in the anus or an abscess, then let theclyster be as mild as for a child;
and this is the form of the mildclyster with which the skin should be drawn tight:
We have said before in the section about the treatment of wounds;
Or we shall tell you of the treatments of hands and medicine, according to the fulfillment.
I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made by, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and of what they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are by throwing of stones, and cutting of sword and knife, or spear or staff or arrow, or similar things;
or they are made according to the parts of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or the chest, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members;
and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, for the reminiscence will come in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, then take care if it is from throwing of stones or similar things, and the skin is entirely ruptured and the wound is large, and you fear the rising of a hot abscess: if he makes it bleed from the cephalic vein especially if a little blood comes from the wound, and let the bleeding be opposite to the injured part;
and prevent the patient from excess of wine and heavy foods.
And if it does not bleed, then reduce his food, and let him drink no wine, nor eat meat;
and apply to the wound, if hot abscesses come, cotton moistened solely in rose oil, or in astringent wine;
and if there is no hot abscess, then put on the fresh wound, which has all its blood and has not been exposed to the air, a powder that I will mention a little later;
and if the burn has moved, then apply some ointments until it is healed.
And if the wound is large like that of a sword cut and similar ones, and the lips cannot be brought together by bandages, then bring them together by suturing, as I will say about abdominal wounds, of the stitching.
if the wound is exposed to the bone, and can be, and only holds on by a little bit, then cut it off; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat hearty foods, such as heads and cooked wheat, as well as pulses, and similar things.
and if you find putrefaction in the skin, and it has not reached the bone, then cut out all the putrefaction and discard it, then treat the wound;
and if there is an artery or vein in the wound that cannot be stopped by medicine, then tie off the artery, and if you find it dislocated, then bind it with a thread; and if this does not help at all, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and it is that you put this powder which soothes as soon as the fire has moved it.
And the manner of the powder is as follows: take frankincense one part; dragon's blood two parts; live chalk three parts, and powder them finely, and apply to the wound, and bind firmly, until it dries well and adheres to all its blood;
and then strain it well, and leave it unloosened, if it does not swell; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
And sometimes one does this with coals alone, when one does not have the incense or the dragon's blood, but the fire has moved the wound.
And if the burn has moistened the wound, in this state, one does not apply this powder;
but apply some digesting ointments, or a powder of oat flour made with water and honey, until it gives off pus; then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
And if the bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with fine forceps;
and I will tell you hereafter the fractures of the head.
of the wound of the neck
If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, then there is no difference between this and that of the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut.
If it is the nerve, there is no other method than to leave the treatment and not apply anything constricting, for it harms the nerves and makes them retract; and do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their connection to the brain, which is the highest member, is with it;
but let the medicine be warm, such as hot water washed in sweet water, and mixed with rose oil, and cicely also washed in sweet water, and other minerals according to this method, and moist ointments.
And if the wound is large, sew it and bind it with bandages, then treat it until it is healed.
And if the wounds are deep and it is covered and full of pus, pierce it at the lowest point;
and if the artery is cut and bleeding comes out, then open it, tie it, and cauterize it if necessary;
and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the windpipe, and the conduit is preserved so that the flesh can pass, then sew the windpipe to the neck bone, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural form; and then bind it appropriately, and leave it for some days, then treat it with drying ointments until it is healed;
and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then seek it out; and if there are pieces of bone, then pull out all that you can, and those that you cannot get, leave until the wound putrefies, and is separated and the discharges are lightened;
and if the wound is fresh, then sprinkle the powder that I have mentioned. And if there is bone in the wound and it has a fistula, treat it as I have said in his chapter.
If it is a blow from a lance or a knife, and the wound is deep, then check if wind comes out of the wound when the patient breathes: then you know that the wound is mortal;
and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, then do not put the powder at the first hour, nor bind it for the blood that does not coagulate fully, and return to the heart, and kill the patient; but apply an attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day;
and if you do not have ointment, then put old cloth in the wound to draw out the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more; there will not come spasm, nor trembling, nor strangeness of heart; And when you see the good arrangements, then you know that the wound is saved. Then treat it with bandages and other treatments until it is healed;
and if it cannot heal, and [the wound] works, then you know that there is a fistula;
treat it as one should. And if the wound is from the incision of a sword or knife, and it is simple, on the buttocks or on the back, then treat the side that is in front; if it is large, by suturing;
and if it is small, of powder, and if it is embedded in the bone, and cut into pieces, seek out the wound, and draw out threads if they are loose; and if they are not loose, let the wound fester, which will lighten the extraction;
and for other wounds on other limbs, the judgment is the same as we have said.
of the rupture of the belly
The rupture of the abdomen is large and medium and small;
from the large wound sometimes the intestines or the nerves of the intestines protrude, causing intrusion of other substances;
and the suturing is more difficult, and sometimes a small wound is worse than a large one, because one delays in pushing the intestines back in, if they are not put back promptly;
For the reason that the intestines swell immediately when they feel the cold, they retract more pointedly, and for this the middle wound is useful, for it allows the intestines to be moved back into place more easily than with the other two.
And know that the rupture of the belly is according to four manners:
the two common sutures occur in the suture of the belly, and the suture of other wounds of the body and two other specific sutures are common to other wounds;
and nevertheless they are more specific with the suture of the belly, and I will say one by one and explain.
I say that when the wound is small, and some part of the intestine comes out, and it is difficult to put back, this is by one of the two manners: For the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen from the cold.
And when it is crushed, heat it in such a manner: soak a sponge or the soft cloth in warm water only, or you boil in water squill and cinnamon and spike, and sprinkle the intestines until the swelling is removed;
and sometimes this is done with constricting wines, and it is better to use only one for reducing swelling.
And when you see the swelling begin to subside, moisten the intestines with water in which fennel and mallows have been boiled, for by this the entry is made less painful;
and if it cannot enter, then cut slightly into the wound with the instrument used to cut hemorrhoids;
and the first treatment is to reduce the swelling, which no one should cut into without great necessity;
and this is the instrument for splitting it:
then cut inside the curvature and not further, and see here the form: And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines have jumped out, put them back according to their natural form in their proper place, if you can, for this is worth doing.
When the wound is wide and it is in the part below the belly, then you must have the patient lie on his back, and raise his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the part below the belly, then raise the head and chest higher than the lower parts, and likewise if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts, then place attention to that the wounded part be higher than the other;
and thus one must administer what I say in large and medium wounds.
In small wounds place what is prepared for you, then have between your hands the ministerious balsam that clings to all the rupture with its hand, and bring together the lips;
and this is the common method of sutures, which is that you take one needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave at the head of the wound some space, and insert a needle where it has strong thread; and pierce the two sides of the skin with the two sides of the sinus, which is beneath the skin inside, until you make it pierced from that part, and bring together the two ends of the sinus all four together;
then strain with a double thread around the needle in two parts, then bring together the two edges of the wound appropriately, and then leave one finger's width, and insert another needle;
then twist the thread like you did with the first needle, and do not stop doing this according to your need for needles, until the entire wound is restrained;
and let the needles be of medium size, between fine and thick, for the fine needles cut all the flesh, and those too thick cannot enter well: for that reason, they should be of medium size;
and it is not right to push the needles too deep into the flesh and skin, so that they do not cut and damage the wound before the suturing;
and then cut the heads of the needles so they do not prick the patient while sleeping, and place threads or cloths on the heads of the needles to keep them still, and leave them until the wound is healed;
and this method of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, for one or two needles suffice.
The second stitching is common, and it is where you bring together the two edges of the skin and the two edges of the surface together with one needle using one strong medium thread;
and when you have pierced these four edges together, then leave the needle at the part where you began, in the manner in which clothes are sewn;
and put a space between each stitch the thickness of a small finger;
these stitches were of a man, and I sewed a wound that a man had in his belly, which was cut by a knife, and the wound was more than a palm wide, and the intestines came out about two palms long, and the wound was in the middle of the belly.
I brought back the intestine after it had been outside for 24 hours, and the wound was sealed up to 15 days, and I treated it, and he was healed.
And the physician had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle;
and I did not treat it with ointment, for I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicines; and I placed old cotton on the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until he was healed.
Now I will tell you the two proper methods of stitching:
Take the needle, and push it from the outer part to the inner part;
when it has pierced the heart straight through, then leave the head of the thread or stitch where you pushed the needle, and make it pierce from the inner part to the outer part again;
and the understanding of this stitching is that you sew as the tanner does with skins, and you leave one side once, and take it from the other, until the stitches are entirely completed.
The second method of stitching, which Galien properly describes, is such that some use, who join the two parts together naturally, and bring one end of the thread to the other end in such a manner:
insert a needle at the head of the mirach approaching, and make pierce that place only, and leave the two shoulders of the syfac; then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the outer part to the inner part, at the two shoulders of the syfac;
then make pierce one and the other from the outer part to the inner part, at two other shoulders of the mirach that are on the other side;
and this is the most versatile stitch and the most common.
Galien said this word, and some testify that one should sew the belly with two needles, each having thread;
and one must push one needle from one side, and another from the other, in the manner of those who sew hides;
and know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, the stitching is more severe than in other parts of the belly.
The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, even if the heat has moved it, you should reset the intestine and the stitch;
then put the healing powder on it, and if the heat has moved it, then put some ointment that is available until the wound draws; and they pinch the threads, and the scissors are soldered, and the mirrors; then treat the wound like the others, until it is healed;
and if you do not have medicines, then put on it, as soon as it starts to expel pus, old cotton, and change it twice a day until it is healed.
For you do not need other medicine in many cases when the wounds are simple;
and if you fear that the wound may affect the principal limbs, then you should moisten fine wool in tempered oil or rose oil, and apply it around the joints, and under the armpits;
and if he feels pain or putrefaction in the bowels, which often happens, then cleanse them with warm black wine, and especially so if the putrefaction reaches the intestines;
and pierce it from inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small.
The intestines which are called "jeun" cannot heal when they are wounded, and this is due to the abundance of veins that are there, and due to the subtlety of all the body, and the closeness of its nature to the nerves.
and if the hernia protrudes from the wound, then replace it as you would with an intestine, while it is fresh;
and if it is old and has turned green or black, then you must tie the place that is black so that no bleeding occurs, for there are veins and arteries;
then cut what is between the ligament, and let the two shoulders hang from the part below the wound up to above to lighten the extraction when the arrow falls, and the wound draws.
Of the rupture of the boil
When the intestine is round, and the wound is small, it can be restored in some people, for I have seen that a man was wounded in the belly by a lance;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became sewn up and turned into a fistula, and excretions and gases came out from it;
I applied treatment according to what I could, and did not stop treating it until he was healed, and the wound was sealed.
And when I saw it sewn, I feared that the patient might have pain in his stomach; and there was no harm, but he remained in better conditions, eating and drinking;
and some experimenter said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be tied in such manner: take frankincense with large heads, then bring the edges of the wound together, and when the frankincense has opened its mouth, place it on the two edges so that it presses its mouth upon them;
and then cut off the head, and it will hold so that it cannot come undone, then place another frankincense in the same manner as before, until the wound is entirely enclosed; and cut the wound.
Those heads burn in the intestine, and cause no harm to the patient, and one can tie the intestine with a fine thread that is cut from the intestine of an animal, in such a manner:
take the head of this intestinal thread that is very thin, and then tie to the head of this thread a fine linen thread tightly, then put the thread in the needle, and sew the intestine, and stitch it in the tear;
and this manner of stitching for hernias is not different according to the way of faith and hope;
and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the great intestines, there is no skill or health, except subtlety.
about the fistula wherever it may be Know that any wound or abscess, when it awakens, is universally called "fistula", and especially when it is hairy and discharges pus.
And a fistula is according to truth a faulty knot hard and white, where one does not feel pain, and it is also hairy like the feather of a bird;
and sometimes it spits clear spittle, and at other times thick; sometimes a little, and at other times enough;
and I have spoken of this in the section on wounds, that any wound that is not healed and has no flesh, it is only due to one of the nine causes: that is to say, by the insufficiency of blood or body; or by its malignity; For there is hard flesh inside, and on the lips, which does not allow new flesh to grow; where there is too much bile; when the blood is thin, and the matter is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good in the treatment; or because the corruption is of a pestilent nature; or because the property of the region causes late digestion, and delayed healing, and swelling by nature; where there are veins or bones;
and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division.
Now I must make you know the treatment of fistula which is done by manual work.
Know that fistula occurs in all parts of the body; for there are fistulas that come to the large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or to the spleen, or to the intestines, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet; and there is one that comes to the principal part of the member and similar areas.
And all the fistulas that are of this kind are difficult to heal, and there is only labor and ignorance;
and if there is any fistula that does not come to the place I have said, and you are confident in the treatment, and you want to know it, take a probe of brass or iron, if the fistula is straight, then seek it;
and if the fistula is twisted, then search it with a slender probe of lead, for lead can bend around the twists;
and if the fistula has many openings and you cannot search it well with probes, then cleanse it through one of the openings, for the moisture will flow from one opening to another, and thus purify it;
then carefully seek it to your ability so that you may know if there is bone or nerve, and do this thoroughly, and ask the patient well about the pain they feel when pressed by your hand, and the place where they feel it;
and when you truly know the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, then cut according to what I have said to you, and remove all the corruption and the putrid matter that is inside;
and then treat it until it is healed, and if the fistula is very deep in a straight line, you must cut deeply as much as you can, then put moistened lint with medicinal herbs inside, and push them to the top of the fistula, so that the medicine corrodes the excess that remains at the bottom;
and then apply healing ointments to promote new tissue growth until it is healed;
and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut it off.
If a vein or nerve does not trouble the principal members, as we have said;
and if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackening, then scrape it until all the corruption is removed, then treat it with healing substances until it is healed;
and if it is not healed, and it begins to swell as before, know that you have not gone far enough to the source:
then expose and clean until you reach the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore the area;
and if he is thus healed, it is well. If not, know that the corruption is too profound, that you cannot achieve it; there is no other method but to leave it to nature;
and if there is a small corrupted bone and you can extract it with tongs, then extract it with the appropriate instrument for that, and if there are many bones, then extract them all, do not leave even one;
and if the moisture hinders you, and there is no mistake nor fear, then cut away both the moisture and the flesh, and free the bones.
And if you cannot remove them in one hour, then put on the wound something encouraging putrefaction, and leave until the flesh is rotten around the bones, and then the bones will come out more easily;
and if it is a large bone, such as from the leg or thigh, then raise the putrefaction only until all the blackness is removed, then heal the wound;
and if there is a large part of the corrupted flesh, it will reach the bone marrow; then it is necessary to sew and cut all the way down to the putrefaction, and then treat it until it is healed;
and I will tell you of an ulcer that happened to a man in his leg, so that you may take example and aid in your work.
The young man was about thirty years old, who had pain in his leg due to something that came into the body, so that the matter came to the leg, and it swelled with a large abscess, and there was no clear reason to open;
but the physicians, through their folly, worked so much on it that the abscess opened, and a great deal of matter flowed out, and it became a fistula, and there were many leaks that all discharged pus and moisture from the body;
and many physicians treated it for about two years, and there was no wise one in the art of hands until I was called, and I saw his leg and the medicines with which he was being treated, and what flowed out through the leaks was thick; and the body of the young man would turn red, and had a yellowish color.
I pitched a tent in one of these perforations, and then searched all the perforations, and found that one came opposite the other from all parts of the leg.
I hurried then, and cut into one of the openings until I discovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupted and perforated, and the corruption reached to the inner bone;
I scraped away what appeared to be the corrupted bone, and thought there was no other corruption except that which I removed;
and began to treat the wound with poultices for a long time, and it would not heal;
and then I began again, and uncovered the bone as before, and found the corruption continued in the bone, and scraped it, and then removed it, and tried to heal the area; but I could not cut around more than a palm's width of the bone, and I pulled it out along with all its flesh, then I restored it with medicines; and he was healed and sewn up quickly, and there was no need to begin the work again except for the weakness of the patient, who could not endure, and for the fear of death that I had for him. For the evacuation he often bled, but was entirely healed, and in place of the bone hard flesh grew, and was of good condition and had no harm nor contrary at all in any way, nor when going nor coming.
and if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it must be treated in this way: take the linen, and pull it at the head of the exposed bone, and command someone to stretch it upwards; and take another thread of wool thicker than the first linen, and tie it on the flesh that is over the bone, and stretch the head so that you pull the corrupted flesh below, and uncover the flesh where you wish to sew, so that the sewing does not hurt the flesh;
and put the ember on a board under the bone to cut off the corrupted flesh;
and it is necessary to scrape as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and scrape again another time.
And if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, then uncover all the flesh;
then put the ember underneath, and then scrape from one part to another the corruption, and let the scraper of the length of the corruption be there, as we have said;
and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut off the corrupted joint, and scrape the bone where it contains on the other side;
and if the corruption is in the connection of the two joints, there is no other remedy but to cut;
and if the corruption is in the wrist of the hand, or in the ankle of the foot, it is a very serious matter, but nevertheless you must inquire about that corruption, how it appears to you; and cleanse it in every way that you can, but do not let the vein or the nerve oppose you;
and know that the incisors and the saws for cutting these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and the appearance of them, and their thickness and their fineness, and their size and their smallness, and their hardness; and for this reason, it is necessary to prepare for each kind of work its tool;
and know that the work will show you the tool you will need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the methods of diseases; so consider the tool you need according to what is necessary.
The shoulders can become diseased due to internal causes or due to external causes;
and when you have treated that corruption with medical care and it does not help, then it is necessary to amputate the limb up to the place where the corruption comes from, so that the patient escapes death or the worse evil of the loss of the limb;
and the sign is that the limb becomes black, as if it were burned by fire, and after the blackness comes the corrosion from member to member, and takes over the whole body;
if you hurry to cut it, and if it is due to the bite of venomous creatures, such as sea scorpion and basilisk and similar, if the corrosion is at the tip of the toe, then cut it off, and do not give it space to reach the hand.
and if it reaches the hand, then cut it off at the joint, so that the corrosion does not reach the arm;
and if it comes to the arm, then cut it off at the elbow;
and if it passes the knife, it is death, and no treatment helps except for the quantity of its virtue;
and do the same when the corrosion comes to the bone: if it comes to the first joint, then cut after the other joint;
and if it comes to the bone, then cut away all the bone; and if it rises up the leg, then cut at the knee joint;
and if it comes above the knee, then there is no other remedy but to let the patient die;
and the method of cutting or sawing the limb is that you tie above and below, and stretch one minister at one end downward, and another minister the other tie upward, and you separate the flesh which is between the two ties to a span wide, until the bone be uncovered;
then cut or saw, and place on each side a linen cloth, so that the saw does not touch the healthy area, and another injury and warm abscess come to the patient.
and if bleeding occurs when you operate, then quickly cauterize the area, or apply some binding powders;
then return to your treatment until it is completed, then bind the wounded limb with a suitable bandage, and care for it until it is healed;
and I will tell you what happened to the man in such need:
a blackness befell him that seemed like fire's burn, and this corruption came first to his foot's toe, until it would spread to the whole foot;
and when the man saw the corruption, he hastened to cut off the foot, and was healed;
and long after, the corruption returned to the toe of his hand, and he came to me, and I placed repellent things upon it after cleansing the body, but the corruptions could not be stopped;
and he wanted me to cut off his hand, but I did not want to, for I had hope of repelling the matter; and I doubted also that if I cut his hand, he would die, for the strength of the man was weak;
and he despairing entirely, returned to his land, and hurried to cut his hand, and was healed;
and I have not found content elsewhere except for what is done differently when it is necessary.
Sometimes an abscess comes in the flesh, and remains so long that it gathers a great amount of pus; and then it rots and bursts, and the pus comes out, and the skin remains for a long time, like vesicles; and the skin that is above is as thin as delicate cloths, and they do not run to the bone, nor to the nerve, and such a disease is called "healthy", and is not called "ulcer";
but if it is so extended that it reaches the bone perfectly, it is called "ulcer";
and the skin is such that you cut all around that skin, especially when it is thin, just like cloths; and it does not matter because of its corruption.
And if you fear that the skin will burn, and the corruption is not perfect, and the skin is thick with flesh, then treat it with a cathartic thus:
look if the breast is large, and the liquid that comes out has a foul smell, then cleanse it with Egyptian medicine which is made thus: take aloes, and oil, and litharge, equally, and put to cook in a vessel over the fire, until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey;
and then take of this according to your need, and mix it with water and honey, and use it to cleanse the breast, and bind the opening; and leave the medicine on for two hours, then remove it by squeezing;
do this many times until the breast is cleansed, and the foulness is removed;
and sometimes it is cleansed with ash water when this medicine is not present, and that you take ashes of vine wood, and throw water over it, then strain it, and use it as an enema until you know the intestines are well cleaned;
and if the patient cannot tolerate it, nor the Egyptian medicine nor the ash water, then cleanse him with water and honey in which there is a bit of ground litharge; or cleanse her with a mixture of honey and wine, for the honey has the property to clean and wash, and the wine makes the body dry;
and when you have done this and you are confident that the intestines are well cleaned, then cleanse him with what promotes flesh growth within, and that you take a diaphoretic plaster, and make it with rose oil and in wine;
where you administer an enema with certain medicines and ointments, of which I have described the properties in the treatment of ointments;
and if the opening of the breast is small, and the nozzle of the enema cannot enter, then widen it a little with an iron, and put in some Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is widened;
and if the wound is too wide, sew it up leaving only enough space for the enema to enter, and if the opening that discharges pus is at the top, cut it lower where it is.
and if you cannot cut the breast below as you wish, then arrange it in such a way that the bow hangs at the lowest point, for when the bow is complete, it does not allow any further growth and if you cannot cut the breast below as you wish, then arrange it in such a manner: that the bow hangs lightly downward, and leave nothing of the bow;
that the bow hangs lightly downward, and leave nothing of the bow; and take consolidative medicines to put on the wound, and stretch out the linen cloth that covers the entire wound; then cut forcefully at the opening of the breast so that it is wider than the first, then stretch an ointment on another cloth according to the size of the opening, and place it over the wound's opening to lighten the bow, and do not remove the large cloth except once after many days;
and the one who is on the opening of the breast, often removes to remove the bile, and know what comes from the bile, if it is venom or pus or enough, or digestible, or indigestible;
and take note if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has spread in such a manner and you see nature rising up on the opening of the sore, then know that the breast is already healing, and health approaches;
and then untie it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you untie the wound, change the other bandage, and renew the ointment.
And if subtle pus forms after a long time, do not despair of the health, for recovery approaches.
For there are people who take too long to remove the flesh from their wounds, and of those who do the opposite;
and if undigested milk spits from the breast after many days, know that the breast does not heal;
and if the breast delays in healing and is swollen, apply medicines that are moist in substance but dry in virtue, such as a diaphoretic ointment, for it has a great part of vitriol, and this is the final medicine;
take diaphoretic ointment, and make it with rose oil, and sprinkle it with old wine equal in substance;
then cook it and use it;
and the same thing is better cooked when diaphoretic ointment is not present, or you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind it, and powder it over the honey when it is on the fire;
and then in glue the cloth, and stretch it over the breast, and sometimes administer long artemisia, and roots of celestial lily, which is also like flour of vetches and centaury; and use simples or composites: grind them, and make powder, and put on the honey that I have said, and use it;
and if the cure is prolonged, and it is not cured by this treatment, then know that the corruption is perfected, and makes an impression on the bone, or on the hard members, or on the ligaments; treat the fistula as we have said before.
Panarice is an abscess that arises under the nail of the thumb of the hand, or of the foot, or perhaps arises in other fingers;
and when it is aged, and no attention is given to it, then the abscess becomes hot, and it runs and throws pus until it reaches the root of the nail, and perhaps it destroys it entirely;
and the corrosion comes up to the bone, until there is a foul-smelling pain, and the joint of the finger becomes swollen, and its color turns purple.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, then you must cut off with an iron all the excess that remains of the nail, then cauterize the wound afterward. The cautery is of great help if the bone is healthy, and the nail is sound;
and if the nail presses against the flesh underneath and begins to pierce it and injure it, then you should place a wedge under the nail that pricks the flesh, lift it up, and cut away that flesh carefully and lightly, and apply burning and corrosive medicines on the remaining flesh to remove everything; then treat with ointments until he is healed.
And if the corruption is in the bone, cut it away and draw out, for as long as the corrupted bone remains, it cannot heal;
and if you see the toe become corrupted, cut it in an I shape as was said before, then treat it until it is healed;
and if it is bitten, and inflamed, and he feels great pain, then you must bleed him first;
then cut the nail of the spur from an acute angle by cutting across it, and be careful that the cut does not go as far as the flesh beneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain;
and if it happens, then put something on that soothes.
The dislocated joint that occurs in the hands of some men is entirely fleshy, and at times it has bones, and sometimes there is a nail, and some are born at the root of the joint, or the origin is in some ways of the fingers.
He who is born with any knot on the tooth does not move, and he who is born at the joint of the tooth may move;
the treatment for one who is fleshy should be gentle, in this manner: cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
He who is born in the root of the joint is difficult to treat: be careful with the cutting.
In him who is born with a hemorrhoid, you must first cut the flesh roundly to the bone, then cut the bone at an appropriate line for that, then clean it until it is healed.
The syndromes that come to the hands together come by birth, or by wound union, or by fire burn, or by similar things.
you must cut that suture so that the teeth return to their natural forms; then place between two cloths or moistened rose oil towels so they do not fuse; or you place between two pieces of thin linen until the wound is sealed, as is appropriate.
If the syndrome comes to any of his fingers with the palm, then cut that union as appropriate.
Veins are large wrapped vessels full of melancholic superfluities, which come to many parts of the body;
and it happens more in the legs of those who walk on foot and work and carry loads than in others.
Therefore, you should administer a purge of bile to him, and then treat him with basilicum.
The care of iron is according to two methods: one is to cut them and draw out the black blood; and the other method is that you lift the vein, and pull it completely out.
The castration is done in this manner: first raise the leg with very hot water until the thick part is made subtle, then remove the leg of the patient from above the thigh down to the part below the knee;
then cut the vein in one place, or two places or three, with a wide incision, then lift and pull out the black blood forcefully from one end to the other, until as much blood comes out as the strength of the patient can endure;
and then tie it off, and instruct him to eat fattening black broth;
and repeat the evacuation and bleeding when the veins are full, and it harms the patient.
The elevations of it are according to this manner: shave the patient's leg if it has a lot of hair, then put it in the bath, and wash the leg with warm water until it becomes red, and the veins swell;
and if you do not have a bath, then heat it with fire, and then cut directly from the vein along the leg to the top of the knee, or in the part below at the ankle;
then work the skin with the lancet, and strip the vein on both sides until it appears when you feel it;
and one sees it red and black, and when it enters the skin it seems like a white thread;
then push the root beneath, until it is raised from the skin, and then scrape it lightly with the lancet, then cut it in another place three times;
then peel the skin over the vein until it appears, then lift it with the root as you have done, and scrape it with another lancet as you did first;
then cut another length, or several if you need them, then lift it, and cut it at the tip with your thumb, then pull and lift until the second length;
then extract it bit by bit, until it comes out completely clean, then cut it;
and if you cannot pull it out and lift it, then put a needle with a very strong doubled thread, tie it and pull it, and insert it under the skin, and turn your hand from one side to the other until it comes out; and be careful that it does not break, for if it breaks, one cannot pull it out or lift it, and harm comes to the patient;
and when you have pulled it all out, then put wool soaked in wine and rose oil on the site of the wound; and care for it until it is healed.
And if the skin is contracted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must cut it diagonally, but do not cut it off; and treat it as we have said before.
The shape of the iron with which one cuts the skin is curved, and it does not cut deeply, so that it does not cut the vein;
and it is of thick curvature, for if it were fine, it would cut the vein, but let it be thick as we have said, and here is the shape:
This vein is located in the legs, in warm areas where no herbs or trees grow, and in land that has no moisture;
and by chance it may appear elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens due to putrefaction that comes under the skin, just as snakes and worms come inside the body between skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are such that there comes a great inflammation in the leg, then the color changes, and the blood begins to flow out forcefully, like the root of a plant.
When the knee is open, you must wrap around a piece of cloth from one and a half cubits up to two cubits, and tie it, leaving the cloth hanging on the leg, and every time there is any drainage, wrap it around the cloth, and tie it.
and if it is too long, cut off a part of it, wrap the remainder, and do not cut it at its root until it is all out; for if you cut it, it will retract into the flesh and cause an abscess and putrefaction in that place, leading to a bad illness;
For this reason, it is necessary to treat it slowly until the end, and nothing remains in the body;
and sometimes this vein is treated when it is five palms long, or ten, and one man came to me, in whom it extended ten palms long, and when you cut it, you put a straw or tube, and pierce through to the bottom, so that everything comes out;
and empty the matter which is inside, and apply at the site purifying medicines for several days to prevent putrefaction, then treat it like an abscess.
And sometimes this vein has fewer straws, especially when it opens at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and many straws come out, from which it jumps with straws;
Then cure it as we have said before.
worms that are born between skin and flesh This disease is called in our land "disease of the ox," for it often occurs to oxen, and it is a small worm that breeds between skin and flesh, and travels all over the body moving up and down, and one feels it well as it moves from member to member, until it bursts the skin where it goes, and spills forth.
and it is engendered from the putrefaction of certain humors, such as come worms and serpents and earthworms and ascarids in the belly;
and there is doubt of its malice, for when it moves through the body, and it rises to the head, and comes to the eye, perchance enters in, and destroys the eye; and this happens often.
When you want to treat and care for it, it cannot be done except when it comes.
then you must bind the area above and below with a strong tight bandage, then cut into it and extract forcefully, and if the pus is deeply embedded in the flesh and you do not find it, then cauterize it with fire until it matures;
and the greatest harm that it does is to corrupt the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming near the eye on the head, then hold the eyebrow tightly below it, then cut into it and extract forcefully;
and it is necessary to treat the patient with body purgation of solutive medicines for the corrupt bad humors, and to warn about eating putrefying foods.
of the pain that comes from windiness This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and it is a pain that comes to some limbs, and then moves from limb to limb;
and I have seen what I tell you. I was called to a sick woman, and she bared her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm;
and it rose up so quickly like a worm to the shoulder, faster than anything, just like quicksilver when it flows from one place to another;
The pain departs from that place, and settles in the shoulder, and then a bit after runs throughout the body, until it comes to the other arm;
then she told me that it turned around the body, as I saw it.
I was greatly amazed at how it moved so from limb to limb, for I had never seen this disease in such a manner. Nevertheless, I had wanted many times that the pain move from one place to another, but I had not wanted it, as I saw in the woman;
and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body, and her veins exposed, and because of this the constrained air became apparent;
and it does not appear according to this reason in those who are plethoric, and who have moist bodies and veins recessed.
And when you wish to cure this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears to you as we have said, then strike above and below quickly, and then cut on top until that wind constrained in place comes out; and cauterize the place;
and if you do not see it with your eyes, then treat it with those that expel the winds, such as foul pills, and pills of serpent, and similar others.
Arrows are diverse, according to their forms and according to the parts of the body where they strike.
The diversity among them is that there are those which have large points, and small ones, and branched ones, and soldered ones; and those which have two angles, and those which have tongues, and those which have pieces;
and she who falls into any limb falls according to two ways: or in principal limbs it affects, such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar limbs. When she falls then in any part of these limbs, and the sign of death, which I will tell you afterwards, becomes apparent to you: then you should beware of the extraction of this arrow, for death follows in many cases; and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not embedded deeply, then extract it and treat the wound.
And the sign of the brain when an arrow hits and pierces the bone, and the sylvian fissure which is on the brain jumps, is when there is scotoma and sweat and disorientation and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of tongue, and spasms and confusion of mind, and vomiting of bile; and sometimes it comes out without force from the nostrils, or from the ears; and sometimes he loses speech and voice; and from the wound jumps white moisture resembling pus, and it jumps like the broth of meat;
and if this sign appears to you, then beware of the treatment, and extract the arrow if it is there.
The signs of the stone when it falls on the heart are that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it were fixed in something hard, not empty; and sometimes the stone moves like the pulse, and causes black blood to flow, and coldness and cold sweat come, and fainting: then you can be sure that death is near.
And the sign of the arrow that is embedded in the throat is that without warning foam comes from the wound, and the neck swells, and the patient changes color, and sighs deeply and seeks the cold air.
And if the stone falls on the covering of the bladder, it is near the lower ribs; and causes great pain and great suffering and sighing; and it moves all the limbs from the shoulders.
And if the arrow falls into the stomach, by chance some undigested meat may come from the wound.
And if the arrow falls into the belly, and any hay comes out through the intestines, there is no hope in the treatment, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine jumps and comes out forcefully, and the patient feels great pain: Know that the wound is mortal.
The other members, such as the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the arm and the spine and the wrist and the thigh and the legs, and similar members, are safe according to various dispositions. When the arrow is in the nerve or the artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me, so that you may do likewise.
It happened to a man that an arrow struck him in the armpit at the root of the nose: I probed it, and pulled it out from the other side beneath the ear fat, and he was healed without harm.
And in one instance, I pulled out an arrow that had struck in the fat of the eye beneath the eyelid, and the arrow was embedded, and could not reach beyond the tip towards the shaft, and the arrow was large, like a Turkish bow's length, all the iron light without barbs;
The eye was healed, and no adverse incidents came to him.
And he removed an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic with ears:
I threaded the beard hairs, and delicately extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
And I removed an arrow from the man, which had lodged in his belly, and I thought he would die;
and after he had passed thirty days, his condition did not change; I cut into the arrow, dislodged it, removed it forcefully, and he had no adverse effects.
And if you see a man to whom an arrow struck in the back, and the wound was sealed over;
and the arrow remained inside him, and did not change its natural conditions, nor found harm in any of its natural works.
And see another man to whom an arrow struck in his face, and the wound was sealed over; and remained thus without suffering great pain;
and many other similar cases.
And extract an arrow from the man of the king's princes, which was lodged in the middle of his nose, and was slightly leaning to the right side; and the arrow was entirely embedded.
I was called to treat her after she had fallen for three days. I found the wound very narrow.
I wanted to examine her thoroughly, but I did not feel anything; and he felt pricking and pain beneath his right ear.
I thought it was due to the tip of the arrow; I applied atractive and digestive plaister on the area so that the swelling would not occur; and the swelling from the arrow appeared.
and the swelling from the arrow appeared. I applied the plaister for several days, and reopened the wound again, and the patient remained this way for a long time, until he felt the arrow one day inside his chest;
and he told me so. I put corrosive medicine on the wound for several days until it opened up, and I probed it, and felt the head of the arrow that was embedded in the place;
then I applied that corrosive medicine to the opening of the wound until the head of the arrow appeared visibly;
and it took about four months to complete the process around the wound, and then I widened the wound enough to insert the tweezers, and moved it from one side to the other, but it could not come out;
then I did not cease to refine and devise methods of instruments until one day I grasped it with well-made tweezers, according to what its form will come at the end of this chapter, until I pulled it out and restored the wound.
And the physician judges that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: Then I restored it, and the wound was sutured, and the patient was entirely healed.
Now I have told you the quality of extracting certain arrows, so that you focus on what I do not say, for the books cannot take everything into account;
but wise masters compare only a little, and when what is present and lacking is found, they discover new work and new instruments, adapting to the strange occurrences that happen in this art.
I say that arrows do not remain in the limbs where they are embedded without two manners: or through the place where they enter, or by another part;
and the one that suddenly enters where it goes in is an arrow entering its flesh, and it suddenly hurts sometimes now.
And if it does not hurt now, leave it until the flesh around it rots and the discharge is cleansed;
and likewise if it is embedded in the bone and cannot come out, leave it that way for some days and move it each day;
and then it will hurt, and if it does not hurt, pierce around the entire shaft finely until the area around it is widened, and then pull it out.
And if the arrow is embedded in a part of the body where it cannot be seen, then seek it throughout the entire area; and if you feel it, then draw it with some suitable instrument;
and if you cannot because of the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone or nerve or vein, then split it so that the wound is large;
and draw the arrow if you can, and if it has ears by which it is held, remove the flesh that is stuck in two parts as much as you can, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow so that you can pull it out;
and be careful that you do not break the arrow, so that you can pull it out more easily.
And if you cannot do it at once, then leave it until the area around is swollen, then pull it out, for the extraction will be easier. And if the flow of blood causes you contrary effects, then apply what we have said about the treatment in its chapter;
and beware of cutting the nerve and vein, and use ingenuity on how you can draw out the arrow without danger, whether quickly or slowly, firmly or gently;
and place the patient according to the position they were in when the arrow struck them, for this is the greatest help that can be done, and if you cannot, then place them according to what the signs show.
The arrow that comes from another direction, or where some part of it is visible, or the skin is swollen in such a way that it can be seen or felt clearly:
Cut then up, until the forceps can grasp, and then extract: then let it be now.
And if it is retained in the bone, then rotate your hand roundly until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then pull it out.
And if it cannot come out, then leave it again, and then restart the extraction until it comes out;
and if the shaft of the arrow is there, push it with the entire shaft;
and if the shaft breaks, and you wish to administer further, then apply the instrument hair-wise, so that the tip of the arrow enters into the hair of the instrument;
and then push out, and if the arrow is embedded, use the instrument with its pointed end inserted to ease the extraction.
And if the arrow is poisoned, then you must cut away all the flesh around where the venom is, if you can, and then treat the wound as appropriate.
And if the arrow falls on the bone or in the belly or at the bladder or at the side, and it is near, and you can cut upon it, if you cut;
and beware of cutting the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then sew the wound, if necessary; and treat until it is healed.
The form of the tweezers with which one extracts arrows is similar to the beak of a bird, and you see here the form:
And there are many methods: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
The form of the hair pusher is also like the feather of a bird, to insert at the tip of the arrow, as here is the form:
There are thirty-one veins from which one recovers, of which sixteen are in the head, to be known as: The flaps which are behind the ears, which are called the two "herbech"; and the two arteries which are in the two temples appearing; and two veins that are in the two tear ducts of the two eyes, which are called "aspires"; and the vein that is in the middle of the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the nose; and the two glands which are in the neck; and the two veins that are on the upper lips of the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich"; and two veins that are beneath the tongue.
The veins from which we commonly bleed are five in each arm:
one is the cephalic, and it is on the left side, and the common people call it the "vein of the head"; and the middle one is called "fastus," and it is composed of the cephalic and the basilic, and the common people call it the "vein of the heart"; and the basilic is on the right side, and the common people call it the "vein of the belly," and it is above the flexor, and it is the one from which we bleed, which appears clearly on the elbow.
And the saver vein is the one between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has two branches;
and in the leg and foot there are three veins: one is below the arch of the foot on the left side, and the second is the saphenous which is at the ankle on the right side; and the vein which is called "ness," which is at the ankle on the other side;
and in the other leg there are three veins below those.
The swelling of the veins behind the ears helps with old catarrhs and migraines;
and the qualities of the surgeon, as I tell you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the place where the veins are with a coarse cloth; then have the patient press his neck with a twist, until the two veins appear behind the ears in two places dependent on the head: then grasp them with your finger, and where you feel the pulse beneath your finger, mark it there;
then take the lancet, and pierce below the vein until the bone, then lift your hand along the entire vein above, and cut both the skin and the vein well twice across, and let the blood flow out as much as you see;
then extract and bind until it is healed;
and I have already said about the incision and the cautery in the first book.
The inflammation of the two arteries that are in the two temples is good for old migraines, soreness, and habitual ophthalmia, and for watery tears in the eyes;
and the qualities of the inflamed are as I say: and it is that the patient stretches his neck, until the two veins appear clearly; and feel the pulse under your thumb, and then sign from there;
then lift the vein upwards with your index finger, and insert the lancet below, and lift the vein up, and cut it, just as you have done in two other veins, and let blood according to your necessity;
then release the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it; and then tie it firmly, and leave it until it is healed;
and we have already spoken about their cutting and extraction at the beginning of the book.
The vein of the forehead is as useful as the cephalic vein for old diseases of the face, and for migraines, and for redness;
and the quality is such that the patient twists their neck so tightly that the veins appear; then take the instrument which is called "digging tool", of which this is the form:
and place the tip on the vein, and press firmly with your hand, or with something else, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you wish; then loosen the patient's neck, and tie the vein so that it is sealed, and sometimes the work is done with a wide flame.
However, it is not appropriate for the flames to be too sharp; and cut sideways, because the bone is close, and by chance the flame might break when it is thin.
The swelling of the two veins that are in the two temples helps the eyes, and for headaches, and redness, and the pupil in the eye, and diseases of the face;
and the quality of their swelling is that the patient strains his neck by twisting some limb, as mentioned before;
then heal it, and let the swelling be across, a bit long of the flame, a bit wide, for there is no flesh. And if the flames are delicate, they might break;
then let blood as much as you need, and then bind cotton on top, and bind it well.
The swelling of the neck vein is good for water retention, and for severe inflammation, and for face ailments, such as migraines and redness that comes on the face, especially when it is old;
and the quality of the swelling is that the patient tightens his neck, then stretches his neck to your left hand, and take the fine long flame, and insert it into the lip in the space between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well there, and the blood will now begin to flow;
and do not go too deep, and let blood according to your need, then bandage it for a night, for it is restored very quickly;
The juice of the two bindweeds helps with the tightening of the girdle, and at the beginning of menstruation, and for many diseases, and for impetigo, and for corrosives, and for herpes, and leprosy;
and the quality of the juice is such that the patient should strain his neck under one and the other, as we have said;
and let the master be standing on the head of the patient, and the patient sit on the seat, then cut the vein of the long artery somewhat widely, then draw blood moderately, as much as is necessary;
then do another part on the other vein, then untie the ligature, and moderately bind the veins so that the patient does not strangle; and leave it until morning, when the wound will be healed.
of the salve for the lips The swelling of the veins of the upper lips aids in phlegm in the mouth, and corruption of gums, and cracks in the lips, and of the nose and around.
And the quality of the bleeding is to sit the patient in front of you and bind his neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one of which is on the right lip and the other on the left, and they are recognized by being black, and by having small black veins around them:
cut then both of them, and if you do not recognize them and are in doubt, cut the largest one on each side, and do the same for the two veins that are above and below, for it is the same method.
of the swelling under the tongue The swelling of the veins under the tongue helps after the swelling of the cephalic vein, and it is at the narrowing of the throat, and for diseases of the eye, and for diseases of the mouth;
and the quality of the swelling is that the patient sits between your hands facing the sun, and he lifts his tongue, and looks underneath on each side a black vein:
swell then one and the other, and do not go too deep, for beneath are the arteries.
The veins of the body that are commonly swollen are treated according to two methods:
either by pricking with an iron blade that is wide and blunt, or with a fine olive oil like cutting bodies, and it is called "anesil"; and they are wide and subtle according to the width and narrowness of the veins. The first form of the flame mint is much renowned, and it is wide as you see:
and it is necessary to open the full and closed veins filled with thick and visible blood, and which contain thick and turbid blood; and this is the form of the olive oil flame:
and it is more finely pointed, and it is for healing the fine veins where there is fine yellow blood.
The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are below the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the abdomen;
and it is necessary for the surgeon to bleed wisely, and to beware of the artery that is below. and if he cuts the artery, and a flow of blood comes, then he must stop it, as I have said; and the flame should not be pricking but cutting like a file.
and if the abscess does not open clearly, you must extract it and change to another one; or if you want to remove any vein, or incise the vein instead in the arm: it opens clearly; and cut with the flame like a file, as we have said.
and if you wish to know the place of the incision, you must first extract the arm, touch the place until you feel the pulse; then mark the site of insertion, then bind the arm, and cut the vein from the flame anesil; and beware that you do not hit the artery when you see the site swell, for it is from the artery: avoid it then.
And if you see it spurt up like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is the blood of the artery: hasten then, and place your finger on it lengthwise, then remove your finger if the blood stops, for this often happens; bind the arm, and leave it thus, and let the patient not move it;
and let it be due to fear, and do not move it until it is healed.
And if the blood flow is not stopped, and it overwhelms you, and the medicines are not present, then cut the artery if it appears, for the head of the retractors; and stop the blood flow.
and take the bark of fig, and split it, and take one of the halves and bind it on well until the next day;
if the blood is stopped, that is good; if not, then treat it as we have said, with powders that stop blood;
and the stitches are not tight in many positions due to the small space of the wound, and the strength of the arm's joint.
The vein in the middle helps draw blood from the head above, and from the body below, because it is composed of the basilica and the cephalic, as we have said;
and it is necessary for the surgeon to be careful of the nerve that is below, and if he pierces too deeply, and he finds the nerve, and it swells and the healing becomes difficult, and perhaps it cannot heal;
and this nerve appears often, and if it does not appear in some people due to its subtlety, then you must extract it with the anisel instrument; and cleanse the nerve to your ability.
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, then cut it lengthwise.
The application of the cephalic vein helps, drawing blood from the head, and aids the eyes;
and it is necessary to apply it by pricking with olive oil or mithridate oil, for it is the safest of all veins, for there is neither nerve nor artery beneath it. Nevertheless, it is necessary to seek the least dangerous place, and it does not matter if one misses the first time, and one retries; and by chance the area swells in some people when one misses the first time, but it does not matter.
The quality of the salve is according to your thought.
The first thing you must know about medicine is that it is not practiced for any reason other than to preserve health and to avoid future illnesses;
and let the bloodletting be done in one of the three veins that are in the arm: that is to know, cephalic, saphenous, and basilic; and one should bleed at the beginning of spring in the morning, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the sign of fullness appears;
and one should bleed on the first day or the third, after two or three hours of the day.
The salve which is administered to the ailments has no fixed time, but when there is need by day or night, at all hours and in all times;
and it is not fitting to apply salve to children until 14 years, nor to a woman carrying a fetus from the fourth month until the seventh. And one should not medicate those who have passed sixty years.
And when anyone wishes to be salved in whatever manner, it is necessary that they cleanse the intestines with a mild enema if they have much retained waste so that the veins do not draw from the intestines the harmful surplus detrimental to the principal limbs;
nor should those who are overly full of food, or drunkards, be salved until they recover, nor those with dropsy;
and if one suffers from purging after colic, vomiting, and diarrhea, and excessive intercourse with women, and labor, staying awake and fasting, and those things that drain all strength, or from weapon or body harm;
then refine the humors, if the blood is thick, through food and drinks and medications, if you have the power;
then enter the bath, if nothing prevents it, to refine the blood, and let blood from the vein of the arm around the third, as we have said;
and guard yourself that day from work, and pain, and lust, and similar things;
and let it be tied and rubbed, and the leech higher than the one being bled, and rub the arm two or three times, then moderately tighten the ligature above, for when it is too tight or narrow, the blood cannot flow;
and then rub the area with your hands until the veins swell and can be felt;
then moisten the leech with a bit of old oil, then place the finger of your left hand on that vein below the spot where you want to bleed, so the vein does not move when struck.
For there are veins that move like cords when bleeding, and some are full of windiness, so when one places the flame on them, they retract from the flame, and one cannot open the vein, and thus one is in trouble; and if he works the vein, then the wound is too narrow, for which reason it is necessary that the surgeon be careful in these matters.
And if the vein is worked the first time, it is good; if not, then begin again a little below that place or above quickly, if the area is not swollen.
And if the area is swollen and the patient is frightened, leave it for one day or two, and do not release the arm: perchance heated abscesses may develop;
do not enter the bath, then restart the surgery if it pleases you;
and if the opening is small, or the blood flows finely and you fear that not enough blood will flow as you wish, then cauterize in that same opening directly with the full flame;
and perform the work somewhat quickly, before the area becomes swollen; for this often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the area swollen, do not begin bleeding again, and place a little bit of oil residue on it, for it lightens the body from blood, and in this area the residue is milder than the oil;
and thus administer the oil residue in each bleeding you cause to the veins, to stop the flow of blood;
and this same thing makes a trichalice and balsam of violets, when it is put upon the place; so refine the sinew and divide it when it is too thick.
And if there comes a large abscess, which often happens, especially when it is not sufficiently opened at the time when the vein opening is small, then hurry and put on the place a sponge moistened in warm water and salt for a short while, and bind it for an hour;
and it is necessary that you do this after the blood has flowed from the vein, and if there remains any blackness or greenness at the site after some days, it will not harm; and if you wish, put on some aloes or murr mixed into calamus juice, mustard, or similar.
And often an abscess and appearance occur at the joint of the basilic [vein]:
put your hand there, and if you find the place soft to the pressure of the hand, then that appearance is bad. Therefore, avoid putting on any of those things we have mentioned, for it may accidentally cut into the artery;
but make a dry plaster to harden the place, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
And draw from each blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it flow until it turns red; and if you see it thick, let it flow until it becomes thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it is fitting for those who are full and strong, and need bloodletting, that a larger wound be made, and the flames be wide;
and for those who are weak, do the opposite, and it is proper to let blood in small amounts and frequently, and it should be done by cutting across, not by piercing;
and this method of bloodletting is safe from bleeding and nerve cutting, and is better than long or wide bloodletting.
And to him whose body lacks strength, one must give moist bread in pomegranate juice; If he is heated, then draw blood three or four times. And if he has a cold temperament, then before the anointing, eat moist bread in musk syrup or in aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and a well-scented syrup.
And if he faints at the bleeding, after the flow of much blood, then it is necessary that he inhales broth of meat, and a subtle fragrant syrup, and uses other things that we have said in the section or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of veins.
And if he wishes to bleed one arm and bleed at other times, then it is necessary, when he is weakened by great bleeding, that he bleeds a little and a little, according to the amount of his continuous strength.
And whoever wishes to bleed one arm after the first bleeding, and he has a strong body, then he bleeds seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
And who wishes to heal on another side, must heal on the second day or the third.
For there is much blood within the body that is already heated and causes fever; so it is necessary to draw a large quantity and enlarge the opening until it flows into the basin; since you observe all the conditions of anointing, and place your hand on their pulse when you anoint, so death does not come instead of healing, and this often happens when the anointer is negligent;
and it is not appropriate when you wish to release the arm, and let blood a second time, and the wound is closed, that you press forcefully upon; and if it is swollen, that he extends the arm hastily, for that would be bad;
but leave it until it heals a second time; or you prick with the tip of the flame until the blood which is congealed in the wound's opening flows out, and apply a piece of cloth soaked in water, and press upon it lightly.
And if the vein is swollen, then leave it alone and do not constrict it until the abscess has calmed down.
And if there is need to bleed a second time, then bleed in the same place or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein in the arm is bled instead of the vein at the head because it is composed that way.
And the method of healing is that the patient puts their hand in hot water until the skin becomes red;
then it should be moderately tied so that the vein appears well, then heal it now acrosswise, not lengthwise nor widthwise;
and let the wound be wide, and heal it well near the joint of the hand, and if nothing can come out, then place the hand in hot water, and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough;
and if it is summer, then do not place the hand in hot water, for it is used more in winter than in summer;
and the healing of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there is neither artery nor nerve there.
The salve of the palm of the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is the method:
Stretch the hand, and put it in hot water until the veins are swollen, as one can see; and if you apply the salve across it, and if you cut it entirely all around, it will cause no harm;
and do not go too deep, for the nerves are all bare of flesh underneath, and then put the hand in hot water again, if the blood is congealed in the wound and cannot come out.
And when you have drawn as much blood as is necessary, put oil and seal on the vein to quickly close it, and do this for each incision.
The salve on the left hand is good for the disease of the spleen, and do everything as I have said for the right.
The salve of sophene is worth for all the diseases that are below the body, like diseases of the marrow, and retention of urine, and disease of the kidneys, and of the hips and of old legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of its salve is that the patient puts their foot in hot water and rubs it on the veins until they break, and binds it over the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot many veins go.
then apply it to the widest vein, or at the ankle, whichever is better.
And if you apply it to the foot, beware of the nerves below, and apply it crosswise as in cutting;
and let the flames be gentle.
And if the blood cannot come out, then put the foot in water, and let the vein fully empty.
and if the first application fails, start again a little higher above, for the flesh is salty;
do not worry about the nerve, as we have said, and thus do the same with the other foot equally.
The sinew of the sciatic vein is at the ankle of force, and its bleeding leads to pain in the hip when it is due to hot blood.
And the quality of his soaking is that the patient enters the bath, and holds above the ankle four times by twisting, for otherwise the vein does not open;
and if it opens, then soak in every way that you can, and by crossing; and it is worth moving that you cut it, for the juice is thin, and it is very beneficial to many people.
and it is worth moving that you cut it, for the juice is thin, and it is very beneficial to many people. And if you do not find it, then soak any vein that opens on the back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and beware of the nerves;
and let as much blood flow as you wish, and then loosen the tie, and put on cotton and bind it; It is now healed.
Suction cups are made of horns, or of glass, or of clay;
and ventilation is done in two ways: either by striking and drawing blood, or without striking.
And this ventilation which is without striking is in two ways: either it is done with full heat, or without heat;
and ventilation which is done by striking and extracting blood is done in fourteen places of the body, one of which is at the very top of the head; and the other is within the neck; and two others on both sides of the neck; and the vein under the chin; and the veins of both shoulders; and the vein on the buttocks; and the veins within both arms; and the veins of both legs; and the veins of both ankles;
and the bloodletting does not draw any blood, for it comes from small veins that are scattered throughout the flesh, and thus it weakens no one, as is done with vein bleeding; and it should not be administered, neither with full fire nor without fire, in any disease that comes from repletion, until the whole body is emptied.
and if by necessity of diseases it is needed to cup, or for customs, then we administer each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in between and at every time;
for there are those who, when they need to be cupped, have a heavy head;
and there are those who find fullness and redness in their face, and in their head, and at the neck, and darkness before the eyes;
and there are those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have a swollen tongue, and spit blood; and there are some who dream, and see by night blood and wounds and death and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the middle of the month, we order it to be cupped after three hours of the day.
The salve of the mouse helps with the headache… that comes to the eyes, and it is not appropriate for this to be after the evacuation of the whole body;
and this ventilation is in place of the salve of the cephalic, and it is not appropriate for those with a cold constitution to use it, or those who have catarrh, because it causes them great harm;
and for that reason, it is not appropriate for the elderly to use it, nor those who have cold diseases in their head.
And those who often recover from it become forgetful, and for this reason the cupping should be placed a little lower due to the fear of forgetfulness.
Ventilation in the neck is in place of the head salve and the basilic, and for that reason it is useful for the constriction of the breast, and to split the channel of the nostril, and for all, and for fullness;
and there it is necessary to apply a little pressure, for if she holds too tightly, it induces obstruction in the stomach or in the heart.
Wind in the two ribs of the neck is good for pains in the head, and opthalmia and migraine, and for strangulation, and for pain at the roots of the teeth, and it is in the place of the saint's basilica;
and it is necessary that you instruct the surgeon to press his hand while inserting, so he does not cut the artery, and there are no flows of blood.
Wind beneath the chin is good for diseases of the mouth, and for corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in place of the wounds of the two lips.
Windings on the shoulders are good for diseases that come from heat and fullness.
Wind movements of the guts are worth as much as three veins of the arm, for they draw blood from these large veins;
and instructs the surgeon not to strike too deeply, for the bone is bare of flesh, and lies beneath nerves and arteries.
The suction cup that is on the buttocks is worth for hemorrhoids of the anus, and for diseases beneath, and it is necessary that the suction cup be large, and made of glass, so that it can draw well; and by chance, if they were delicate, they would break; and I make large wounds.
The leg cups should be applied openly, for they draw blood from the whole body, and are good for old pains in the reins, and of the spleen, and of the bladder, and reset the flows;
and they are placed at the site of the two malleoli, and at both ankles, and over time they weaken the body after long use, and cause paralysis in many conditions.
The method of applying the cupping is that you first place it empty, and suck moderately, and put it quickly, and move evenly, and do not stop doing this until you see the area red and swollen, and then apply the redness of the blood;
then apply force, and reset the cups, and take care in the positioning of the body, for there are those who have so much flesh, and clearly weak: so it is necessary to strike only once, and it is necessary to make wide wounds, and one poke deep; and suck lightly.
And if the vein is large, then it is necessary to strike twice: the first time to refine the path of the thick blood.
And if the blood is very thick, then it is necessary to strike a third time;
and when we want to draw blood little by little, then we strike only once. And if we want much blood, we often reopen;
and if the blood is thick, then apply to it perfectly, and the purpose is that the veins be pierced suddenly, and it is necessary for those who have thick and hard skin, and who have narrow pores, that you anoint the spots of the cupping vessels with opening and dissolving oil: if it is in this state, of violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or cucumber seed oil;
and if it is in ivory, of watercress oil, or lily, or chamomile, or other similar.
And if the excess is large and cold, then take oil of marjoram, or of balm, or oil of anise, and similar things.
And if one heals someone with tender flesh and large pores, then no oil should be applied, but it is necessary to wash after ventosation with rose water, or cold water, or water of black nightshade, or water of cucumber, or water of porcelain, or other similar things.
And for those who have much moisture, it is lifted with oil of asphodel, or water of myrtle, and of sumac, and similar things.
And those who have excessive accumulations should rise from old wine, or from juice water, or from decoction of anise or chamomile, or other similar;
and it is not right to bleed with cupping before the bath nor in the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two;
and he should not sleep after the cupping, and it is necessary that he warms himself when he is to be cupped and when he has been cupped.
And beware if the one who is bleeding is choleric, and if the blood is too sharp and inflamed; he should take cold things, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuces with garlic, and similar things; and he should eat pulse, and castrated animal meat, and moist foods.
and he should eat pulse, and castrated animal meat, and moist foods. And he who has a cold temperament, let him take syrup of honey, and wine that is aromatic, moderate, which is between old and new, and let him eat roast porridge, and let him eat partridges and small birds and pigeons;
and on the day he will be cupped, he must drink more than he eats;
and it is necessary to give some men at times treacle or mastic before cupping, or after, to strengthen the principal limbs; and let the soup be made delicate, but it is not suitable for those who are hot to drink it.
The cups that are placed without pricking are those that are set upon the liver, and upon the spleen, and gout, and upon the belly and the throat and the kidneys and the hip, for these members do not withstand pricking upon them, and it is only done to draw blood from member to member, as we place upon the breasts when the infant suckles;
To remove the viscosity which is in the member, just as we put leeches on the belly and on the thigh to reduce the member;
and removes the pain when there is an obstruction or stone, and by its attractive power it may remove the obstruction or displace the stone from its place;
and it does so when applied to the liver and the spleen when there is retained wind, and these leeches are administered empty solely for suction; and sometimes are administered together with fire, and sometimes filled with warm water, as in diseases of pleurisy, and in such a manner that one fills the leech with hot water alone, or with water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
The form of the cupping administered with fire is as follows:
And let it be two fingers wide and half a palm deep, and have on the side around the middle one small hole, as if to pierce a needle, and let it be of brass, smooth in front so that it does not hurt the patient when placed on the limb;
and in the middle have a crossbar of brass or iron to hold a lamp tightly, and let there be both large and small according to the diseases and age of those who use them;
for the cups for children are different from those for the elderly, and for the thin different from those for the fat.
And one should put this cup in this way on the limb:
take the wax candle or the liniment, and place it inside the cupping vessel across the wick that is inside the cupping vessel, so that the flame is at the bottom of the cupping vessel so it does not burn the patient;
and then place it on the limb, and your fingers should be on the openings that we have mentioned, so that when you want to, the steam comes out, and you remove the cupping vessel;
and apply the liniment as before, and repeat it often, if you need to.
In the cupping vessel used for treating diseases of phlegm, entirely filled with water, there is no wick or openings, and it is only applied when it is full of water, and is placed solely on the limb;
and this is the form:
Sinuses are not treated with bloodletting except in members where one cannot apply cupping due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar areas; and in those parts bare of flesh, such as the toes or nails, and other similar areas;
and the quality of using them is that when you find sinuses that are in clear sweet waters without putrefaction, then you take them;
and place one at a time in sweet water, until they become accustomed, and have nothing in their insides; and then let them be bled from veins and with cupping, then rub the member until it is red, and place the sinuses on it;
and when they are full, and fall out, if it is a place where one can apply a cupping glass, then apply it, for this helps greatly.
If not, then raise the place with ash, and then with water, very well, and then apply it;
and if the place heals too quickly over the blood vessels, moisten the linen cloth with cold water, and apply it until the bleeding is stopped;
and if the bleeding is profuse, then apply ground vitriol or gall, and similar things, until it is stopped;
or you place on the area half-cooked peeled beans, and leave them until they burn at the site, it will stop the bleeding now;
and if you need more, then take other veins.
and if the veins do not want to take [the blood], then rub the place with fresh blood, or stick a needle there until the blood comes out, and then put them on, and as soon as they sense the blood, they attach themselves;
and when you see that they fall, then sprinkle a bit of ground aloes and seal, or ash, and they will now fall.
Here begins the book of fractures This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Know, dear son, that the foolish physician disregards this chapter, who never saw any of the ancient books, nor read a letter from them;
and for this reason, the knowledge is rare in our land, for I never found any good one;
and I know nothing of it, except through the knowledge of ancient books, which I have studied so much that I have treated the subject with knowledge, and by experience, and by the habit of my life;
and I have described in this chapter what is contained, and have summarized it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are mentioned, as I have done in these two previous chapters.
It is necessary then that we say in the prologue of this book the summaries of the speech and the chapters where the wise place their understanding, and remain on the truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twisting or crushing comes to anyone, you must hurry to treat the patient from one side and the other, unless something prevents it, such as weakness of the body, or fainting, or old age; If the body is not very hot, or too cold;
and eat cold things, that is to say cold broths, and meat of chicken and goat, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not fill yourself too much with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you have no fear of a hot abscess, or of the spreading of matter in the limb;
the patient returns to the first regimen he has used.
And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that one nourishes the patient with foods that produce great nourishment where there is viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, and rice, and heads, and feet, and cow's stomach, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things. For with such nourishment the break repairs itself more quickly and better.
And know that the broken bones of old and frail people cannot heal or knit well according to their nature due to the dryness of the limbs, nor can those that are too tender, such as the bones of small children;
but has no care, reset on the broken bone the thick tendon that binds and joins the limb together, until it is reinforced as it was before; and does not spoil any part of its work, and for that reason it is necessary to nourish with coarse meats, as we have said.
And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot, or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all manners of fractures. For there are fractures that go across, and others in sharpening, like the cut of a quill for writing.
For there are fractures that go across, and others in sharpening, like the cut of a quill for writing. And there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture with a small split.
And for each method have its own ingenuity and proper instrument in the restoration, according to what the memory comes into place;
and the bone fracture is known by the twisted limb, and clearly appears due to deficiency, and sounds on pressing with the hand;
and when there is no twisting or sound on touching, and the patient does not feel great pain, there is no fracture;
but it can have a twist, or a split, or a small break. So you must not move it by hand, but apply medicines that come after here, and then bind it now subtly.
And know that the break going through, where the two parts are separated, they must now be placed evenly together, so that hot abscesses may come.
and if hot abscesses come, then leave it for some days until the abscesses are calmed;
then set it equal to the movement that you can do lightly and wisely, and know that the restoration of this is lighter than the restorations of that which has pieces;
then bind it as appropriate thereafter.
And if in the bone there are broken pieces, then stretch it with two parts, if it is hands or feet, or with your hand if it is a small limb, or with two ropes, or with one rope and your hand;
and place the limb according to its natural form, so that when the broken parts of the limb are separated, you reset all the fragments in their places as much as you can, and be careful that your work does not cause injury or pain to the patient;
and align the two ends of the bones according to the best forms.
And feel well with your hand if it seems to you that it is not properly aligned:
so she raises it beautifully, and does not tighten too much, nor presses as those who cause by their work a hot abscess and contraction in the limb, as we have seen many times.
And when the limb is set right, then instruct the patient well that he does not move it, neither while waking nor sleeping, nor in turning, nor in any other way; and ensure that the limb is so secured that it feels no pain. For when it feels any pain, then it is not set right, and it must be put in such a position that it feels no pain;
and ensure that the limb is so secured that it feels no pain. For when it feels any pain, then it is not set right, and it must be put in such a position that it feels no pain; and take care that it is set straight, so no deformity comes when it is restored;
and the qualities of the broken limb are according to what I tell you.
Know that broken limbs are diverse in smallness and in largeness and in form.
For there are small limbs, such as arms and legs and the like: one must wrap cloths of soft and fine linen; and those that are large, such as thighs and legs:
one must wrap with a wide and hard binding, for the wide bindings encircle the entire large limb and compress it equally on all sides, so that there is no unevenness;
then bind around light splints, three or four turns according to the limb, and compress your hand a bit along the entire binding, then go above the break and compress less, so that the break may extend slightly;
and soften the ligament little by little, until you take a large part of the healthy area, then take another ligament, and wrap it around the broken area again;
then return to the part below the break, and bind it moderately, not too tightly nor too loosely, as we have said in the first section above;
then place linen or cloths between the ligaments until it is all even, then bind everything above with a bandage, and then put your well-made splints on, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or an abscess, then place something that alleviates the abscess when warm, and which reduces the swelling, and leave it like this for some days;
Then cut onto your splints, and let them be half the width of a large cane, shaped carefully, or made from wood used for plows, or palm ribs, and let them be according to this shape:
but it is necessary that the splint which one places on the fracture be a bit larger and wider than the others;
and it should also be as long as is necessary for the member's smallness or largeness; then bind onto the splints just as you have done at the first place, then tie on top a suitable thread, as in the first place on the fracture; tighter afterwards, then less tight;
and it is necessary that the threads be medium, neither too thick nor too thin, and they should be of soft linen;
for if the threads are thick, like I have seen in the works of fools who make their stitches like cords from twisted linen, and this is great error, for the stitch cannot be even if it is too fine, and there should not be less than a finger's breadth between each needle.
And if the patient is wounded by the heads of the arrows after they are embedded in their flesh, put under them tow of linen, or shredded wool, so that it does not hurt.
When the wound is with a fracture, and the skin is broken, I will describe the treatment hereafter.
And know that it is not appropriate to extract all broken limbs of arrows on the first day. For when the limb is large, it is not necessary to put in stitches that after five days or seven, or more according to your security from a hot abscess coming on;
and here is the method of the ancient plasters to restore fractures, dislocations, and twists:
and it is that you take the flour that sticks to the mill walls, and knead it with plenty of egg, and apply this mixture, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common method for the plaster restoring the break in various situations, especially for women and small children, for it is not too hot nor too cold.
Another method for the plaster restoring the break and the dislocation and the twist: take б of bay leaves and labdanum and anil and asafetida and gum arabic and myrrh, total X б. myrrh and aloe, total V б. apply nine aleches; and make it into powder, and mix it with egg white; if the complexion of the person is hot, then use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and quickly restores broken bones, and is beneficial to many people.
Another method of plaster for sprains: take mugwort and mallows, an equal amount; mastic and aloe, nine dirhams each; acetum six dirhams; boil Armenian rhubarb X З., and grind well, and mix with water or egg white, and administer it.
Another method of plaster for joints and bones out of their places, and to alleviate the pain that follows, and the shards use of the bone, and the fracture: take new wool, and melt it in grease and in cooked oil, and apply it to the area.
These plasters do not restore, but they are good for soothing hot abscesses and properly remove the pains.
Another method of plaster that restores broken bones: take dried fig leaves and earthbind leaves, and grind them together, and make a plaster.
Another manner of plaster for the restoration of bone fractures and to reduce the remaining abscess. Take root of mallows, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of vetches, of each one part;
and grind, and mix with wine, and if the limb is heated, mix it with coriander water or water, and use it.
Another way of making a stronger plaster than the first one, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the limb. Take roots of mallows, and flaxseed, buckthorn, sweet clover, and sorrel, and flowers of violets and chamomile, of all one part; and grind, and mix with salt water, or fresh water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its condition.
Hippocrates says in his book that one should not put on the broken limb to restore strength anything other than a salve made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and he says it should be between two neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems Galen says one should put on the broken limb to restore dry things a bit warm, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another method of poultice that is good for injury and pain: Take mutton fat and human nails that have been cut off, or bird feathers, and vervain, and salt equally, and grind them, and make a poultice and apply it.
And then loosen it a little after, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor has the bone moved from its place; do not loosen it for several days. And if pain comes to the place, or itching, without rest or swelling, then hurry, and loosen it, and remove the poultice now;
and take a light cloth, and moist sea sponge, and soak it in water, and apply it to the place until the itching stops, and the pain is soothed; then let the limb rest for an hour, then apply dry wool soaked in water or rose oil, and bind it with a bandage until you are sure of a warm abscess;
and the inflammation of the limb subsides, and the pain is removed, then start the gentle binding again, and apply a poultice, but do not squeeze as tightly as before; and care for it gently until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess is hot and red and painful and swollen has been entirely removed, and you need plaster and binding, then restart it as you have done before equally.
and if none of what we have said applies to the limb, do not untie it until after three or four or five or seven days; and sometimes leave it for twenty days, according to what is observed, until the fracture heals, and the flesh grows over the alignment;
then hold it tighter than before, and swell its flesh, as I have said before;
and if you see the area drying more than is necessary, know that no healing can come; then use warm water, every time you release it, and do this every third day, and slightly reduce the dressing;
through this work then comes the healing to the limb, and quickly amends what the foolish doctors do, who restore the limb improperly:
it is harmful, and it is fearful work, and I see nothing else but letting it be and treating it properly.
Many kinds of fractures exist, and various shapes, and their causes are distinct;
for there are fractures caused by the blow of a sword, and the collarbone breaks all the bone down to the surface that is beneath the bone, just as an ax splits wood; and for that reason this kind of fracture is called "hatchet blow".
When the sword cuts the bone from above without piercing, this kind of fracture is called "absolute";
and the wounds of these two fractures are large or small.
And if there is an embedded impact, or a split from the edge of a stone, or from falling on a stone, or other similar cases.
And if it has a penetrating fracture, which approaches up to the tissue that is under the bone, or on top of the bone, and this wound is either large or small.
And there is a wound that penetrates the bone as finely as a hair, and the split is small, and for that reason this fracture is called "hairline";
and if the wound that is made by striking a stone, or by falling, or by similar things, and makes the piece of the bone go inwards, and the place is twisted like how the blacksmiths strike on the cauldrons; and the stone enters inside.
And this happens more to those who have moist bones in their head, like a child's head;
and it happens in all these kinds of fractures that small pieces are separated like stars; and I will speak of it in its place.
And we recognize all sorts of fractures by cutting into them, and by probing attempts, and by the corrupted flesh that is on them.
The hairline fracture is understood by this, that when the bone is exposed and rubbed upon, the break appears black.
In the treatment of the fracture, beware of the patient's accidents, and if you see any harmful signs, such as vomiting bile, loss of consciousness, stiffness, paleness, ague fever, eyes coming out forcefully and reddening, and other similar symptoms in various conditions, it cannot heal without doubt.
And if you see no astonishing accident and you hope for recovery, then begin the treatment.
And when the wounded comes to you first, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day at the latest.
And if it is in summer, then you must hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, lest the tissue under the bone be corrupted, and the accidents we have mentioned come about.
and if the bone fracture extends to the membrane that covers the brain, then you must split the fractured part as follows:
and it is that you take the head of the wounded patient, and expose over the bone in all ways that you can, and over the face of the wound as much as you can, and if blood flows out when exposing the bone, or an abscess is hot, aid with what is necessary, and fill the place with cloths soaked in rose oil; and let the wound rest until the hot abscess is calmed, and be sure of the flow of blood; then begin to remove around the bone, and it is done according to two methods of work:
one method is that you cut with a narrow incision in front, and this is the form:
And then he makes another incision larger than the first one.
And the second manner is that you have a number of different cuts, some narrow and others wide, and they should be pointed, and they should be made of iron;
and work lightly so you do not bruise the head.
And if the bone is hard and strong, then you must pierce around it, either by making cuts with probes, but not so deeply that they do not penetrate beyond the skull bone, and there should be a margin or circle above the tip to prevent the point from passing beyond the bone;
and you must have several, so that each comes into its place according to the thickness of the bone, so that you have probes for all skulls;
and these are the forms of the three types of tarers:
and the quality for piercing around the broken bone is that you place one tarer on the bone, and turn with your hands until you know that the bone is pierced;
then place the tarer in another part a little after, and thus do all around, then cut with the incisors the space of the bone that is between the holes, and do this more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you draw the bone to your hand, or with any of the tools you have such as tongs, pincers;
and be careful not to touch the brain or the surface.
And when you have the bone perforated and drawn out, then it is necessary that you remove the roughness which remains on the bone with another instrument similar to an incisor, but it must be finer and more delicate than other incisors;
and if any of the small bones or scales remain, remove them lightly with the instruments; then cleanse the wound with tents and ointments that we have mentioned.
And another method of work is the one that Galen said, which is simpler; and he praises it greatly, and this is his word. You must first uncover a part of the bone where the fracture shows movement, so that once you have uncovered that part, you will place under the head of this lenticular incisor, of which here is the form:
And do not cut from one side, and the part to be cut is on both sides, so that the cutting is towards the bone;
then strike with a small mallet so that you lightly chop the bone all around, and be careful of the tissue that is below;
if it is adhered to the bone, remove it lightly, for it should be removed without harm and without fear.
And if the bone fracture does not pierce through to the skin, and the bone is only cut on top, and there are small fragments, then it is necessary to address that roughness, and remove the scales with a fine scraper of which you must have various sizes, to apply in each place most appropriately, according to the work and shape of the fracture.
And scrape first with large scrapers, and then with finer ones, and do not stop doing this until it is smooth.
In each of the other haircuts and subtle fractures, you must treat according to its direction;
and this is something that is not easily answered by one who has devoted their study to this art.
And if the surface is exposed, then you must take a piece of linen according to the size of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and place it on the wound; then take another piece of linen folded in two or three, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first piece of linen; and do this as gently as you can, so you do not burden the surface, then apply another bandage on top, and do not bind it too tightly, only enough for it to reach the wound;
and leave it like this for one or two days until the hot abscess is calmed, then untie it, and apply medications such as lily roots, and bran of beans, and incense powder, and aristotle, and similar things;
and of these things make powder, and put it on the wound, and administer immediately cleansing medicines without biting;
and ensure that the wound is immediately clean, do not leave any ointment, nor allow scabs to form, for when scabs form on the fabric of the brain, they can corrupt and harm it, causing great harm to the patient;
for when you put something biting on the surface, it can burn from above. Take heed then, if any bad accidents happen to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt.
and if blackening comes on it other than from the medicine you have put on, which has such virtue, then you should take one part of honey and three parts of rose oil and mix them, and put it on the surface; then treat it with methods of treatments that are necessary, until it is healed.
Know that sometimes both parts of the nose above are broken, or one by itself, for there are two bones;
and the one below is cartilaginous, and does not break, so it does not cause to cave in or twist, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, then you should put your little finger into the nostril, and place that break inside according to your finger's guidance, and push by force, until the nose returns to its natural form; and do this gently, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
And if the break is in the upper part of the nose, and the fingers cannot reach the place, then you must make it even with the tip of a small rod.
And if the fracture is of two parts, do likewise, and hasten to restore it on the first day, if you can;
and if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the hot abscess is calmed, then place at the head of the nail pieces of linen cloth, if the fracture is in one part.
And you place another on the other side, if the fracture is there; and let the pieces be so thick that they fill the holes of the nail.
And some say that one should moisten the threads with butter and change them each day. It does not seem right to me, but they must be moistened with egg white and mill powder; then leave the tent, until the bone is hard, and the cartilage is hardened.
And sometimes one puts goose feathers in place of tents, and thus wraps the cloth around, and the surgeon holds it, and the patient blows through; or do what you wish.
And if hot abscesses come to the nose while you are working there, put a poultice or cotton moistened with rose oil, or with a drop of mercury.
And if hot abscesses do not come, then apply a plaster for cooling, of flaxseed flour, and incense powder, mixed with egg white, then put light bandages on top, and do not bind the limb;
and if the break of the limb is small, and it is broken into tiny pieces, then extract it with suitable instruments for that, then sew the wound, and treat with things that heal flesh and promote healing, such as appropriate plasters and ointments;
and if it has no wound inside the nose, then treat it with tents, and put in pins of pitch until it is healed.
When the jaw is fractured below, and there is no open wound, and the break is only superficial, and is not split into two, but rather indented inward, it is recognized as a minor injury.
It is necessary, if the break is on the right side, that you put your index finger in the patient's mouth; and if the break is on the left jaw, then put your index finger of the right hand, and push the break inside gently, and align it with the other hand by force, and make it equal.
And if the fracture of the jaw is separated into two, it is necessary that you administer extension from both parts until they are aligned.
And if movement of the teeth occurs or a tear, then extract them with a gold, silver, or silk thread, then put on the broken jaw a poultice, and place a double cloth over it; and put on the cloth a well-made large needle or a piece of leather equal, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it up as high as you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
and if you see that the face changes, untie it on the third day, and then reapply precisely what has changed; and put a poultice on, of the powder from the mill with egg white or sesame flour, after you have removed the plaster;
and put on the poultice a light wool, and if the poultices dry out and the condition of the patient does not change, leave it until he is healed; many times is healed in three weeks.
And if hot abscesses come, then apply what we have said many times.
And if there is a break and wound together, treat it if no piece of the bone has been removed; so carefully remove the fragments with appropriate instruments for this.
And if the wound is narrow, then widen it with fire according to your need.
And when you have removed all these pieces, and none remain, then sew the wound if it is wide, and apply appropriate poultices to promote flesh growth until it is healed.
The forearm breaks often in front, towards the shoulder, and the break is according to three manners:
or it is broken and separated into two, and there are fragments, and it is the easiest to restore;
or there is a break with a wound.
And the work is when the break is without a wound, that you have two assistants, so that one holds the shoulder where the forearm is broken; and the other extends the neck towards the part;
then place the fracture equally in your hands, so that the form is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor shift.
And if you need to stretch more, then place under the shoulder of the patient a round ball of cloth, or of wool, and let it be large according to your necessity; and stretch and lift the forearm, and hold the ball in your hand, so that you place the fracture equally as it should be.
And if you cannot pull the head of the shoulder back into place due to its being stuck, then it is necessary for the patient to lie often on his side, and put under the shoulder a medium pillow, and have the attendant push the shoulder down until the bone of the shoulder is raised.
and then align the fracture with your hands, and if you find it shattered, then you must split it open;
and pull lightly on the fragments, and if the bone cannot join due to some obstacle, then cut it with one of the incisors that you have; but place under the forceps this instrument, to protect the surface:
and it resembles a spoon, and is not closed, and should be as wide as necessary, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work;
and let it have two ends, as you see, and one should be wide, and the other narrow, like the rupture of the wound that you made when you pulled the bones;
and when you are sure of a hot abscess, cut the wound, and if the rupture is small, or if you doubt it is a hot abscess, then apply cloths and bandages to the wound according to its size.
And if hot abscesses come, moisten the cloth with rose oil and with asses' fat and with wine, and put on.
The binding of the bone, when there are no wounds and no cutting, is that you put on the bone a plaster of mill powder and egg white, and place light bandages over it, and put a sphere under the splint if you need it; then take a very wide bandage of a palm in width, then place the doubled cloth over the bandages and the plaster; then take a thin strip three digits wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage, so that the ends of the bandage are hanging; and place the strip on the fracture, and wrap the bandage around the neck, and under the healthy splint, and under the diseased splint; and the reset of each part, and when you see that the bone holds the break properly, and you clearly see that the needle does not move over the broken bone, then reward it every day, and when the bindings loosen, restrain it again;
and make the patient lie on his back, and place a small bolster under the mattress when he sleeps, to raise the shoulder up; thus lighten the break of the arm by the elevation of the shoulder, where you bind the arm to the neck, and do not unbind it unless bad accidents occur, until twenty days;
then restart the plaster if you see it is needed, and bind it tightly, leaving it this way until it is restored;
and it is restored in twenty-eight days or less for some men.
of the break of the shoulder
and it often happens that the shoulder is broken at its broad part or in the middle, and one does not know it except by touching it;
set it according to the shape of the break, and reset it according to its natural form, in every way that you can;
then apply flour from the mill with egg white and light bandages, and place a double cloth on top; then place a wide and thin board slightly larger than the shoulder, and if beneath the board there are any hollows in the shoulder, fill those hollows with flax bandages so that the board lies evenly;
and then it is tightly bound with a large bandage firmly, so that the splinter does not move from its place, and check the binding every day;
and every time it becomes soft, it is bound, and the splinter is placed back in its proper place if it has moved, and the patient lies on their side;
and the shoulder is restored in twenty days or twenty-five.
And when this number is completed, then untie it, and be sure, for it is not bone that moves easily out of place.
And if a piece of the bone protrudes forward and points below the heart, cut above it, remove the bone, and do what we have said in the fracture of the arm to ease an abscess that is hot.
of the fracture of the hip
The bone is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; but it often breaks at the root.
And when it is broken in the middle, it bends downward, and the patient feels great pain, lacks strength, becomes faint, and may vomit blood, and the marrow appears in the broken bone, which can be clearly seen.
And the restoration is such that the patient lies on his back, and you place a cushion between his shoulders, then press the shoulders, and align the ribs from the second rib with your hands, and delicately apply equal pressure in all ways you can, until the shape of the bone is as it should be;
then apply plasters and bandages over the stake subtly of salt, or another light wood, and wrap it in a cloth, and lay it on the broken bone so that it does not move; and turn the bandage around the back, and bind it gently, and loosen the bandage every hour, and if it becomes soft, then tighten it;
and if it needs to be loosed, for corrosion or itching that comes to the place, or pain or abscess, then hasten and loosen it, and scrape off the plaster, and address what has come in ways of treatments;
then apply the plaster again, and bind it until it heals.
Of the breaking of the ribs
Know that the breaking of the ribs only occurs in their thick parts behind the back, and at the head inward, and they do not bend except because they are slippery; and one can feel it well upon examination with the hands.
And the restoration is to set the break evenly as it should be. And then apply the plaster, and bind it with a splint if necessary.
And if the breaking of the ribs inclines inward, then the patient feels great pain and pricking, like from pleurisy, for the bone pricks the membrane; and a punctured wound, and quickly it causes great spewing of blood, and this is from severe illness, and the elders have put much ingenuity into it.
And so there are some who say that one must administer foods that inflate the belly, to push the wind downwards.
We do not wish for hot abscesses to occur if they have not already appeared. And if it has occurred, then heal it.
And some say that we put leeches on the place to suck well, and this seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the leeches may not draw the excess to the place due to the disposition of weakness.
And some say that we should cover the area with wool soaked in hot oil, and place tents between the ribs to evenly distribute the warmth around, then treat it with the treatment for pleurisy, with food and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot endure from the bone piercing the tissue, and there is doubt for the patient, then it is necessary to make an incision over the site of the broken rib, and it is necessary to place an instrument underneath to support the surface;
and then one must cut the bone, and draw lightly, and then sew the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and treat it with plasters until it is healed.
And if hot abscesses come, then put on cloths moistened in rose oil, and place them on the area;
and treat the area as appropriate for an abscess, and let the patient lie on their side where it is needed until they are healed.
and likewise for the spine of the back.
And when this happens to someone, and you wish to know if they will be healed or not, then beware if you see his hands softened, swollen, and lifeless, and he cannot move them or stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, he does not feel it.
Know that it is mortal in many conditions, and if they move and feel well when they are squeezed and pricked, know that the bone’s joint is saved, and that the patient will be cured if treatment is applied.
And if similar things happen to the spine of the back, and you wish to know whether it will be healed or not, then beware if the feet are softened, and if the symptoms are present which are in the hands, and on the back there is windiness and involuntary emission;
And when it is treated on its belly, there is involuntary emission. And when he is lying on his back and wants to saddle up, he cannot. Know that it is mortal: do not labor too much in its treatment.
And if this accident does not happen to him, then the condition is lighter.
And the treatment is that you wrap it if there is a hot abscess, put rose oil or egg yolk oil on the spine until it is calmed;
then place one of the comforting and drying plasters on it and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on the part where the pain is felt until he is healed.
And if any bone becomes dislocated, it is necessary to cut on the joint; and remove the bone, then sew together the two edges of the wound if it is large, then treat it with ointment to promote healing until he is healed;
and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the skull," place your pouched hand (left), and make it equal to the other hand as much as possible, then put the plaster and the splint on top if needed;
then he tightens it, and if there is dislocated bone, he cuts over it, removes it, and treats the wound until it heals.
of the fracture of the hip bone
It rarely happens that the hip bone is broken, and if it does happen, there is only a slight reduction at the top; and it lengthens outward and tilts inward, and the patient feels pain in the area, and there is a sharpness and swelling where it is broken.
And the restoration is that you place your hand over it until you are above the break; and understand where the break is and its shape;
and if the fracture is at the head alone, then set equal this fracture, until it has a natural shape.
And if the fracture is lengthwise, or it tilts inward, then make the patient lie on their stomach until the restoration of that fracture is aligned for you. and when you have set it equal, then put on the plaster, then put on a splint of wood or horn, and bind the fracture so that it does not move;
and apply the area beneath the ribs until the swelling is equalized. And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side, or on their back.
and if hot abscesses come, do not touch them until the hot abscesses are calmed, and put on what we have said before; and then return to the restoration, and bind it as appropriate, if there is no harmful accident;
of the shoulder fracture
The shoulder joint is what is between the arm and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, it should be restored according to one of the two methods:
one of which is that you take a stick of moderate thickness, according to this form:
And tie the two ends with two bindings, and pull them up, and seat the patient on a chair;
then lay his broken arm on the stick until it reaches the shoulder, and place a wooden support in the middle, then pull upwards with some weight or have an assistant stretch it down;
Then the physician places the splint equally with both hands together, until the splint returns as it should.
And the other method is that the patient is placed on his back, and his hand is tied to his neck, then command two assistants that one holds above the fracture with his hands, and the other holds below all the way to the joint, and each stretches their part.
And if you wish that the extraction be stronger, then hold the limb below the fracture and above the fracture, and stretch each of the assistants to their part.
And if the splint is close to the shoulder, then you must place one tie in the middle under the axilla, and the other towards the side, under the splint;
and likewise if the splint is towards the side, then you must place the bandage lightly, without force, until the splint is even on the spot and on the side;
then set the fracture evenly as it should be, and bind it, if no warm abscesses come.
And if warm abscesses come, then do not bind it for seven days, and place wool soaked in wine and rose oil on it until the warm abscesses are calmed;
then you bind it, and the method of binding is that you put the plaster on the fracture, then align the arm with the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the chest;
and place the bandage, and bind it on the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm is in its proper place, unless something prevents it, or if the bone has not moved.
And if you fear that the bone may move, then use splints, and place on the fracture a splint wider and stronger than the others, and have one inch of space between each splint, and let each splint be so large that it extends three inches beyond the fracture on each side;
then extract on the stars, as I have said at the beginning of the chapter on fractures, more strongly and less in moving away.
And if you see the setting of the stars and the binding, as we have said, at the hour when you restore the broken limb, and you fear the abscess is hot, then leave it to bind until the seventh day, as we have said;
then examine the bandage every three days to ensure that itching or swelling does not arise in the area, or that nourishment cannot reach the limb because it is too tight. If it is directed, as we have said.
And if no such accidents occur, then do not loosen it until after three days or more, and have the patient sleep on his back, with his hands on his stomach;
and place beneath the shoulder a cushion full of wool evenly, and look at each hour of the day or night, that the shape of the broken limb does not move, or the ligaments do not become softened;
and direct it through the power of medicine, and give it the meat that we have mentioned before, in such a way that the meat be at first subtle; and when it begins to recover, let it be coarser.
And it is customary that the shoulder and the leg should be fully recovered in forty days; and then one should untie it and administer baths and medicinal ointments to properly direct the area.
And if the constriction is tight and embedded, it remains to untie for one day or two months.
of the breaking of the arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the two "radius", of which one is small, and it is the one that follows the wrist;
and the other is large, and it is the one that is below, towards the little finger;
perhaps only the large radius is broken, or the small one, and perhaps both together.
When the small radius is broken, the restoration is light, and the healing;
and when the large one is broken, the healing is bad, and more grievous than when they are broken together.
If it is the small fragment that is merely broken, then it should be gently extended and made even.
And if it is the large radius, then it must be bound more tightly;
and stretch it on the cushion, and raise the palm of the hand higher than the others, and the small fingers lower than the other fingers, and let the patient be crossed over himself, and the cushion in front of him higher, that the patient does not suffer any strain;
then extend the minister's arm below to his hand, or to the joint, and another minister above.
And then the doctor should place it evenly, according to its best form.
And if in the fracture there are pieces, then place each in its place, and if any detached piece pricks the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then cut into it and remove it, as we have said before.
And if with the splint for the wound, I have spoken of it in a specific chapter; then take care of it.
And if at the beginning of the healing process abscesses occur, then apply a cloth with ointment made of rose oil and white wax, which should not be too hard or too soft; and tie the cloth on top gently, until the heated abscess is calmed.
and then remove the plaster, and put on the poultice of mill powder with egg white, then place the splints, and let the splint of the brace be stronger right away and a bit wider than the others;
and know that it must have six splints on the arm in various arrangements: whether the fracture is in one of the bones, or in two;
and bind tighter on the fracture than elsewhere, and always less tightly as you move away, just as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the bandages that are on the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard nor rough;
and let the bandages that are on the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard nor rough; and let the thread, with which it is sewn, be of flax, not too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
And reward the limb and the joint after some days. And if any bad accidents come to the member, such as itching that comes to the member, then you must rinse the member with warm water, until the itchings are calmed;
and let the member rest without being too tight.
And then begin the binding again, and if the joint is loosened and the bones separated, and similar things, then address it.
And be wary if the nourishment cannot reach the limb because it is too tight, then you must loosen it a bit, and leave it this way for some days until the nourishment circulates, and then bind it tightly.
And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, then do not release him until twenty days.
or wrap around, then he can place his hands on his neck, and let his necks be equal, and beware of movement and jolting, and sleep on his back;
and know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or in thirty-five, and by chance in twenty days, according to the compositions and the complexities of the virtues.
of the break of the hand
Know that on the back of the hand and at the joints of the fingers there are few breaks, and they do not come more often than a sprain many times.
and when the palm of the hand is broken or bent, it is necessary that the patient sits crossed, and sits straight in front of him evenly;
then place his hand on the stretched cloth, and the minister stretches the broken bones, and the doctors make them equal until they are well joined;
and apply the plaster and the bandages, if no abscesses come, then put a splint according to the size of the area; and be wrapped in a linen cloth.
And if the break is on the outside around the belly of the foot, make a sphere of cloths, and instruct the patient to press it against their broken foot; and then bind it with a long cloth, and let the splint be as large as the palm of the hand, and bind it tightly as appropriate.
And if the break is in the palm, then you must put a splint on top and another beneath in the sole, so that the hand be open and straight, then bind it all around the hand, and stop the bleeding between the fingers.
And if the break comes to any of the joints of the fingers, if it is swollen, then make it even as appropriate; and bind it with the sole, and if you wish, put a small straight splint to elevate the break, and do not move it;
and if the break is in the other fingers, such as in the index or one of the others, then make it even, and bind it with the healthy finger that comes after; When you tie them all while holding, which is better, or you put on a splint, just like in a poultice;
and take care in the restoration and in the placement of a hot abscess, and support those who come to it, just as I have said.
The bone of the thigh is often broken, and one can see it well when it turns forward and backward;
and the restoration is such that you bind one end above the break, and the other below. And the patient lies on his back, then each minister extends his bandage equally on his side;
and this is when the fracture is within the bone.
And if the break is near the root of the thigh, then one of the ligaments should be towards the hip, and the other ligament below the break.
and likewise if it is near the knee, then let the bandage be close to the knee, and let the extension be downwards;
then the physician places the bone straight with his two hands until it is according to its natural shape, and then applies the plaster, and binds it, if no abscesses come.
and if there is a hot abscess, let it subside, then return to your work and your treatment; the binding is done in such manner.
It is necessary that you wrap around the fracture one thick bandage doubled into two or three layers and leave the excess, then turn the leg until the heel comes to the root of the knee, and place one long thread between the thigh and the leg, below close to the knee, and let the ends of the thread come above;
then turn over the bandage on the leg and on the thigh, then place the splints in position, and put a splint on the bone of the leg;
then place the empty space between the leg and the thigh with soft cloths to evenly distribute the pressure, then begin to tightly bind three or four turns on the splint; and as you go higher up the splint, apply less pressure;
then tighten the two ends of the thread that you have placed between the leg and the thigh, and bind three splints that are above, then go back down to the top of the thread until you come near the foot;
and he restrains it so that it does not move from its place, then leaves it thus, until no abscess or swelling or similar comes. And if it happens there, he loosens it and addresses what comes, as we have said many times;
and if there are pieces of bone that cause pain, then it must be washed, if one can; and if one cannot, then it is necessary to cut open the place and draw out pus; and treat it as we have said until it is healed.
and sometimes the thigh is broken in such a way that one must insert splints, as in the shoulder and arm;
However, in the restoration thus made, the patient does not limp.
And know that the thigh is restored in 50 days, or a little less or a little more, according to the differences of temperaments.
Know that in the region of the knee there is little breakage, but it bends often.
And if it breaks, it is not more than a crack, or perforation, and it happens to all wounds, both visible and invisible, and this people feel well.
And the restoration is such that one puts equal pressure on what is round to its ends, until it is assembled so that it can move;
then apply the plaster, and place a round splint if you need it, and bind it as appropriate, then treat all the conditions we have mentioned in other fractures, such as a hot abscess and similar ones; apply to each case what is necessary until it is healed.
of the fracture of the leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is properly called "tibia," and the other is called "fibula";
and it happens that all kinds of fractures are like those in the arm, and for this reason the restoration is as with that of the arm equally, and the work is entirely so. And if both bones are broken together, then the leg turns in all directions.
And if the slender bone is broken, it turns forward.
And if the large bone is broken, then one feels great pain, and it is clearly seen; and it turns inward.
then apply extension, and make it even, and bind the splints evenly;
but nevertheless, if the fracture is bad and there are many pieces, the extension should be smaller and lighter; and lighten according to your ability.
And when you have completed your work, take two wooden splints that fit the leg on one side and the other, and let them be as long as the leg from the knee down;
then wrap one bandage over and under them in two places, and tie it in the middle as well, and at this point the leg will not be able to deviate to the right or left, and thus it is properly secured;
and some administer one board as long as the leg, and if it is made of wood, the leg is placed there to prevent movement, and this is properly done in a fracture where there is an injury;
and move each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess hot or other accident; and treat it until it is healed.
of the breaking of the bones of the foot
At the ankle no fracture occurs, but sometimes a fracture happens to the bones of the foot and less so to the toes, and there is force that shatters in many positions.
And if it happens that the bones of the foot are broken, and you see these bones protrude over each other, then place the patient's foot on the ground as if they wanted to walk, and then put your foot on top of theirs where the bones are raised, then press until they return to their places;
then apply the plaster and bandages on top, and place under the arch of the foot a small board two fingers thick, then bind it to the foot appropriately, after you have wrapped cloths around, and other things you need.
And when three or four days have passed, then loosen the binding, for you will find the bones aligned, whether they are fractured or dislocated.
And if any of the fingers are broken, restore them, as we have said about the fingers of the hand; then place a splint on the broken finger according to the length of the finger, and let it be a bit wider, then put beneath the end that tablet I have mentioned, and bind it appropriately;
and if there are two or three, or more, broken, then place a splint on each finger according to its size, wrapped in one linen cloth, and bind the tablet beneath the end; and let it be placed at the head of the tablet to support the belly of the end, so that it holds it well.
And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said to other breakers, since we have said; and address each incident as it is appropriate.
of the break of the bone of the wrist
When the bone of the woman's nature is broken, have her sit stretched out, then incline her towards the back part, and let her be held from behind;
then fill the patient's female part with cotton, and put as much in there as a thumb;
then stand the woman up, and lift her back little by little, and then the cotton comes out, until it reaches the entrance of her female part, and the bone returns with it;
and when she wants to urinate, she removes the cotton, and after she has urinated, she puts it back, and thus does this for seven days or around: the fracture will be restored, and if you want, take a bladder of a bird, tie a reed to the opening, and insert the whole bladder into the appropriate place; then blow into the reed forcefully, until the bladder is inflated inside: the fracture will then return to its natural state;
then it should be filled with cotton, and leave it this way for several days until it is healed.
And when the bone of the wrist of a man or a woman is broken, restore it as we have said for the bone of the hip;
and they are not hidden these fractures coming to those who put their study and practice into it, and understand my book.
For the fractures indicate in various positions the right way of restoration: understand it then.
In the penis, when it is broken, take a goose's throat and insert the penis; then wrap cloths around it, and leave it for three days or a bit longer, and it will be healed quickly.
of break with wound
It is necessary for one who has a break with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, that he be cauterized now, so that the cauterizations we have mentioned testify to it.
And if the wound heals, then stop it with vitriol, if you have nothing else, then begin again to restore the broken area at that same hour, or on that day, unless hot abscesses come.
And if hot abscesses come, then delay the restoration until the ninth day, until the abscesses are calmed, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would cause harmful accidents.
And if the broken bone is visible on the uncovered chest, then you must set it lightly with your hands, with slight stretching.
And if the extension is not available to make it equal in your hands, then reset it with this instrument which is made of iron, which is seven or eight inches long, and its width is according to the size of the wound; and for this reason it is necessary for the doctor to apply three or four, according to what he needs in each case of fracture;
and let it be round and a bit thick, so that it does not bend when pressed on the limb during your work, and let it be sharp at the front, and thick from the middle to the front, thus:
And it is called "palette," therefore the bent head of the bone should be placed on top of the visible bone; and push it once, until it returns, and make them equal to each other. And if the fracture is fine and the instruments cannot grasp the bone well, then you must cut the head of the bone so that the instruments may have power over it.
and if you cannot bring back the bone, as we have said, then cut it with a suitable instrument, or an incisor or saw, to your ability;
then scrape what remains in the bone of roughness and small fragments.
And when the bone is replaced and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural place.
so do this until it is in its place, then moisten the bandage with black styptic wine, and clean if it is necessary; and do not put on the wound any salve or other oily substance that might cause putrefaction and corruption;
then apply bandages when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cut the covering all around according to the size of the wound, and be careful that the wound is not constricted with the fracture;
and many times this has been done by foolish doctors, and they have caused the patient death or corruption at times; and let the bindings be softer and looser than other fractures.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you fear that harmful accidents may come, as we have said, and you find pain at the site, then you should not put stones on it; but wrap around, instead of stones, hard cloths, and bind them.
And when you see after one day or two the wound around the wound inflame, remove what you have put on with all wine, and apply a healing salve, such as tetrafarmacon and similar.
And you must loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and in the evening, until it is healed and whole.
And it is necessary that the limb be positioned in such a way that the pus flows down lightly.
And if many days pass, and it cannot heal but keeps coming back with pus, know that there are small pieces of bone, for which you must probe the wound with a tent, and remove all these loose pieces that cause the pain.
And if a fistula comes to the place, or any other kind of corruption, then you must cure it, according to what he says in his chapter above.
And when the bone is broken and open on the limb, such as the bone of the thigh or the shoulder, and other similar large limbs, do not treat it, for often death results, but leave it until it putrefies;
perchance it will fall off by itself after twenty days or thirty, then treat the wound if you can;
and if you cannot, then leave it.
We often see the health of the fracture, especially when it is near the joint, and it is a gruesome thing to look at the shape of the limb; and perhaps the limb cannot perform its natural functions.
Be careful then if the wound is fresh: administer styptic medicines to it, such as aloes, frankincense, and myrrh, and sarcocolle, gallnuts, and similar others, so that you take any one of these things, or all together, and mix them with styptic wine or with egg white or with oil; and he places them on the knot in bundles, and binds them well, and does not untie them for many days;
and he places them on the knot in bundles, and binds them well, and does not untie them for many days; and then dislocates it, and begins another one, until the knots are removed;
where you extract on a well-made piece of flesh; for the property of the flesh is such that it removes all swellings above the limbs;
and if the knot has already hardened like stone and needs to be removed, then cut on top of it and open the visible excess; where you shave it with a razor until it is removed, and care for it until it is healed.
of the limb which is weak after the healing
When the bone fracture is restored, and the limbs remain weak and delicate afterwards, it happens for many reasons: one of which is because it was bound too tightly, and not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many bindings, and the nourishment could not reach the limb; or due to an abundance of bleeding; or due to excessive movements, not at the right time; or because he has little blood in his body, thus is weak.
And the treatment is that you make the patient eat and soften the body so that the blood may multiply within him; and the minister bathes, and gives joy and ease;
then puts pitch on the limb, so that the pitch attracts to the large swelling, and often waters it with warm water, until the swelling runs to the limb; and returns to its natural form.
of the deformed limb after the health When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bone is visible, and the form of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function:
do not believe the fools who say one must break the limb all over again, and many foolish doctors have done this in our land;
and this work is blamed, and great evils come from it, and perhaps death;
however, if the nodules and the swellings are fresh, then they should be soaked in hot water, or herbs that soften should be boiled, such as leaves of mallows, and roots, and mallows, and similar things;
and he makes the softening plaster, such as diaquilon well does, and you take the mallow mucilage, and mix it with hen's fat or linseed oil, and make a plaster on top;
or you take fatty figs, and grind them with coloquintida, and similar medicines that reduce the swelling.
And sometimes the nodulation is removed by rubbing continuously and for a long time with wet hands. And let the limb be moved every hour.
And if the twisted part is awakened and hardened, like stone, and it is necessary to remove it with iron, then it must be cut until the bone, with a subtle light incision; and apply care and study in the treatment.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation comes to someone, then he must now bring it back without delay.
For if one delays, the joint swells, and perhaps it is reset with difficulty in its place;
therefore, one should not move it at the time when it is swollen: it often causes spasms and other pains;
nevertheless, when this happens, make the patient sweat, then leave it alone until the abscesses have calmed;
then bathe the limb with hot water and oil, then reset it gently, and treat each limb as the treatment will bring it back to its place.
And I have ordered the chapters of the dislocations from the head to the feet.
It often happens that the jaws are dislocated here, and the dislocation of both is according to two manners: or they are slightly displaced from their places, and somewhat softened; or they are entirely dislocated, and hang downwards, causing the saliva to flow from the mouth so that he cannot hold it in, nor can he close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped around his speech.
When the dislocation is small, it returns through many arrangements.
And if it is complete and whole, then you must reset it quickly, and do not delay;
and in such a manner that the minister holds the head of the patient, and the doctor places a small bag from one of his hands at the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts; and the other fingers of the hands should be apart, to make equal;
and instructs the patient to soften his jaws and move them in all directions. And the physician places it equally, until it returns to its place.
And if the resetting is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated together, then wash them with warm water and oil until you reset them gently;
do not delay in resetting them, as we have said.
And when they are brought back evenly, and the mouth of the patient closes well without softening, then put on cloths moistened in an unguent made of rose oil and wax, then lightly bind it with soft bindings;
and the patient sleeps on his back, and his shoulders be between two cushions, so that he does not move it to the right or left, nor exert himself to mix, but take light food, until the pains are removed, and the jaws are healed;
and then chew what he wants lightly, and do not strain to open the mouth for eating and drinking, until the jaw is well healed and mended.
And if the two jaws cannot be perfectly reset within an hour and are not returned to their places, then fevers and usual sweats result, and perhaps diarrhea occurs, and perhaps vomiting of bile.
And when you see this, then know that it is destruction; and many times the one to whom it happens dies within nine days.
The forceps cannot dislocate from the side within the continuity of the breast and the swelling, and it sometimes dislocates outward, and this is well felt.
And the restoration is that the patient lies alone on his back, and extends his arms; and then press the area firmly with your palm, and it will return;
then apply the plaster and bind it, and constrict it;
and the joint that is towards the side cannot dislocate; if not, and if it dislocates at any time, then reset it to its place, as we have said;
then put on the plaster and bandage it, and bind it tightly, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed;
and in the same way is reset the shoulder of the spine when it is dislocated from its place.
Of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is not dislocated except according to three manners:
one of which is that it dislocates on the side of the armpit below; and the second is on the side of the breast; and occasionally it dislocates on the upper side, and this happens rarely;
and does not dislocate behind due to the shoulder, and does not dislocate inward due to the nerves;
and often dislocates downward towards the socket, especially in those who have little flesh, for it happens quickly and suddenly;
in those who have enough flesh, it happens with difficulty, and returns with difficulty.
And it sometimes happens to some men that there is a blow or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they believe that it is dislocated because of this.
It is therefore necessary that you test it until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
And the dislocation is known when it moves downward towards the socket, and there is a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a noticeable difference between them; and you will find at the head of the shoulder a hollow, and beneath the collarbone by touching the head of the shoulder, just as if it were an egg; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose, nor move it in any way;
and likewise, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you find it clearly by touching;
and this kind of dislocation is not difficult to reset when it is new, or if the patient is young.
And the method is that the practitioner lifts the patient's hand upwards, then places his thumbs beneath the collarbone, and raises the joint forcefully upwards to its place; and the minister lifts the hand, and extends it upwards, then places it below; it will come quickly.
and if it does not come as we have said within a few days, then the patient should be bathed in warm water; and the administrator uses a strongly soothing and relaxing agent, such as a decoction of hellebore and fenugreek and melilot in water, and let it be applied;
then place the patient on their back, and put under the board a piece of wool equally neither too soft nor too hard, then the doctor places his heel on the piece, and lifts the head of the shoulder forcefully, and pulls the patient's arm;
and another minister holds the head of the patient so it does not move down; the shoulder returns completely now, and if you want to reset it in this manner:
and it is that you have a man present who is taller than the patient; and stand straight against the side, and place his shoulder under the armpit of the patient, and lift the armpit up so that the patient hangs in the air; and another minister pulls the patient's hand down towards the belly. And if the patient is too light, then with him some heavy thing may help, and the dislocation returns immediately.
And it is also reset in another manner:
and one sticks the long firebrand into the ground, so that the shoulder is as hard as a pestle, and neither too large nor too thin; then it should be placed under the patient, but that there be cloths above, and the patient be lying along the long part of the wood;
then his hand should be stretched down on the other side properly, and the joint will return to its place quickly;
and if it does not want to return despite all these things that we have said, then do this treatment: take the firebrand two arms in length and four fingers in width, which has the head hard to insert under the skin, according to this form:
then tie above the head of the wooden stake with underclothes, so that the wood does not wound the patient, then place it under the armpit of the patient;
and extend his arm over the long stake, and tie the shoulder to the stake, and the arm at the hand, then place the arm on a step of a broad ladder, and let the hand hang down, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint is now in place.
And when it is in, in whatever manner, you must put under the armpit a sphere of equal wool, then apply a poultice mixed with mill powder, along with incense and egg white, on all over the shoulder and around, then strain under the armpit appropriately, and wrap the bandage over the poultice, and bind the hand to its neck, and let the hand remain thus.
And it is necessary that he eat little, until the limb is strengthened, for it will heal faster;
and then eat more after five or seven days, and move it; and if it is firm and it is not softened, then it is healed.
And if the joint is displaced due to moisture that has come in, or for other reasons, then you must apply cauterization at three points, as it is set out in the chapter on cauterizations.
and if you do all this, and it loosens after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and he cannot lift his arm up, then you know that the nerves at the head of the shoulder are cut or stretched or weakened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
The dislocation that is towards the breast or behind is done by pushing and stretching with the hands, and another place is administered;
and treat until it is healed.
And if after the healing there comes cracking in the limb, and slowness in movement, then the patient should take baths many times, until that cracking is alleviated, and returns to its original state.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated little by little, and little by little returns;
and it has dislocated entirely, especially in front and back, and the dislocation is not put back, for it is clearly seen and felt; and dislocates according to each figure. And when you join the sick limb with the healthy one, then you can see it clearly. For the joint is dislocated, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch his shoulder at all.
And you must reset it before hot abscesses occur, for if hot abscesses were to come, it would be difficult to reset;
and perhaps it cannot be completely reset, especially when it is at the back; it is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and perhaps death may come from it.
And the restoration is such that when it can be returned, you extend his hand with your two hands; and his arms be spread out, and the hands of the physician according to the cut around, above and below, and put the joint at its angles together, or at the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is at the front, it returns when he folds his hand to his hand, and trust in the root of the palm the part that is dislocated.
And if it does not want to return to its place, then administer strong extension;
and it is that two assistants extend the arm, and two assistants hold it so that it does not move during the extension;
then turn the arm on each side, after you have wrapped a long and wide double cloth;
and when the doctor joins the joint with his hand, he anoints it with some oil to soften the joint, then forcefully pushes the joint back until it returns;
and when it is in place, he puts on a dry plaster with egg white, then tightly binds it, ties the arm to the patient's neck, and leaves it for some days, then unbinds it.
and if the joint is firm in its place, then untie the binding, and leave it;
and if you see that the joint does not hold well, then reapply the plaster and the binding, and leave it this way for some days until it is firmly set; then untie it.
And if he feels stiffness after the joint is reset, and it moves, then bathe and gently rub it, and press until it is eased; or place a piece of fat sheep’s grease on the joint, then leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and make him enter the bath; and when he sweats, gently rub the joint, then put the grease back on, and then enter the bath; and do this two or three times until he is healed;
and if you wish, put warm cow dung mixed with butter on it and apply it;
so it returns to its position.
the dislocation of the hand
The joint of the hand dislocates, and the return is light, more than the other joints. Nevertheless, it must be returned to its place quickly, in the same hour that it is dislocated, lest the area swell or a hot abscess form.
And the resetting is such that you place the afflicted hand on a table, and the assistant stretches the hand, and the doctor places his hand equally, so that he puts his palm on the surface of the joint, and pushes until it returns.
Nevertheless, you must check if it is properly in place; then place the patient’s back of his hand on a table at the extension and retraction. And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, then place the patient's back of his hand upon the table, and the physician places his hand upon that area of the joint.
if it returns now, it is good. if not, then apply warm poultices to soothe the abscesses, and leave it thus without repeating.
and if he cannot bear it, and you cannot place it back in position after some days, then the joint will remain distorted;
and it does not harm the patient's strength as long as the hand is weakened, and cannot grasp anything at all: then you know that the nerves are cut, or the arteries;
so there is no other way stronger than to draw close with cautery near the case, and by chance there may be nothing else.
And when the hand is in place, then put on the plaster that we have said, then bind it and leave it for five days, then unbind it and leave it thus.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is any crack, then soften it with hot water, and rub it until it heals.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated on each side, sometimes on the back of the palm or on the front;
then extend the finger and push the dislocation with your fingers until it returns, then hold the tip of the finger and bend it towards the part where it is separated;
and leave it for two days, then make it straight on the third day;
and at night bind it as we have said, and unbind it during the day, and make it move, and bind it again at night;
and do this often, until it is tight, and do the same if it is dislocated at the palm of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed;
and do the same when it is dislocated from another side.
Of the dislocation of the vertebrae of the back
When the vertebrae of the back or neck are dislocated, or there are several dislocated, there is no cure, for death quickly follows the patient.
And the signs are that the excretions jump out without will, and cannot be held back, and many times some member is weakened, or both thighs or the two arms or one.
And many times the shadow changes in four parts;
that which changes at the back is called "gilbositez":
The treatment is that you reward if the lameness has come from childhood: there shall be no treatment nor healing at all.
And for those that come from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient methods of treatment speak greatly in grand words, which do not have much real benefit;
but I have abbreviated according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the lameness which comes to the front foot, there is no remedy nor health;
and likewise that which comes directly to both sides, and one cannot cure except properly the one that comes to the back, as I say;
and it is that the patient be stretched out on his face in an equal place, and have straw underneath him, so he does not hurt himself;
then stick the poker firmly in the ground at the head and the other at the feet, and tie a rope underneath the arms of the patient, and the other at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles;
and two ministers hold the ropes, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two pokers;
and they should be well secured, the pokers as we have said, and the doctors place their palms on the spine firmly, until it returns.
And if it does not return by this cure, take a board three arms long, and place it under the wall, and let the patient lie on their side, and put the end of the board under the wall, then place the middle of the board on the spine; and let the physician place his feet on the other end of the board, and press firmly until it returns to its place;
and if you wish, do it with a wrench that turns by hand. And you should drive in two stakes at the head of the patient's length of a large arm, and towards the feet two others, and have between each stake, above and below, a palm's space in length;
and have in each firebrand one hole, where the drill turns, and let the firebrands be firmly in the ground so that they do not move;
and between each two firebrands have one rotating firebrand, on which the ropes turn, and in two rotations have two small firebrands of one palm long, to turn the drill;
and then tie the rope that is among the boards to the drill towards the head, and the other rope towards the feet to the other drill, and each of the assistants turns his drill along the entire rope, and the master places the point equally as we have said.
And when it is equal, place a drying plaster with plenty of egg, and then the wadding, and then the splint of a piece three inches long, which should cover the area of swelling and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with a rope as we have said, and let the patient use subtle nourishment until he is healed;
and if anything comes at the end of the health, it is necessary to administer softening and relaxing medicines, with the tool that we have mentioned before; and sometimes a piece of plaster is administered, and sometimes the appearance comes in the last vertebra of the back, and one thinks it is a dislocation; and it is the bone that appears, for which one should not be presumptuous: perchance it might bring about death.
Know that in the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder, only dislocations occur, and they do not happen as they do in other joints;
and the hip joint is dislocated according to four parts: inside and outside, and in front and behind;
and more inside than others, and less dislocated in front and behind.
And the knowledge of its internal dislocation is that when you join the sick leg with the healthy one, it appears longer, and the sick knee is more open than the healthy one, and the sick person cannot bend their knee properly; and the area that is near is swollen with an abscess and hot because the head of the thigh bone comes there.
And the sign of that which comes to the deficiency, is that these accidents are contrary to those before.
and the signs of that which happens in front is that he extends his leg according to the alignment; nevertheless, the knee does not bend without pain, and if one wants it to move forward, it cannot advance, and it retains its urine, and the ankle swells, and when it goes, it passes over the heel.
And the sign of that which happens to him behind is that he cannot extend his knee nor bend it, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the thigh is in the place below the ribs.
The treatment for this kind of dislocation is that you reward if the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its position, there is no cure; and it does not require any presumption.
And in the case where the dislocation is fresh, and it is one of the four types of dislocation, you must hurry to return the joint, stretch it inside and outside, and move it right and left; by chance it may return, and does not need another treatment.
And if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare the minister strongly, and stretch the leg strongly with two hands, or with one ligature that is tied above the knee; and another minister extends his hand in such a way that he places his hands under the thigh, then tightens with one strong ligature above the hip; and another holds the end of the ligature;
and they stretch up and down all at once, until the patient is lifted off the ground at once, and remains hanging.
This method of extension is common to the four kinds, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is well.
If this is not so, then one must pay attention to its appearance.
When the dislocation is at the shoulder, then you must place the patient on his healthy side, then put the bandage on the root of the thigh, and the area which is below the angle, then stretch the bandage up towards the angle, and towards the elbow;
then have another minister take his arms, and embrace the thick part of the diseased thigh, and stretch it out fully; it will return to its place now;
and this manner of dislocation is lighter than the others.
And if you cannot tighten it in this manner that we have said, then you must bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong bond above the two heels, and above the two knees, and let the affected leg be stretched out two times more than the other;
then let it be hung from the top of a post, and let it be two arms' length above the ground;
then instruct the minister to grasp the head of the thigh, and let another minister hang with the patient, who firmly holds the thigh, for the joint now returns quickly.
And when the dislocation is severe, the patient lies down, as we have said in the case of one who has rheumatism, and tighten the bandage properly on the affected leg, and on the weight as well;
then put two torches, one at the head and the other at the feet, then place one torch between the thighs of the patient in the form; and have plaits of wet cloths around so that it does not harm the patient, then extend each strip towards him, and the doctor places equally in his hand the dislocation.
If it returns, it is good.
If not, place it on a table, and press it as we have said in the case of paralysis, and let the patient lie on the healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the affected leg quickly, and according to what I have said; and the doctor places his palm on the affected joint, then presses with the other hand, and stretches it downward towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is behind, it is not necessary to stretch the patient downward, nor lift him up from the ground, but he must be positioned as if the hip were dislocated behind, just as we have said about lying on both hips; and let it be on his face, and the bandage extended as we have said before, and one must press on the joint at the table; and it will be right when the patient stretches his legs, and they will be equal; then align the thighs, apply the plaster, and bind it with a bandage so that the hip does not move; and let him rest for three or four days, then untie it, and apply the plaster again;
and if you see that they are equal, then bind it as before, and leave it for three days;
then he unties it, and makes it move gently, until the limb is strengthened.
of the dislocation of the knee
The knee is dislocated in three ways: that is to say, inward and outward, and backward;
and it does not dislocate forward.
And the sign is that you instruct the patient to bend his leg at the thigh, and if it does not straighten at the thigh, know that it is dislocated;
and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit straight, and extend his leg if he can, and place your back against his face, and put his foot on your feet;
then take his knee in your palms, and pull between your fingers, then bend the two sides of the knee fully; and another minister extends his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he will lightly move his leg to his thigh;
and apply the plaster on it, and bind the leg to the thigh tightly, and keep them bound together for three or four days, then release it;
and the patient should not exert themselves to walk until the limb is strengthened.
And if the limb is not completely healed, apply strong extension as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the heel
The heel is sometimes displaced, and sometimes fully dislocated, inside and out.
and the sign of this is that the ankle is swollen, and it protrudes at the place where it is dislocated:
The manipulation is so light, and it must be extended lightly with his hands when he is only roused.
And when it is entirely dislocated, you must make the patient sit straight, and have the minister hold his leg by the ankle;
then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with the left two times, then stretch it upwards, and gently place the foot upwards;
and do this two times, as we have said, by placing and pulling the foot;
if it returns, that is good;
if not, then repeat the procedure, for it will return;
and if it cannot return thus, then have the patient lie on their back on the ground, and place a stake firmly in the ground between their legs, and tie cloths around so that they do not injure the patient;
then have one minister hold the thigh, and another minister extend the foot with their hands or at the ligament that is tied above the ankle; then have each minister extend equally, and the stake should be between the patient’s legs to hold the patient still when they are being stretched;
then the physician places both hands equally on the dislocation, and another minister holds the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it is at the right point, he applies the plaster and wadding on top, and tightly binds it, and ties up the foot to the leg, and watches the nerves that are above the ankle behind, so that the binding is not too tight;
then leaves it for two days or three, and if the binding softens, he tightens it;
then unties it on the third day or fourth, and forbids the patient to walk for four days; and if he walks before that time, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
And if hot abscesses come, then you must soothe it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
of the two When both are dislocated, then they must be gently extended without effort, and this is an easy thing to do.
And if the dislocation is in any joint of the foot's back, then you must have the patient sit on a flat place or on a table straight up, and put your foot on what appears to be his joints, then press with your foot strongly until it returns;
and when it is leveled and nothing appears, then place under the sole of the foot a board at two shillings, then bind it properly, and leave it for three days, then unbind it; and have it rest until it is healed.
of wound and dislocation together
When a wound comes with the dislocation, and one wants to restore it, many times it happens that the patient dies:
do not be presumptuous in the care, if you are not wise in the art and have not practiced it for a long time, and if you are not pitying and merciful and cautious, not rash;
and begin with soothing remedies for hot abscesses, and leave the patient in God's hands if you see no hope of health; and when you see hope there, reset now the limb to its place, unless the hot abscess comes;
and when the limb is in place, administer soothing things for a hot abscess, and treat the wound as appropriate with drying ointments;
and if with the dislocation there is a fracture and small bones displaced, then set them, and do what we have said in simple diseases;
and beware of entering a path of fear, according to what I have said, for it causes much harm according to your Creator, and for the wisdom of your art and your body.
