The author of this book, having completed for you, my sons, this book which is a part of the knowledge in medicine with its completeness and where the aim has been reached from its clarity and elucidation, saw fit to complete it for you through this article which is a part of the work by hand.
For the work by hand is improved in our country and in our time, it is entirely absent; so much so that its study was almost abandoned and its effect faded. Only a few minor notes remained in the original books, which have been distorted by hands, and faced with errors and obfuscation; thus, their meanings were lost and their benefits were obscured.
I saw it fit to revive and write this article about it on the path of explanation, elucidation, and concision, providing illustrations for each instrument and all tools of work; as these are an increase in clarification and an essential resource.
The reason being that there is no craftsman skilled in his hand in our time, due to the length of medical craftsmanship which requires him to be well-versed in anatomy as described by Galen before embarking on it. So that one can understand the benefits of organs, their structure, sensitivity and interaction, as well as knowledge about bones, nerves, muscles and their numbers, exits and arteries, veins, sinuses and their exits, places of their exits.
Therefore, the novices say that doctors by name are many but in reality few, especially among handcraftsmen; we have mentioned this on one side at the beginning of this book.
For whoever is not knowledgeable about what we mentioned regarding anatomy, it would inevitably lead them to make a mistake that could kill people as I have witnessed with many who portrayed this knowledge without understanding or expertise.
And thus, I have seen an unlearned surgeon cut into a piggy tumor in the neck of a woman, severing some vessels of the neck until she bled to death right before his eyes.
And I have seen another surgeon who advanced in the removal of a stone from a man who had pricked his kidney; the stone was large and caused much commotion, but he removed it with a piece of bladder. The man died around three days later, and I was called upon to remove it. From the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, I could assess what I would face.
And I have seen another doctor who was supported by some of our local military leaders in the field of medicine.
And it happened to a black slave who had a break near the ankle with an injury. The doctor rushed without hesitation, gripping the fracture tightly against the wound with ligatures and splints in a manner that cut off all possibility of breathing for the injury.
Then he indulged him in his desires, then left him for days and ordered that no bandage be removed until his leg and foot swelled up, watching over his demise.
And I called him, rushing to remove the bandage; he found relief and alleviation from his pains. However, decomposition had set in deeply within the limb, and I was unable to dislodge it.
And decay continued to ravage the limb until death ensued.
And I have seen another surgeon who treated a black cancer, it would blister after days until it became large for the patient. It was this: if cancer is of a pure mixed black essence, then it should not be exposed to iron completely.
Unless it is in regard to a limb where one may consider amputation.
For this reason, my children, you should learn that work with your hands divides into two: one accompanied by safety and the other often met with difficulty in most cases.
And warnings have been given in every place where danger and fear are involved, it is necessary for you to be aware of these and avoid them.
So that the ignorant do not find the path to speech and criticism, take firmness and prudence for yourselves, and treat your illnesses with kindness and perseverance.
And use the best path leading to safety and commendable outcome, and be prepared for dangerous illnesses that are difficult to cure.
And purify yourselves from whatever you fear might lead to suspicion in your religion and worldly affairs, for it is better for you both here and in the afterlife according to your fate.
And Galen, in some of his instructions, said: Do not treat illness with evil; call yourselves doctors of evil instead.
This article has been divided into three doors.
The first door.
In the first section, there is a comprehensive arrangement from the ancient times to the current era including images of tools and machines used for manual work, fire striking devices, different types of medicines and everything needed for manual labor.
The second door.
In the second section, there is an organized collection of everything related to incisions, piercing, fractures, bloodletting, surgeries and other similar matters, accompanied by images of the tools.
The third door.
In the sections of reduction and dislocation and treatment of fractures and similar procedures, there is a well-arranged collection from century to century and images of the machines.
The first door.
In the knee.
And before we discuss its use, it is necessary to mention the way of its benefits and drawbacks and in what mood it is used.
And I say that speaking about the manner of benefitting from the knee and its drawbacks is a long and precise knowledge, a secret hidden truth, and many wise people have spoken on this topic.
And they differed in their views about it. I have abbreviated my brief discussion to avoid lengthening the explanation.
And I say that the knee benefits in general for all bad moods, whether with a substance or without one. There are two types of mood: the hot mood without substance and the dry mood without substance.
As for the dry mood with substance, they differ in it. Some say that using the knee is beneficial there while others oppose this view, stating that fire, which causes heat and dryness, does not suit a disease of this nature.
It is impossible to be cured of a hot, dry illness with a treatment that itself is hot and dry. The one who argues against this states that the knee treated with fire can be beneficial for a hot, dry disease that occurs in people's bodies. Because if you add the body and its moisture to the fire mood, you will make the human body cold.
And I say as he says because the experience has shown me that to this matter it should not be imagined without experiencing and going through the process of understanding deeply in the topic of the knee. This is about stopping on the differences in moods of people and conditions within themselves, causes of their illnesses, symptoms, and duration of time for each one.
And as for other moods, there is no fear from them for you and especially cold wet illnesses; all the physicians agree on it and they do not differ in benefiting from it.
Know this, my sons, that healing through fire and its advantage over treatment with burning medicine lies in the fact that fire is a unique substance whose effect is limited to the organ it penetrates and does not harm another connected organ except for minimal damage.
And healing with burning medicine might extend its effect beyond the organ and perhaps cause a difficult to cure disease in it, or maybe kill. And because of its honor and magnificence is nature of fire; that's what she does unless she went overboard.
And we have clarified that through experience by extending our service and care for the profession, and standing firm on the truth of the matter.
For this reason, I refrained from lengthy speech, even though it would not be fitting for my book, I have discussed with you in secret the mystery of fire and how it works in bodies, and refuted its effects on diseases using philosophical, proof-based language to clarify your understanding.
Know this, my sons, that they have differed about the time in which fire is to be used and made of spring time the best period for it.
And I say that fire may be used at any time, because the harm caused by time can be absorbed in the benefit brought about by the use of fire. And especially if the fire is from necessary strong pains that cannot bear delay, for fear of what might follow it which could be worse than the harm caused by time itself.
Do not let yourselves be deceived, my sons, by the common misconceptions and the folly of many doctors. Know that there is no return for a disease which a cure has been found for, do not blame it.
And do not assume that the cure is only like a medicine that changes mood and dries up moisture, which is the cause of pains.
However, the cure prefers over medicine in terms of the speed of its success, strength of its action and intensity of its power.
But the disease might return at some point in time depending on the mood of the patient and the success, strength, and intensity of the illness, as well as what accumulates in his body from excesses and neglecting himself in acquiring food and so forth among its causes.
God, let the disease that the cure is used for be a mild one and in an organ with little excesses and moisture. Like the cure for pain, for example, and similar conditions; it might be that this pain does not recur. This would at least be the case.
And as for the common belief that the cure is the end of medicine, it's a correct statement but not according to what others say because they believe there's no cure that benefits with medicine or without after the occurrence of the cure. The situation is different from this.
And the meaning of 'the cure is the end of medicine' only means that when we have tried various treatments for a disease, and those medicines did not work, then we resort to the last thing which is the cure, and if it works from this point onwards, then indeed the cure is the end of medicine. There is no meaning in what the general public and many of the doctors misunderstand.
And I mentioned at the beginning that gold plating is better than iron plating, and they said so because of the balance in the quality of gold and its excellence. They also claimed that it doesn't corrode the place where the plating is done, which is not true at all.
And I have tried this myself and found that it only works on some bodies not others. Gold plating is better than iron as they said, but the problem arises when you protect the hearth in fire from gold; you won't be able to determine when it heats up to the desired temperature for the redness of the gold.
And because it speeds up the cooling process; if you increase its heat in fever, it melts in fire. Due to this, craftsmen become confused with this matter and thus gold plating is faster and more accurate for work if God wills.
This chapter on gold plating is organized into sections, from head to foot, making it easier for the student as God wills.
The first section.
In the gold plating of the head, there is one method.
This method of gold plating is useful against the dampness and cold that affect the brain, both causes of headaches, as well as frequent head colds extending to the eyes and ears, frequent sleepiness, toothaches, and sore throats. In short, for every illness that appears due to cold, such as fevers, convulsions, fainting, and so on.
The picture of this method is that you should first instruct the patient to take a purgative medicine for the relief of head congestion for three or four nights, depending on what is prescribed according to the strength of the patient, their age, and habits.
Then command him to shave his head like Moses, then place him before you sitting with his hands on his chest.
Then place the tip of your hand on the tip of his nose between his eyes. Wherever your middle finger ends, teach that location using a stylus.
Then heat the oil lamp which is shown here.
Expose as much of the bone as would be equal to the diameter of a human skull or a pear, then raise your hand and if it cools down replace it with the same hammer or another one if it gets cold. Until you see the part of the bone as I have described to you. Then take a bit of salt and dissolve it in water, soak a piece of cotton in it, place it on the spot, and leave it for three days.
Then apply a piece of cotton that has been soaked in animal fat to him, leaving it on until the irritation from the heat disappears. Then treat him with the fourfold ointment until he recovers, if God willing.
They said that the wound becomes better and more effective as it remains open, discharging pus.
Some of them advised that the skin should be heated to the bone and that the iron should be held until some of the bone becomes burned, then after that remove what has been burned from the bone and treat.
Others said that it should be heated excessively until its effect is strong enough to cause the bone to break down, resulting in fragments as small as a carob or a small walnut. They claimed that vapor from this area rises and allows the wound to remain open for a long time.
Then it is treated until it disappears, and I do not consider these types of pus fundamentally except in some people. On the way of risk, leaving it with me is better. If it occurs, the head doubles whenever its natural connection separates, as we have seen in all other members.
And especially if the head of pus is naturally weak. The first type of pus has converted and it's better for me, I'll use it if God willing, and apply it accordingly.
The Second Chapter.
It is also in the head.
If it happens in a sentence of the head and chronic pain continues with the pus, then use the applications, the powders, the poultices, and salves. Especially if that one type of pus we described does not respond to anything else, look into other treatments. If the structure of the head of pus is strong and it's not weak, but it finds extreme coldness, apply another type of pus above that slightly. Then apply on every century of his head a pus until the thickness of the skin disappears and reveals the bone extent that we described. And apply a pus at the back of his head in the place known as the spur, and be gentle with your hand here. Don't reveal the bone, for the pus finds extreme pain there different from all other head pus pains. I will describe this pus in its proper place.
And the poultice that is used for the horns of the head and its back should be softer than the poultice used in the middle of the head, and this is how it looks.
The Third Chapter.
In the case of the temporary sister.
If a headache occurs in the forehead accompanied by a migraine, and the pain extends to the eye, you should expel the body fluids using medications that purify the head, and use all other treatments mentioned for disease categories. If this does not work, there are two possibilities for her. Either by using the burning acute medicine or by using iron.
If treatment by burning medicine, then take a single clove of garlic, peel it and cut its ends from both sides. Then make an incision in the place of pain with a broad dental tool until there is a spot under the skin that can accommodate the clove.
Then it should enter under the skin until it disappears, then pull on it with tight pulls and leave it for about fifteen hours. Then remove it and take out the garlic and leave the wound for two or three days before carrying on.
Cover the area with a cotton ball soaked in oil until pus starts to come out, then treat it with ointment until it heals if Allah wills. If you wish, do this with some of the burning medicines I mentioned in the eighteenth article about burning medicines.
And if treatment by iron is to be done, it will be like this: heat the iron which has this shape:.
The iron rod is called the pierce due to its shape where it has some curvature at its head, and in the middle of it there's a small notch.
Then place it on the painful area and hold your hand while you spin the iron slightly, very slightly. The amount of heat that burns the skin should be like half of its thickness. Raise your hand to prevent the burning of the artery below which causes bleeding, then dip a cotton into salt water and place it on the spot, leaving it for three days. Then apply the cotton with some fat, then treat it with a lotion until it heals if God wills.
And if you wish, sharpen this needle from the hammer and take care not to cut the artery in this temporary lesion specially.
The Fourth Chapter.
This is the chronic lesion.
If you treat the lesion with the advanced treatment we have mentioned and what we have discussed in parts of diseases, but if the treatment does not work and you see signs that cannot be achieved by what we have described from the first medicine or second fire. You should protect the metal needle until it becomes white. After you have learned on the area of pain by a line long for half a finger or around that, and leave your hand once when you pull it so as to cut the artery and reach towards the bone.
'Except that you should beware of contacting the jawbone which moves during chewing, as it burns the muscle or nerve that controls it and causes cramps.'
And be cautious and watchful for bleeding from the artery that you have cut, as there are risks in its cutting. And especially for those who do not know what to do and were not experienced practitioners, leaving the job is preferable.
And the treatment of bleeding from the artery on its face will be mentioned in its place in the book, if God willing. If you see signs that cannot be achieved by this method.
I have seen the body of the deceased being opened in a manner in the center of the head as we described and treated the wound until it heals if God wills.
And if you wish, use the method we mentioned in the section about freeing veins using a tool with two blades; it is better and more effective than this.
The Fifth Chapter.
In ear pain.
If earache occurs due to cold and is treated with lubricants and all the treatments mentioned in this section, but the pain does not go away, increase the use of the tool known as the point, which you can visualize like this.
Then apply it on her with the tip, all around the ear as you would rotate or both of them if the pain is in both. And move the tool from slightly behind the ear after learning its position with the stick, making it have about ten points in each ear or close to that. Then treat the positions until it heals if God wills.
The Sixth Chapter.
In this section, we discuss the strength of the cuts.
The type of strength that is treated with the needle is the one that occurs due to phlegm, as described in sections on diseases.
And it avoids using the type of needle that is caused by dryness and neuralgia.
If this type of strength is treated with needles, thread, instruments and probes but does not relieve the pain, it may be necessary to puncture the skull three times. One at the base of the ear, the second slightly below the cheekbone, and the third at the tip where the lips meet.
Make your incision against the diseased side of the patient because relaxation only occurs in the clear, healthy area.
A drawing of the incision shows that it should be made towards the top ear's edge beneath the forehead slightly, and another one in the mouth. Its length should correspond to the length of the index finger.
Lower your hand with the knife until it burns half the thickness of the skin. Here is a depiction of the scalpel, which is an advancement in surgical tools compared to others; however, as you can see, it is slightly less sharp. It should have a slightly rough edge on the knife. Then, treat the area according to what has been mentioned until it heals if God willing.
The Seventh Chapter.
In chronic stenosis.
If the embolism is treated with what we have mentioned and no improvement occurs, without it being due to fever of the area, then prescribe four finger-width treatments. On each of his forehead, one incision in the middle as we have mentioned and an incision at the end of his head according to what has been said.
The recipe for the scalpel, as described, it may also be applied to an incision on the mouth of the stomach, which would be more effective. Then treat according to what has been said.
The Eighth Chapter.
In the case of forgetfulness.
The one who has phlegm should first be treated with the strongest juices and purified seeds for the brain.
Then his whole head is shaved and a pad soaked in the extract of the bindweed, which has been mentioned under the heading 'extracts', is placed on its tail. It is worn for several times; it is one of the remedies.
And do this at the same level that was mentioned there; if it has been healed by this, otherwise let them make him three remedies with his tail in his head's rear, being set up from the top of the head to below the neck.
And place a finger's thickness between each remedy and the next, then treat each remedy with what was mentioned. If you desire an increase and it is plausible for that reason, make the middle remedy three remedies.
And if you desire an increase, make it on the ears then treat him until he heals, and let the dressing be oily in accordance with what was previously described.
Chapter Nine.
In the falaj method and relax the entire body.
It is necessary for the cleansing of the head with astringents and what we mentioned, then shave the head of the patient, then apply one remedy in the middle of the head, one on each earlobe, and one at the back of the head.
And three on the neck folds, if you need for the relaxation of the body more than that and the patient is capable for it under a reason, and the illness is strong and persisting, then apply four remedies on the lumbar area's folds. Continue with the application of remedies until they burn the skin as much as possible, then raise your hand and treat it according to what was mentioned until he heals if God wills. And let the dressing be oily.
The Tenth Chapter.
In this, it is epilepsy.
Only the epileptic affected by phlegm should have his brain cleared first with large apophasis cathartics and all the remedies that we have mentioned in the previous section, when the disease is considerable and possible for taking medicines.
But if it's a child who can't bear medicines, they should use the enema and brain-clearing poultices before that for many days, with improvement in their diet.
Then he shaves his head, then performs the incision on the scalp as described previously in the method of operation, and another incision at its rear. For each century (of time) on his head, the incisions are made according to what is stated in the Falaj book, and relaxing the body on the cervical and thoracic intervertebral foramina, with the wound dressing being oily as described.
If it is a child patient, make the wound dressing soft according to this image.
The Eleventh Chapter.
In the case of smallpox.
If the cause of smallpox is bad moisture and sticky phlegm, perform the incisions as we have mentioned in the Falaj book.
If the cause of smallpox is a preference towards black and the body of the patient excessively moist, clear his brain as described in the previous section.
Then shave the head of the patient, then make a tight wad like a circle from cotton and put it in the center of his head. The patient should be seated comfortably, touching each side with each hand. Then take one pound of old sheep tallow.
Then he heats it on the fire to a moderate heat as much as can be tolerated by the finger if inserted in it. Then he evacuates it in the middle of his head in the circle and leaves him until it cools down. He does this with every week along with all his good treatments until he gets rid of it, God willing.
And if you wish to weaken it, puncture it with many small holes without touching the iron with your hand. The smell will emerge, for this type of khey (a term used in traditional medicine) moistens the brain moderately.
Then place it on cotton that has been soaked in oil or chicken fat.
The second chapter.
In the water of khey that descends into the eye.
If you notice the beginning of water descending into the eye by the symptoms mentioned in this section, act quickly with the patient to cleanse his head and protect him from all wetness. Have him bathe in cold water for several days.
Then, once again shave his head and puncture the khey in the middle of his forehead. Then puncture two kheys on each cheek if water starts descending into both eyes or from one side only if it is into one eye.
Then, using the iron, cut all the veins and arteries beneath the skin. Make sure that each khey (puncture) is as long as the width of both cheeks to avoid bleeding.
If you see anything of it, cut it at its place with any treatment that is possible for you and we will come to discuss how to release the arteries and cut them while preventing bleeding.
And it may weaken under the bones in the temples with two strong kheys (punctures).
Chapter Thirteen.
In cases of chronic weeping.
If the tears are chronic and constant, having originated from the veins and arteries located on the head's surface, outside the skull, and if they are characterized by a cold, thick, phlegmatic flow, then for this type of watery discharge as described at the beginning of the water flowing out. A method for the center of the head and two near the jaws, two under the temples below the bones. If an increase is needed, add a similar method on each side of the eyelid at the end of the eyebrow with a small lump.
Chapter Fourteen.
In the treatment of nasal issues.
If treating it with what we have mentioned did not work, proceed with three consecutive nights of quick treatment for the person in despair. Then shave his head and apply the middle method using an oily lump. Then apply with the sebaceous lump, two near the eyebrows beneath the hair slightly. Be cautious not to cut the vein; this is an example of a sebaceous lump.
Chapter Fifteen.
In the treatment for relaxing the eyelid.
If the eyelid relaxes due to disease or moisture, treat with an eyelid method using this semi-circular lump.
And if you wish, treat above the eyebrows slightly with two each side, spacing them away from the jaws, and ensure that the length of each method is along the eyebrow.
Do not overuse your lump, but apply until it burns about one-third of the skin. The shape of the lump should be as shown here.
The sixteenth chapter.
In the corner of the eye lid.
If its eyelashes turn inward and scratch the inside of the eye, there are two types in the corner [of the eyelid]. It is either by fire or by burning medicine, and if it is by fire then you order the afflicted one to abstain from touching his eyelashes until they grow out and become even.
If his eyelashes stick when they grow back, you tie his eyes with a band to prevent them from moving until they grow out and become even. When they do grow out and are even, place the head of the afflicted person on a stone and then draw a mark on the eyelid in the shape of an asafoetida leaf using a reed.
The mark begins near the eyelashes, then under the lower lid you place cotton soaked in egg white or saliva of the camel snout. Then heat your iron until it resembles this shape.
Then you apply the heated shape to the skin little by little in many repetitions until the surface of the skin resembling an asafoetida leaf is completely burned off. A sign that your operation was successful is when you see the eyelid turn white and the hair has risen from the eye lid.
Then raise your hand and leave him for three days. Afterwards, apply cotton dipped in oil until the scab comes off, then treat him with medicine until he recovers if God wills. If any hair returns after a while and relaxes the eyelid, this is an indication of healing.
Repeat the treatment in that area as you did at first. If hair is found on the lower eyelid, pull it out until it returns to its natural position and does not fall into the eye. As for treatment with burning medicine, you should order the afflicted one to refrain from touching his eyelashes until they grow out evenly.
Then create from the paper a sheet of skin, then take ordinary soap and unlit tallow from each, weighing about dirham or similar, grind them thoroughly into a good grind, and do this with the wheel so that they don't dry out. Then spread it onto the paper which you have made into the shape of an ace sheet, and place it on one or both eyelids. Place under the eye cotton soaked in egg white, and place the tip of the garlic inside your hand.
Place your index finger over the medicine and gently compress it. As you move it, touch the garlic to the medicine when you feel a sensation of heat from the garlic because it finds pleasure similar to fire in it. If it keeps finding the heat, leave the medicine alone and move it with your finger. When the heat ceases, remove the medicine and wash the eye with water.
And observe, if you see that the eyelid has risen as it rises when burned with fire or cuttings and if not, apply more medicine to the spot where the medicine did not work and was not cured until you complete your task and burn the eye. Then place cotton with fat on it until the scab of the burn falls off.
Then, treat it with the donkey's milk ointment or another until it heals. It is advisable for you when working to be extremely cautious that nothing falls into the eye from the medicine; if the eyelid relaxes after days and there's a bit of hair in the eye, we fear it might cause damage.
Then, apply the medicine to the spot that relaxed in the eyelid specifically as you did at first, then treat it until it heals. This is a sheet of paper resembling an ace.
Know that people's eyes may vary in size, so according to this, let your treatment be for them as well, it is not a secret path of rightness for those who have expertise in such matters.
The Seventeenth Chapter.
In the chapter concerning the use of light in ophthalmology.
If you treat the light according to what we have explained in sections of diseases, but the treatment is not effective, it would be necessary for this property to be reinforced.
The willed is commanded that he should place his head on your stone and hold his head between your hands as a confinement, not to move nor shake his head.
Then, place a cotton ball soaked in the white of the egg or in saliva of the batson on his eyes. Then heat the iron as depicted here.
It should be shaped like a feather tube of the eagle from one end which has the hole for the needle, and if you wish it may have an open end. Otherwise, it can be cutted like a reed, but this hollowed tool is better for your work Insha'Allah.
Then, squeeze the light if it is open and extract the wick from it or if it is not open you will open it to remove the wax. Then put the iron on it as it is very protective; hold it with your hand until it reaches the bone.
Move your hand slightly away from the bulb of the eye towards the nose so you don't accidentally touch it or worry the patient as you might burn the eyelid. If you reach bone in the first attempt, otherwise try again with the iron if needed.
Leave him for three days, then apply cotton with butter on him and treat him with dried ointment until he recovers. If it has been forty days and he doesn't recover, apply the strong medicine until the bone is exposed and remove it as explained in its chapter if Allah wills.
Another method that some pioneers mentioned regarding the lion's tooth, it would cut into the place of the lion's tooth then put a thin plug in the same cut. This is its depiction.
And pour in a weight equivalent to one dirham of melted lead. Hold the plug firmly and well with your hand, not allowing any movement from the object inside so that the molten lead does not leak out of its eye. It is advisable to place cotton that has been soaked in egg white or water on the eye of the object.
If lead is poured into the place of the tooth, it burns off that area and cleans it in a miraculous way. If the tooth is cleaned using what we have described regarding the treatment and care, otherwise, one must resort to using an nostril piercing procedure and placing the tooth back in its nasal passage according to its specific anatomy as will be discussed later.
The eighteenth chapter.
In the case of splitting the lip.
Often, a split in the lip occurs and is called the hairline. Especially in boys' lips; it happens frequently. If the treatment of this split as we have mentioned in the previous sections did not work, you should heat up a small, sharp needle like this.
Its opening should be at the tip of the needle, then place it carefully in the groove of a wheel on the same split so that the tool reaches to the depth of the split. Then treat it with a heated file until it heals if God wills.
The nineteenth chapter.
In the case of severe toothache in the mouth.
If it occurs at the root of the tooth or in the gum, or around the roots and gums where there's a boil that is hard and then bursts, forming pus-filled tooth. If treatment did not work after trying, you should heat up a needle according to what fits inside the tooth.
Then the nurse enters in the hole of the rhinoceros and holds your hand until the nail reaches deep inside to its entire length, this process is performed one or two times then you treat it with the treatment we mentioned till it heals if God wills.
If the material is severed and it heals, otherwise an inspection over the area is required and the dead bone is removed according to what will be described in its section if God willing.
The twenty-first chapter.
In it, the contractions and the relaxed condition of the larynx.
If the larynx relaxes due to moisture and contractions occur, treat it with medicines if it does not subside. Place the head of the patient on your shoulder then heat up the iron that will be illustrated after this, place the tube on the contractions after you have done that.
The iron is inserted into the patient by a wheel and the nurse holds your hand slightly so that the patient feels the heat of the fire reaching to the base of the contractions, then you lift your hand. Then you repeat the iron over the contractions several times as desired. The patient fills their mouth with salt water.
He holds it for an hour and throws it, the moving contractions become fixed while the relaxed larynx tightens and dries out the old moisture.
The twenty-first chapter.
In it, the pain of the larynx.
If the larynx pain is due to cold or there are maggots inside and if the treatment with medicines does not relieve it, there are two ways to treat in this case, either by buttering (applying butter) or by burning (applying heat).
If it is regarding tallow, then take cow's tallow and boil it in an iron pot or a pot made of copper. Then take some cotton and twist it on the tip of a medical tool, dip it into the boiled tallow and place it onto the painful tooth using the wheel motion, hold it until it cools down.
Then repeat this several times until the heat reaches the root of the tooth. Alternatively, you may dip wool or cotton into cold tallow and place it onto the painful tooth, then put a protected nail over it so that the fire can reach to the bottom of the tooth.
And if it's done with fire, you should use a copper or iron tube, there must be some water in its body so that the heat of the fire doesn't reach inside the tooth. Then heat up the iron rod until it reaches the shape, place it on the same tooth and hold your hand until the rod cools down. Do this several times.
If the pain goes away either that same day or another, then after this treatment, the patient should fill their mouth with good tallow and hold it for an hour, then throw it out. This is what the iron rod looks like.
You can heat it on any side and according to what is possible, this is how the tube appears.
The twenty-second section.
In treating pigs.
If the pigs are affected by phlegm and cold moisture and do not respond to maturation through medicines, and you want quick maturation, then heat up the hollow iron rod that has its ends inserted.
Smoke should come out from the other end when treating, place it protected on the same lump once and twice if needed until you reach the depth of the lump. If the lump is small, make the iron rod according to the size of the lump.
Then leave it for three days and carry on him a cotton ball soaked in oil until what burned by fire goes away. Then treat it with ointment and threads until it heals if God willing.
The twenty-third chapter.
In the middle of the cavity for the voice and the constriction of the breath.
If moisture dominates the bronchial tube, especially if this is accompanied by a cold mood, it may be necessary to first evacuate the urine with diuretics, then apply soothing treatment in tapping at the base of the neck when it's at its lowest point.
Be careful not to reach the trachea with your fingers, and don't burn any skin except half a finger. Then apply another soothing treatment at the articulation of the neck at the end of its strongest hair strand, with the tool being pointed on the skin as described earlier.
Then treat him with what has been mentioned until he heals if God willing.
The twenty-fourth chapter.
In the cavity of lung disease and coughing.
If the cough and lung disease are due to cold moisture, not urine fever or sputum, and the illness is chronic, apply two soothing treatments above the lower tracheal cartilage in soft empty low areas, and another treatment halfway across the chest between the breasts.
And the tool should be pointed like the previously described image, and if you wish, it can be a small dot with the needle called 'point' which has been illustrated in puncturing earache pains, and the dots are around thirty to that number.
Then treat it with what has been mentioned and specified until it heals. You can make a three-pronged scalpel in this shape, and use it quickly because you can apply three knives at once on one operation using it. This is the image of the scalpel.
The twenty-fifth chapter.
In an ear loop.
If the shoulder blade recedes due to slippery moisture or does not hold when it is pushed back until it becomes a habit of pushing then it will recede with any slightest movement as we have seen. It should be that the jaw recedes first. Then the patient lies on his back or on the correct side. Then, with your left hand, you lift the skin inside the elbow to the top. If the joint has receded into the body.
Then heat the two-pronged scalpel, which is shown in this image.
Then you use it to cut the skin until it reaches the other side, resulting in a shape of four knives. You might use a scalpel with two prongs for this, making the knife shape six when using one with three prongs. The prongs should be on an angle relative to the direction of cut.
This is an image of the scalpel with three prongs.
And this number might be increased by one, making it eight knives. Then you carry out the operation using pointed balls on the knives with salt. The patient is kept immobile until strength returns, unless the dislocation was upwards, which happens rarely.
Apply one or many well-sharpened single-point knives to the thigh bone. This will strengthen the joint and eliminate moisture, thus healing the dislocation.
Chapter Twenty-Sixth.
In the stomach region.
If there occurs in the stomach a large amount of cold and moisture, to remove it from his mood, and increased urination to him. After treatment with various remedies if they do not cure, it is necessary that he lie on his back, extend his legs and arms, then press three keels (referring to certain parts of the body). A keel under the spoon of the chest as wide as an inch with a cylindrical pin and two keels below each side of the single keel until it forms a triangular shape between them. They should not meet if filled, and the depth of the keel is equal to one third of the thickness of the skin, and the shape of the keel should be kept like this.
In this manner and up to this extent without any excess.
And if you wish, press one large keel in the middle of the stomach in this manner.
And the cylinder with which this single keel is pressed should be circular in shape, as depicted.
And the stomach can be pricked with a dot for those who are upset because you want to teach on the stomach a point according to the amount you desire with a needle, then press it with a pointed cylinder. Then treat it with the prescribed medication until it heals,.
Chapter Twenty-Seventh.
In the cold liver area.
If a symptom appears in the liver indicating pain due to coldness, moisture or fumes, such that it has an excessive and abnormal egress from its natural mood, then treatment with the remedies mentioned was applied for the intestines if they did not heal. In order for the patient to lie on his back and learn with ink three stabs of this form and quantity, precisely like that on the liver below the intestines where the human being's recess ends.
After each cut, there should be a cut every width of a finger. The cuts should be straight along the body and your hand shouldn't touch the awl firmly indeed.
Let the amount of skin you burn be half, no more. The patient should stand on his feet; if he can't stand, lie down spreading his legs and lifting his arms. This is an image of the awl.
You may use the surgical knife to make these cuts if you have a skilled assistant and are careful in your craft, making sure not to focus too much on the cut so that you don't burn all the skin. Instead, it will burn the abdomen reaching towards the intestines, for the skin there is thin; hence be aware of this.
The twenty-fourth chapter.
In removing a tumor in the liver with cuts.
If an extraction is presented in the liver and you want to determine whether that tumor is within the liver tissue or the diaphragm, then if it is within the liver tissue, the patient will feel a weight and pain but without intensity.
And if it is within the diaphragm of the liver, there will be intense pain and you will see that doctors have become weary of treating it. It is necessary for the patient to lie on his back then learn at the warm spot with ink.
Then heat the awl in fire; this is the awl that resembles the needle and here is its image. Refining it until a single method burns the entire skin until it reaches the wound, resulting in the expulsion of all the pus. Then treating it with purulent treatments until healing occurs.
And this kind of fire should not be used except by one who has advanced in the field of medicine, and these diseases have been tried on him by experience multiple times. Then he would undertake such work and leaving it to me is preferable.
The twenty-ninth chapter.
In the fire of cautery.
The first type of cautery uses the origin of the hot needle for cold cautery on this kind, which is: take one long root from the origin of the dry reed that you can find, being as thick as a finger, then dip it in oil and place it in the fire. Then, refine it between the connection of the throat and two small fires slightly tilted towards the neck area. Two large ones above the breasts in the space between the third and fourth ribs.
Also, two fires between the fifth and sixth ribs slightly tilted backward. Another fire in the middle of the chest, another over the stomach. Three fires behind one is between the shoulders, two on either side of the spine below the fire that would be between the elbows.
It should not be that your hand goes deep into the fire, but it should show through the skin as a burn. Some of the pioneers have mentioned that some people use an iron tool similar to half a millimeter and protect it by inserting it between the ribs until they reach the tumor.
The pus comes out as we mentioned in the liver tumor, and in this burning with fire from the gallbladder, either the patient dies of his heat or he becomes a chronic one without recovery.
The Thirty-first Chapter.
In this liver.
If you treat liver diseases with the remedies we have mentioned in this part, and if your treatment is ineffective, it could be due to three aspects; each one of them being correct. One might need to apply three or four wicks at intervals along the length of the liver.
In the form of liver wicks that are shown, they should be placed with a finger's width or more between each wick along the liver. The thickness of the applicator is as we described in applying to the liver wick; do not plunge your hand into the wick and let the image of the patient lie on their back.
The other aspect involves lifting the skin in front of the liver where the right rib cage ends, and then lifting the skin in front of the liver where the left side's rib cage ends. Lift your skin horizontally across the body so that the wicks are laid along the length of the body.
Then the two wicks are inserted very carefully so that they penetrate through the skin on the other side. After that, remove the applicator; this results in four wicks. If you wish, you can use another applicator with three tubes instead.
Then treat the application site after leaving it open to expel pus for a long time. This is more effective than other treatments you have previously mentioned.
The Thirty-fifth Chapter.
In the application of sprinkling water.
The application of sprinkling water is only beneficial for the abundant, special type of water. If you failed to heal with the treatments we mentioned in this section, it's recommended to apply four wicks around the navel and one on the stomach.
Another incision on the liver and an incision on the spleen, two incisions behind his back between the ribs, one closer to his chest and another closer to his stomach. The depth of the incision should be close to the thickness of the skin, then leave the incision open for a long time to allow pus to drain.
Do not cease the treatment of the invalid after making the incision as much as is necessary for the gathering of those responsible, so that recovery comes quickly. The image of the needle with which his back is pierced becomes cylindrical like what has been advanced in its description and the needle with which his back is pierced becomes oily.
The Second and Thirty-Second Chapter.
In the incisions of the feet and legs.
If they swell in the metatarsals and fill with yellow water, it may be necessary to pierce on the back of the foot at the puncture between the tarsal and the phalanx.
Hold your needle in hand and do not twist it. Then raise your hand and don't put it back immediately; for the yellow water will drain out, and this is how the needle should look like.
Then, two incisions are made on the legs, two each in every leg. The incision is at the needle end of the puncture tool and it's along the length of the leg; one incision below the knee and another near to its middle towards down the leg. Each thigh also has two incisions.
Leave the incision open without treating it for a long time, allowing water to drain from it. Then treat it with all that we have mentioned before.
The Thirty-Third Chapter.
In the case of diarrhea.
If the diarrhea is due to cold and moisture, even affecting the retaining and digesting powers in the stomach and small intestine, then various treatments are applied. However, if it does not heal, I found the patient suitable for surgical intervention with a large incision on his stomach. Based on the previous treatment in the stomach with a winding motion, four gentle incisions are made around the navel using the smooth needle. A large incision is made on cotton above the tongue or two incisions.
If I find that moisture is abundant and the patient suitable for this, then make a large incision on the elbow and one on each rib. Perhaps add two small ones near the stomach with the larger one. This is a successful treatment whose benefits cannot fail if God wills.
The fortieth chapter.
In the incision of the sitting hole.
If there are recurrent or single, thick and cold mixtures in the sitting hole causing infections, and despite treatment with what we have mentioned in this section, the treatment did not work, then I would perform a procedure on the patient involving three incisions at the lower back below the waist, slightly like an equilateral triangle.
A procedure is conducted underneath the navel with the width of two fingers. If I assessed that his stomach might have cooled down and his food does not digest properly, seeing his face swollen, then a large incision is made on the stomach following what was previously mentioned, as well as an incision on his liver. And another one on the gallbladder with a smooth needle and I leave the incision open for some time, then treat him until he heals if God wills.
Chapter Thirty-Four
In the chapter of the lungs.
After cutting it, if you cut the lungs, heat up an awl that resembles a corkscrew. Then insert this tool into the cut lung and hold your hand until the awl reaches the bleeding wound from which blood is flowing. This should be done once or twice.
If the lungs are numerous, treat each one in accordance with what we described, and then treat them with appropriate ointments until they heal. If their size is large on cotton, it may be more beneficial for treatment.
Chapter Thirty-Five
In the gallbladder and its surroundings.
If the calculus does not reach the cut and if you do not proceed as described in its place, it may be relieved by the operation. If this occurs to one of the gallbladders and discharges pus from it along with bad dampness, then the first thing that should be done is to measure yourself against a delicate needle.
Then, determine the depth of the gallbladder with a needle. Heat up an awl that resembles a corkscrew and insert it into the gallbladder while holding it in alignment with the width of the gallbladder and the depth that the needle went in. Prepare for the operation using the forceps until all those harmful substances are burned out, once or twice or three times depending on your need.
And be cautious of burning nerves if they exist or large veins, and if the gallbladder leads to a kidney stone or a bowel obstruction.
Be cautious of all these areas, however, if the gallbladder is located in a place of inflammation and you've determined that it's not embedded, then treat the area until it heals. If the site closes off and stops receiving materials and remains like this for some time, know that it has healed perfectly.
And if the material does not cease to come out, know that it is toxic or in a rotting bone or something similar of what will be mentioned at its place.
The thirty-fourth chapter.
In the kidney area.
If pain occurs in the kidney accompanied by cold or thick wind, and there is a decrease in urine production, it should be recommended to use two methods on the same kidney as each kidney would have a medicinal paste used for that purpose. It may require three treatments at the same table, resulting in three properly arranged stages which can provide more benefit.
The thirty-eighth chapter.
In the bladder area.
If weakness and laxity occur in the bladder, accompanied by cold and moisture to such an extent that urine is not retained, apply a method below the pubic area on the bladder where the hair of discomfort begins. Apply another one to the right side of the pubic area and yet another one to its northern side.
And apply after the method from each side up to the point of the fist's length, a method at the lower back or two if needed. Make sure the paste used is medicinal as previously mentioned.
The thirty-ninth chapter.
In the womb area.
If cold and moisture are found in the womb, it may cause disconnection of the blood supply, damage to its texture, or difficulty in its movements. In such cases, it is recommended to apply three methods around the pubic area, as we described in the case of the bladder. The stitching on cotton underneath the shoulder or two stitches, and make the needle perforated.
Chapter Forty.
In it, you remove the thigh.
You might install false secretions into the buttocks, causing them to move out of their place. The sign is that one leg becomes longer than the other when measured against each other; if you find a gap where the removal should be, you should fix the injured buttock in its rightful position like half a circle for fixing.
After you learn around the true one as it turns, causing its truth to be in the center of the circle. If the needle presented in the stomach stitch does not satisfy you, use three stitches with the large oily needle.
Make the stitch depth according to the thickness of all the skin, then heal it until it heals if God willing.
Chapter Fifty-One.
In the sweat stitch for women.
If there is pain in the buttock and this is due to cold secretions, treat the patient with what we mentioned earlier for treatment. If the treatment does not relieve and the condition persists, it may be necessary to simplify the mixture of thick materials by using honey from the honeycomb or mastic resin and similar items.
Then, make it with the stitch in two ways either by sewing with burned medicines or by fire. The stitch made by fire is on many fronts; one of them is to fix it at the true buttock itself as three triangular stitches like this picture.
You make its depth suitable and you have a distance of grip between each stitch according to the thickness of the finger, with oily needles. It may be one stitch in the middle at the head of the buttock itself resulting in four stitches, or if you prefer, use circular stitches like those mentioned in the waist stitch as one stitch for removing the thigh.
To form a circle around the entire thigh, burning all of the skin, this is the characteristic of the smallpox in female sweat if the pain is necessarily confined to the thigh itself and does not extend to the buttock or leg.
If it extends to the thigh and leg, then there are two smallpox spots on the thigh at the point indicated by the pain as instructed. A spot above the buttocks using four fingers towards the back slightly, and the blister should be sharp. The depth of the spot is only according to the thickness of the skin.
And if the pain indicates that it extends towards the toes, there are two or three or more blisters as directed by you, if needed. And if the pain is under the knee towards the leg, then there should be a single sharp blister there.
And when making any blister, ensure that the blister does not reach a point of burning through a major nerve or artery. Doing so could result in serious or temporary harm according to the patient's condition.
I have seen individuals who experienced burning above the buttocks and blistering. This resulted in leg swelling, and in severe cases, all of their legs were affected leading to diarrhea and death afterwards. If the pain is felt in both sides, they should experience blisters with this exact characteristic.
Some wise scholars have mentioned the characteristics of thigh blisters. They create something resembling a hoof from iron, its diameter is half a span, and it's slightly thicker than the pit of a date's seed or less. Inside that hoof, there are two smaller cups, and another cup inside them.
And it is placed between each pair of blisters according to the length of a fist. The cups are open on both sides and their height is towards a fist or two fists. A handle made from iron which is fastened in the cups, this is its appearance.
Then it is heated in fire until it turns red and is thrown out, then placed on the right hip bone and spine lying on the correct side. Then three cylindrical pieces are applied to him all at once. He is left for three days and ointment is spread over him. The wound remains open for days.
It is then treated with the ointment until recovery, said the author of this book. This type of cylinder was rarely used due to its inconvenience and unpleasant appearance, and few people could tolerate it. However, for those who are good at using it and have been affected by it in their place, they were able to endure it.
As for the cylinder with burned medicines, it is to make two almost circular devices where pitch or iron rust from the hinges of a door would drip inside.
In their interiors, there should be a height of about two decades or around that. There should be a thickness like the density of the finger between them and it should be open at the bottom and open at the top. It should have been connected to each other in this way.
Then it is placed on the right hip bone and spine lying on the correct side, and your hand is smoothly pressed. Then, water from two circles is poured in between which has been heated by a little fire. It is held for about an hour. The patient bears the pain of burning and finds it like being burned with fire.
Until the pain eases, then lift your hand with the device and wipe away the hot water from his entire hip using sweet water. Leave him for three days and bear it until the soot of burning leaves, and let him rest as pus comes out. It is most effective in usefulness.
Then treat him with ointments until he recovers. If the pain extends to the thigh or leg, make a container for him according to the size of water that would be held on the hip, whichever is similar. This is the quality of hot water which has been proved in an article about correcting medicines.
Take from the gauze salt and from the raw bone, an unlit portion of each. Crush them and place them in a new pot which has been pierced at its bottom with one small hole. Place under the bottom of this pot another pot that is greased to some extent.
And pour on the gauze and the bone, a little water from the fresh spring that covers them by an inch after you have pressed them well with your hand. Leave the pot until the hot water drops to the bottom of the greased pot. Then collect all this water and then pour it over another piece of bone and another piece of gauze which are also renewed.
If it's then extremely hot, it becomes very effective in many medical procedures and in the care of all organs because it performs the action of fire exactly, and some remedies can be used to strengthen the muscles like thlasia, honey from the pomegranate tree, bone mixed with soap which are beneficial.
Galenus claimed a story about an old man who treated pain in the joints and the sweating of women. He made his treatment extremely effective and he claimed that no other treatment is needed, and it cures after just one application.
Until he might even carry the bath and come out of it cured. He would take from the green soap if available, but if there was no green one, he would take the dry one and improve its effectiveness with a little oil, then apply it on the joint where pain is or on the leg or on the thigh where pain occurs.
You heat and cool the pot for three hours or as long as the patient feels relief from the burning sensation, then he takes a bath when his body smells of water. The pain disappears and he heals with the permission of God. If it doesn't heal, you apply the compress again after ten days once more.
If God wills, he will cleanse. And know that no one should use these medicines unless the body has exhausted itself, and Dioscorides had mentioned that if the milk of camels became strong with it, then it was beneficial from its sweat.
And the kyiyy (a medicinal preparation) of this nature, wool is taken and it is drunk in old olive oil, and it is placed on the deep place that is between the thumb and index finger of the hand, being closer to the index finger. Then take a dried camel's sweat.
And light it with fire until it becomes a burning ember, then place it on the wool and let it burn out before taking another one; continue this process until the sensation reaches through the back to the thigh, easing the pain thanks to God's will. This method of kyiyy is called the camel's sweat treatment.
The second and fortieth chapter.
In the treatment of back pain.
Back pain may arise from many reasons, either due to a fall or blow, excessive exhaustion and so on. It is characterized by the accumulation of cold moisture. The treatment, however, applies only to this category alone.
The one that results from the accumulation of cold matter should, after allowing for a period of rest and using substances like the one known as "mentat" or similar, have three rows of heat on his back where the pain is located, this being across the width of the table. After having determined its position by using a writing tool in each row, apply five treatments or more according to what you judge considering the exhaustion and strength of the individual.
The treatment for this is to heat the point with a pitted tool. If you wish, you can apply three or four treatments using an intermediate banded pin in this manner.
Chapter Three and Twenty-Fourth.
In the beginning of the section.
This condition is often observed in young children, and the first sign of it appears when they experience difficulty breathing upon standing or movement. You will find that certain areas at the end of their back develop nodules that protrude out among other lumps.
If you see this and want to stop it, use a file in the form of a circle as shown here. Take the knife to cut at an equal height on both sides of the lump. If desired, you can also use a file around the lump in two or three rows of points, ensuring that these points are close to each other. Then, treat the area until it heals as we have described.
And remember not to use the knife in the section that results from muscle spasms.
Chapter Four and Forty.
In the case of gout and joint pain.
If joint pains are due to cold moisture, they can affect any body part. If such pains occur in the legs, it is customary for doctors to call this special gout.
If the cold gout is treated with various forms of treatment as mentioned in the division and if the pains do not subside, then using a knife to remove them involves cutting around both legs joints. The knife should have an oily medium consistency like this.
And if you need to puncture on the leg, do so with a puncuturing knife. If the pains ascend to the knees or other joints, this condition often occurs; using this oily medium consistency knife, cut around each knee three or four times from each side in the same manner.
If you need more than this, remove it and don't deepen your hand in the wound, but only around the thickness of the skin. If the pains have reached up to the thighs or back, then use what we mentioned about the knife under its section.
If the pains are only in the hands, dot around the wrists as if you circle two lines. If the pains remain in the fingers, dot them on each joint and across the hand's comb, if after some days the pains have risen to the upper arms or thighs.
Remove them from all directions, and let there be no negligence in good surgery practice and taking medicine. If he has good nutrition and expels phlegm, then with this kind of treatment, if God wills, he will recover.
The forty-fourth chapter.
In the treatment of baldness.
If a boil appears in the scrotum and some pus and scabs descend to the penis, especially if this is an early case that began recently, it would be advisable to instruct the patient to skip meals. It should also use what clears his bowels from inside.
Then have him lie on his back between your hands. Command him to hold himself until the scabs or pus protrudes, then push it with your finger. Then use a needle to trace the boil under the ribs towards the hip bone, as if drawing half of a circle, its ends reaching up to the body.
Then it describes this image of the process.
Until a white color appears, which expels the evil. Then push back the pus or scabs inside him. After that, have two servants place their hands on his body to prevent the pus from protruding. Have another servant prepare a bed for him between his legs and place a mat under him. A second servant should also tie his legs.
On the back of his hand, he holds his hands and then places the hammer on the same mark. He uses the hammer upright and straight while holding it firmly until it reaches the bone or performs another strike if it didn't reach the bone in the first attempt.
Preserve your strength to prevent the exposure of fat while searing, so as not to burn it. This could either result in death or severe injury for the patient. Know that if you fail to reach the bone with your sear iron, your operation would be unsuccessful. It is necessary to have a children's hammer smooth on their skin and on adults' skin too.
Then, treat the sear area with tallow for three days until it heals and stops scarring. After that, apply other ointments. The patient should lie on his back for forty days to ensure the wound has fully healed before being able to move around.
It is necessary to prepare his food for the duration of his treatment in a way that soothes his stomach, so as to avoid excess when urinating and defecating. After this period, if he wishes to stand up after the forty days, use a secure girdle and keep it on for another forty days. This helps reduce fatigue from excessive eating, drinking, and severe sneezing.
If this method is followed, the complete cure will be achieved if God wills it. I'll mention the treatment for scarring of the throat in its respective section if God permits. As for the hernia that occurs elsewhere in the abdomen and starts small, if you wish to prevent it from increasing, then treat the hernia with a constant pressure bandage according to its size. The amount of skin you sear should be like a third, then treat it with what we've mentioned. If God wills, it won't increase. Some early sources suggest using a triangular hammer on the hernia in this manner to strengthen it.
After learning the technique of puncturing the boil, where the line on its surface is above the boil and another line below it. You then place your hand in the middle with one square finger movement, starting from the first move. The first move is easier and better if Allah wills.
The sixtieth chapter.
In the second square.
If there is a fall or strike in some organs causing pain that lasts for a long time and no relief comes from medication, it should be treated by rubbing with an iron point. Each organ should have a square according to its size, strength and weakness.
Heals the pain and square from it; if he recovers from the first square, then apply another iron point. Otherwise, reapply the iron point because this type of pains tend to move from one organ to what is close to it. It should be followed up with applying more squares until the patient recovers.
The seventy-fourth chapter.
In the square for leprosy.
As for those affected with leprosy, they can benefit greatly from the iron point treatment. Particularly so in cases of leprosy caused by phlegm and black mucus.
If you wish to apply the iron point treatment, observe the leprosy. If it's in its early stages and has been treated as we've described, without showing any signs of improvement or slowing down, fearing that infection might spread throughout his entire body, then apply five iron points on the head. The first one in the usual spot on the head, the second slightly below it near the forehead at the end of hairline. Two more apply to temples and one behind on the mastoid process. Keep your hand on the iron point for a little while until it has a slight effect on the bone.
The peeling off of its layers facilitates the inhalation of dense fumes from it and hardening too, just like in the liver as previously explained. If however, the gangrene has been lingering on the feces and a clear manifestation has appeared, it would be necessary to harden these substances that we mentioned in the introduction. A lump at the end of the nose, two lumps on the cheeks, two on the neck grooves and six on the back grooves. There is a large one on the penis when it fails to retract and another above it in the same plane and two on each buttock, one for each buttock. Two on the knees, one on each knee, two on the elbows, two on the hips, two on the shoulders, and two on the ribs. Hardening at every joint of his hands' and feet's fingers as well as on each heel of his feet and binding both his arms.
Take care not to burn the nerve at the heel for fear of burning them, and it may harden on the astragalus bone, another one can be placed in the mouth of the stomach, and yet another one on the liver. Know that every addition of a lump was better and more beneficial.
Remember that the patient in fever does not feel the pain of the lump as the one with the right condition does because his body is numbed, and it should be known that the adjustment for the large and small lumps depends on the organs and joints according to the properties of metals mentioned before.
Then treat the lump with corn flour mixed with honey and other treatments until it heals if Allah wills.
The forty-eighth chapter.
In the lump of numbness, when a part of the body becomes numb and is treated with medicines, ointments, and dressings but does not heal; remove its own numb part by lumps according to the size or smallness of the bone corresponding to the organ, make it a lump slightly thicker than the skin.
Then treat it with the ointment until it heals, and sometimes it may be affected by a certain anaesthesia that appears on the hand and foot at the exit of the nerve which moves this limb, hence the anaesthesia.
And only one who is well-versed in the anatomy of organs and exit points of the moving nerves in the body should perform this.
The forty-fourth chapter.
In the case of scabies.
If the scabies persists and no remedy from medical remedies works, cover it with a paste in which there is a slight depth according to the thickness of the skin until the whiteness disappears and its color changes.
Then treat it with powdered lentil mixed with the paste of rosewood, camel's milk or goose blood from each one part. Mix all and apply it on a bandage which will be adhered to the area until it heals.
The fiftieth chapter.
In the case of cancer.
If the cancer is in its beginning stages and you want to stop it, treat it with a small cupping around it as if you are rotating it. Some of the wise have mentioned that a strong paste should be used at its center. However, I do not consider this because I expect it to dry up, which I have witnessed several times.
The correct method is to apply it around it in a circle as we said, or with multiple pastes.
The fifty-first chapter.
In the case of indigestion.
If indigestion occurs in one of the digestive organs, causing delays in its maturation either due to its active beneficial factors or due to the age and low blood volume of an elderly person, or due to time, and if you want to hasten its maturation, cup it with small multiple pastes covering it densely.
Then leave it because it accelerates the ripening; if you want to cook it with fire, increase the strength of the furnace which has this as its picture.
And pour it in the middle of the dough until the skin penetrates and becomes what is below, making it easier for pus to drain. Then treat her with what is required until she is freed from infection.
The Second and Fifty-First Chapter.
In cooking the food.
The 'akla, or ulceration, is simply a malady that consumes the organ it affects, just like fire devours dead wood. If I see an ulcer in a place where it can be cooked with fire, I would ignite a charcoal furnace of small and large pins according to what suits that particular location where the ulcer exists.
Then, from every side, she should be applied until the entire decay is excised without leaving any residue at all. Then leave it for three days and apply powdered sulfur with oil to the areas heated by the charcoal iron, so that all the skin scales are removed along with all of the decay.
Then treat it with herbal ointments for the meat, and if after three days I see that the meat has grown healthily without any decay, otherwise reapply the fire to what remains of the decaying parts. The ulcer can be treated with strong medicine as well.
He serves the function of fire more effectively and efficiently. I mentioned treating it with strong medicine in Part Three; take it from there whenever you need it.
The Third and Fifty-First Chapter.
In using inverted and non-inverted needles.
Often, this reason occurs in the heels of the feet. It is a hard thing that grabs the heel and there are two aspects to it: either heating it with fire or soaking it in sharp water.
As for heating it with fire, this involves heating a dried heated iron brush resembling an eagle's feather made of iron around the entire circumference of the nail and making it thin at the edge. Then apply it on the nail, then move your hand with the iron brush around the nail until the iron brush reaches to the depth of the nail.
She leaves it for three days to benefit from the pus, then applies it with a heated and salted broom on the plaster, leaving the dressing overnight; it comes off from its roots. Then she treats the wound site with herbal ointment for scabies until it heals, if the nails are not bent back.
This often occurs on the surface of the body, particularly in hands and feet. It's recommended to use a brass tube or iron pipe or an eagle's feather brush, dipping it into a small amount of sharp water, then lowering it onto the nail or splinter.
Hold your hand as you move it slightly in a small flick motion, allowing the edge of the tube to affect the root of the nail. The sharp water will find its way into the root of the nail and allow the patient to endure for a short time on the sting of the sharp water.
Then leave it; the nail will come off completely. Do this to each one until you have treated all parts of the body that are affected, then treat their sites after they heal with ointments that promote flesh growth.
The forty-fifth chapter.
In discussing the nail.
If frostbite affects a nail, or fever to one quarter of the body or otherwise, four or five needles should be inserted between each spinal needle in his back and one needle in his chest. And on his stomach, a needle is placed with the oil-dipping method; then frostbite settles and the progress of the cold disease accelerates.
The fifty-fifth chapter.
In discussing the sudden bladder affliction in the body.
Sometimes, in the body pus may erupt which consists of thick foul matter from cold, rotten materials. Upon its first appearance, one should prick each soft needle head with a reed dipped in oil or by using the long tongs or with an optical glass pipette.
And the pimples should be pricked in their first eruption using this method; it does not increase or dissipate its effectiveness and frees him of his suffering except after exhausting the pus through scratching.
The sixty-fifth chapter.
In discussing the bleeding that occurs during artery ligation.
Blood often leaks from an artery that has been cut during a wound exposed from the outside or when cutting a tumor or organ and parts, making it difficult to cut.
If this happens to someone, quickly extend your hand towards the mouth of the artery and place your index finger on it, gently pulling until blood is contained under your finger and nothing leaks out. Then, heat up several small and large oil-dipping needles in a fire until they become intensely hot.
Then, she takes one either small or large depending on the wound and where the vessel ruptured. She then applies the forceps to the same vein after removing your finger with the wheel, holding onto the forceps until the blood is cut off.
If, upon lifting your finger from the opening of the artery, and extinguishing the forceps, take another forceps with the wheel from the furnace prepared forceps. Continue this procedure with one after another until the blood is cut off.
And be cautious not to burn a nerve if there is one, for this may cause blindness. Understand that when blood flows from the artery, it cannot be permanently cut; especially if the artery is large, unless by four methods: either with force as we said or by amputation if it has not already been done. And when amputated, its ends contract and the blood stops. Alternatively, it can be tied with a tight ligature or medication that reduces blood flow may be applied to stop the bleeding with firm compression.
As for those who attempt to cut it with a ligature or by squeezing the wound, or applying burned objects and such methods; they cannot permanently stop the bleeding. If you happen to expose yourself to any of these situations without having medical assistance or medicine, it would be wise to place the affected finger directly over the wound opening, as we have described.
He should be held tightly until the blood is squeezed out and appears above the wound, on the artery and finger. It should not be rinsed with extremely cold water even after it has frozen and stopped bleeding. During this time, you need to look for a forceps or medicine as needed.
The Second Gate.
In the sections of the cut, puncture, fracture and surgical procedures and similar matters.
He said, Khalifah, we have mentioned in the first chapter all diseases that can be treated by fire and burning medicine, and its reasons and causes, as well as its tools and images of similar cases. He divided this into chapters from the beginning to ancient times.
And in this chapter, I follow that path exactly, making it easier for the student to achieve what is required...
Before I begin this, you boys should know that in this chapter there are more tricks than in the first chapter concerning fire.
And because of that, the caution should be stronger in this chapter, as much work in this field often leads to blood loss which sustains life when a wound opens or a cut is made on a tumor or discharge from pus or surgery, or removal of an arrow or cutting through a stone, and so forth, all of which are accompanied by fears and risks, resulting in death in most cases.
And I advise you to avoid falling into what might cause suspicion on you, for in this profession there are many people suffering from various illnesses; some of them have been crippled by their illness and despised death.
Due to the intensity of their suffering and length of their ailments, along with the certainty from illness that points towards death; among them are those who expend their wealth for you in hopes of your health, but their disease is deadly. Therefore, it should not be for you to assist anyone of this nature impulsively.
May your caution be stronger than your desire and concern. Do not engage in anything of this matter except after acquiring certain knowledge that is confirmed by you regarding the desired outcome. Use in all treatments for your illnesses, advancement of knowledge and warning about what leads to safety.
If there is a way for you to benefit in gaining praise, glory, mention and commendation, Allah has inspired you my children. Follow His guidance; do not prohibit yourselves from correctness and success. Indeed, that is within his power. There is no god but Him.
And this chapter has been organized into sections based on what was discussed in the previous chapter from the hourglass to the sand clock, so that it may relieve you of any need for what you want if God willing.
The first chapter.
In the treatment of water that collects at the head of infants.
This condition, lithiasis, often affects infants at birth if the mother presses the head of the baby roughly during delivery. It may also occur for an unknown reason that is not identified.
I have not seen this cause in anyone other than infants, and every one of them that I saw from among them died quickly. That's why I avoided working on it. And I have seen an infant whose head was completely filled with water, the head increased every day. Until he could no longer sit on himself due to the enormity of his head and the humidity increased until it killed him.
This humidity either gathers between the skin and bone or under the bone on the skull. In this case, if the humidity is present in the space between the skin and bone and the tumor is small, it should be incised with a single longitudinal cut through the head until the water flows out; this is what we call the surgeon's technique.
If the humidity is greater and the tumor is larger, make it two intersecting cuts like this:.
And if the humidity is under the bone, its sign is to see that the head's seams are open from every side and water will decrease when you squeeze it with your hand inside; this should not be hidden from you. It would be appropriate to make three cuts in the middle of the head like this:.
After the incision, all moisture is drained out then the incisions are tightened by sutures and dressings. Then they are irrigated with water and oil up to the fifth day. Afterwards, the bandage is removed and the wound is treated with ointments and poultices without over-tightening the head scarves or feeding the patient on anything that's wet or highly moisturizing.
Until the member strengthens and recovers, another aspect of this involves observing where the bone of the tumor appears and the location where water (or possibly, fluid) collects. This is because it might be in the back of the head, or at the front, or on the right side, or in the north direction.
You are referring to making the incision where you see the tumor and the accumulation of water; so, you make the cut as much as possible, while being careful not to sever a vessel causing excessive bleeding that may lead to death from blood loss along with draining out moisture.
The Second Chapter.
Cutting the two arteries behind the ears, known as the hissiyis.
If someone experiences severe attacks affecting the eyes or chest, and medications have failed to alleviate this despite long duration, inform them of performing surgery on these two arteries.
If you wish to cut them, you should shave the patient's head with a scythe. Then carve the area roughly until the artery appears. Next, fasten the neck of the patient with a woollen garment. After that, locate where the pulse beats and their positions which are behind the ears in two places. Not all people hide anything else except for some individuals.
Then teach him on them with a needle, then cut them with the cauterizing forceps until they reach the bone. This can be done across the head and if you wish you could place the forceps underneath the artery and cut upwards. The length of each cut should be about two inches.
If the sweat duct is severed, blood flows in pulsating streams towards the front and in successive layers; if the artery is not palpable to the touch, it should be estimated from the ear after three fingers' width, then proceed with the suture until reaching the bone, and what should.
Blood sends six streams into the interposition, and perhaps it sends more or less; all of this depends on what you perceive in terms of the strength of the patient's blood flow and the saturation of his arteries. Then look at the wound; if there is something left from the scrotum after reaching the bone, cut it.
To avoid exposing an inflamed tumor, then suture the wound with a thread from a silk fabric. Then treat it with ointments until it heals.
The third chapter.
Suturing the veins in the axilla.
If a person experiences chronic constipation or severe, acute episodes due to hot and dry conditions and heat in the axillary muscles, or chronic intense headache and similar issues, and treated with various medical treatments without success. We have tried to drain the veins in the axilla or its pouches as described.
The purpose of this work in draining it is to shave the hair of the patient that is present in the axilla. This refers to the visible artery in the armpit; its pulsation becomes evident and very little remains hidden, except for some individuals.
Or when there is intense cold, if he can't see it, have the patient tighten his neck with a belt of his garment. Then you should puncture the area with a needle or heat the site with hot water until the artery becomes clearly and distinctly visible. Then take the trephine which is shown here. Then, with it, you would gently cut the skin until you reach the artery. Then place a cannula and guide it upwards until it comes out of the skin. This would help to get rid of any clots from every direction. If the artery is thin, you would wrap its tip in the cannula. Then, cut off from it a part that extends its ends and you would tighten it without causing bleeding. If it doesn't heal or doesn't get detached, then blood won't flow at all. Then, drain the blood through six to three outlets.
If the artery is large, it should be tied in two places with a strong double thread. Let the thread either be from wool or from the strings of the guitar so that before the wound heals and becomes joined, mold does not rush to spread and cause bleeding.
Then cut a part between the ligatures. You do this at that moment or after some other time, and if you wish to harden it by striking bones with an iron scalpel until its tips get detached. This action is repeated or improved as we said.
Unless there is fever or mood swings in the patient, because hardening aids in eliminating fluids and makes it more effective. It should be recommended after bleeding off both arteries, to stuff the area with old cotton and place tight bandages on it. After that, apply dry medicines that stimulate wound healing and fettah until he heals if Allah wills.
If during your work there is bleeding from the artery, act immediately either by hardening or by filling the area with lead and tightening your hand until the blood stops. If nothing stops it, place your finger to congeal the blood.
And conclude the position with intense cold water until the pain subsides and you adhere to what should be done, and it is easier than cutting the vein by pressing this two-edged tool on the sweat after learning the positions with the needle.
And let the midwife press it very deeply until it reaches the bone, causing sweating in two places to make the sweat spread between its sides. This is because it does not heal like this at all; here is a picture of this tool.
The edges of the two blades resemble small knuckles, but they are much sharper than many knives because if they were as sharp as a knife, cold would have reached them faster and the flesh would not have been cut quickly. If there is some roughness in both, fire will stick to both.
The flesh is cut quickly, and this operation is better than any other work and it is easier and lighter. Let there be the thickness of a finger between the two blades.
Chapter Four.
In treating the constant hot bleeding to the eyes.
If the tears are constant and its flow is from the sweat ducts on the forehead from outside, and no benefit was gained from treating with medical drugs, I saw that the face of the wretched had become red. He feels a stinging sensation like that of a bee sting on his forehead, and his eyes are drooping and wet, the ointments have hardened on them, and their eyebrows were disheveled from the severity of tears. They were forced to resort to this treatment at first, which they call sword therapy or surgery. This is when you tell the wretched person to shave the hair on their forehead.
Then cut three parallel incisions on the forehead. The length of each incision is about two finger widths. The first one is parallel to the nose's length in the center of the forehead, the second one is slightly behind the movement of the muscle at the lip area, and the third one from the other side.
And preserve from cutting the two veins on both sides, leaving your hand distance from the connection of the jaws. A space after each incision should be as wide as three fists. Have a sponge or a large absorbent cloth with you to soak up blood.
Then, the sharp pointed implement used enters, as depicted in this image. Then, enter the incision following the jaw to the middle cut and excise all the skin between the two cuts together with the flap on the bone. Then do this also from the middle cut to the third incision. Finally, remove this implement. Then, you also enter another instrument in the first incision; it's a sharp curved scalpel from one side and smooth non-sharp on the other. This is how it looks:
And make its sharp side towards the attached flesh and its smooth side towards the bone. Push it until it reaches the middle incision, and cut with it all the blood vessels that descend from the head to the eyes without reaching the surface of the skin.
Then, do this in the middle cut to the other incision, and after an amount of blood has drained moderately, press the areas containing clotted blood. After that, put a cotton thread in each incision, and place on it a pad soaked with a mixture of water, oil, and honey or oil.
To prevent a hot tumor, the suture dissolves on the third day. Then, you use many pessaries in water and then treat it with the bath of balsamic oils mixed with rose essence until the wound heals if God wills.
The Fifth Chapter.
In the treatment of tears and discharges to the eyes from the inside of the head.
It happened to one that there were frequent sharp discharges, always burning. You see the two eyes hanging small, and their sight has weakened. The cheeks are inflamed and the eyelashes have fallen out from them. It happens deep in the head with severe, painful headache and continuous sneezing. If you notice these symptoms, know that such discharges come from many deep sweat glands. The best treatment for this is to command the sufferer to shave their forehead, then make a single incision down the middle of the forehead.
It happens deep in the head with severe, painful headache and continuous sneezing. If you notice these symptoms, know that such discharges come from many deep sweat glands. The best treatment for this is to command the sufferer to shave their forehead, then make a single incision down the middle of the forehead. Or lift it slightly to the side and begin making the cut from the left corner of the mouth to the right corner. The cut should go up to the bone, and keep your hand away from the movable muscles involved in chewing until you expose the bone and wipe all blood with a sponge.
Pull the edges of the incision with cotton or a piece of cotton thread, then pull from above using the forceps and dip the forceps into water and oil to prevent any hot lump. When you have finished and see that the hot lump has disappeared, it is necessary to cut through the bone so that new flesh begins to grow on it.
Then treat it with the drying agent that promotes flesh growth, for example by taking two parts of buckwheat flour and four parts of clove oil, to prepare a paste which is used in promoting flesh growth in such surgeries.
The Sixth Chapter.
In the treatment of what falls into the ear.
All that falls into the ear is of four kinds, either a metallic ore-like stone or something similar to it like iron and glass, or a plant-based seed like chickpeas and kernels, and so on, or a liquid thing such as water and vinegar, etc.
If it is an animal, if a stone or a type of stone that does not exceed the ear falls in the ear, receive sunlight with the ear. If you see something greasy from buttercup or scissors stuck in it then try to remove it by movement of the head or shaking with forceps. Close the snuffers when coughing comes after placing a loop of wire or wool around the ear, and extend the ear upwards. It often comes out with this treatment; if it doesn't come out, try removing it with gentle tweezers as shown in these images.
If it comes out with the tweezers, otherwise try to remove it with a dim lighted candle with little bend. If it doesn't come out even then, make a copper tube and insert one end of the tube smoothly into the ear hole.
Fill what surrounds the tube with greased wax to prevent any other path for wind, then pull it with your breath strongly and frequently. It often comes out this way; if it doesn't come out as described or even so, take a small piece from bird molasses or the manipulated wax used for catching birds, put it in one end of the syringe.
After tightly wrapping it with a piece of string, then gently insert it into the ear hole after drying the ear from moisture. If it doesn't come out through all we described, start cutting before a boil occurs or a seizure happens.
The method of cutting is to cut the wax in the candle first, then let out a bit of blood according to its strength. Then hold the wax between your hands and turn it upwards. Cut a small incision at the base of the ear where its fat exists at its lower position.
The cut will be crescent-shaped until it reaches the stone, then remove it with what you can of the machines. Then stitch the cut as quickly as you can and treat it until it heals.
And if the thing that has fallen into one of the ear from one of the grains that grow and fatten, try to remove it with what we have mentioned. If this does not work for removal, take a soft thin forceps in accordance with this description.
Try to cut that type of grain that has fallen into the ear with it, and do this only if you are sure that that grain has become fragmented by the steam in the ear until it turns into many small pieces, then remove it using a blind sinner or a gentle hook or with tweezers.
As we mentioned, it facilitates its removal, and as for the water entering the ear, it should be used first with a camel's urine gargle. It fills his ear with some used cotton which is lying on that wet ear, and if it was removed by this method.
And if not, take many pebbles along the fingers that are smooth and grind them a little with fire. And insert one of its urine pellets into her ear hole and blow on one of her legs from this side, and strike another stone on the stone in the ear.
He continues doing this with a stone after another until all the water is removed, and he removes the water by taking one of the camel's wool or feather, inserting its single end into the ear, heating the other end till it burns most of it, then repeats the feather.
Repeat this several times until all the water is removed or draws it by the tube as previously described with the stone. As for removing the animal inside, look if it is small in body like the grasshopper and similar, then treat it with what we have mentioned in the section and otherwise.
If the size of the object is large and it is visible to touch, attempt to remove it using tweezers and forceps; this will make removal easier than any other method used in ear problems. As for removing wax that has hardened in the ear, if you have treated it as described in our section on warts and didn't succeed with your treatment.
You should look at the ear in sunlight. If you see something of wax, remove it with tweezers or delicate forceps. If you do not see anything from them, take this tube to photograph it.
Make it narrow at the bottom and wide at the top, then insert the delicate tip of this tool into the ear as far as the patient can bear. Then firmly push it in several times until all wax is removed. If it does not come out, seal around the tube with beeswax as we taught you for stones.
If it does not come out as we have instructed, use the methods mentioned earlier which were first tried to kill wax and you will find this in the section on warts. Your application of oils and medicines inside the ear would be done with this tool, here is its depiction:
As you see, it is made of silver or brass. It's narrow at the bottom with a small hole and wide on top. You can make sure that the gun inside the tube is solid if you want, or you could leave it hollow. If desired, take a piece of cotton and tightly wrap it around the end of the tube.
Then place the oil, juice or any of these medicines in the tube. It is inside the ear. Place the cotton wad at the top and squeeze it moderately with your hand until the oil flows into the auditory canal and you feel its effect.
Insert inside the wound, and let whatever you insert into the ear have been slightly heated by fire. Be careful not to allow it to be too cold or excessively hot for the ear cannot bear this.
The Seventh Chapter.
In the treatment of obstruction in the ear.
Some children may be born without having been cut, both from their mothers' wombs and in their ears.
It may also expose some people to obstruction in the ear canal due to a wound or a graft there, and this obstruction can be at the depth of an eardrum that cannot be seen by the eye.
It may extend slightly outside the hole and be visible. The one that extends deep in the ear and is not visible is usually difficult to see, while the one that can be seen should place the doctor's ear next to the sun. And you inspect it, if I see the obstruction visibly, open it with a gentle pair of forceps; this is its appearance:".
It will have a slight protrusion at one end, limited by itself and the other sides of the forceps; these are smooth to avoid injuring the ear. If the obstruction is due to growth of flesh in the ear canal, hold it with a soft hook and cut it very gently until all flesh is removed.
If the obstruction is deep in the ear, take a gentle smooth probe and slightly heat it in fire. Then place this inside the ear canal. If you feel the obstruction along with what the doctor feels of heaviness of hearing, gently remove it.
Be cautious not to damage the nerve of the ear and then insert a wick in the ear as long as the size of the hole, which has been soaked in Egyptian ointment. Do this for days until it heals without scarring or else take out the wick dipped in water with some powdered sulfur.
If you see the ear has swollen, put in a hot object. It should cause the pus to come out and you can then replace it with another wick that has been soaked in rose oil until it soothes the hot lump. Then treat it until it heals.
If there is a blood flow, soak a sponge or a rag in cold water and place it on the ear. Then use all the treatment methods described to stop the mentioned bleeding as written in the article 'The Practices'.
Chapter Eight.
In the treatment of boils that appear on the cheeks.
These boils that appear on the eyelids, they can be moist or dry. It is necessary to hold them with a comb or a pincushion and cut them from their roots with scissors then apply it with powder in the affected area.
If there is bleeding from it, treat it with a gentle glass pipette and it's better to do this after cutting. Often, if something remains from its roots even after the cut, it will reappear, but if you burn its roots with fire, those roots are destroyed and it won't return.
Chapter Nine.
In the treatment of colds affecting the cheeks of the eye.
Very often, something resembling a cold in terms of its intensity and hardness appears on the cheeks.
And therefore, it is called cold which is a gathering of thick moisture in the upper and lower eyelids. In working on it, look if the cold is prominent on the surface of the eye lid, it moves in every direction; making this easy task requires cutting across it with a cut parallel to it.
Then, gently cut from each side until it's rid of anything then hang it with a pincushion and cut it off. If you can't cut it except after the eye lid has gone through cutting during that process, it won't harm the operation if the cut is large; in that case, stitch up the cuts together and treat it until it heals.
And if it is small, it is not against you, for the ointment will force and bind it. If the eyelash leans towards the inner eyelid towards the internal surface, turn the eyelid over and suspend the eyelash with a thread without needing to make a cut and penetrate it from each side.
And if the eyelid has been cut through, it will not cause harm. Then wash the eye after removing the eyelash with salty water and apply treatment that binds so that the discharge of pus stops.
The tenth chapter.
In treating the condition that appears in the eyelid.
The condition known as 'sharqan' refers to a formation of skin that occurs in the layers of the upper eyelid. This is more common among boys, causing heaviness on their eyes and making them prone to night attacks due to exposure. They are unable to look directly into sunlight. Because tears speed towards them.
Thus, you see them leaning on their faces always, sleeping with it, and their eyelids are damp due to the puffiness of the condition known as 'nto' which is noticeable externally. When you press that area with your fingers, you can feel the 'nto'. The purpose of this treatment is to have him place his head in a hole (in the wall or ground), called 'the hole', so that he might be cured.
Then take a thread of cotton, prepare a wick from it and make a circle with the wick around the 'nto' (the condition) on every side. Place this around the affected area and apply pressure from each side using your fingers to gather the 'nto' in the middle of the circle.
Then cut a groove in the middle of this moisture using the sharp tool 'nashl' across, without letting the cut be larger than the cut that would occur naturally at the edge. In depth, it should be necessary to cut through all the skin down to the 'nto'.
In most cases, the eyelid protrudes from the cut in the form of a piece of white fat which you draw out with a probe that you have wrapped between your fingers to the outside while moving your hand back and forth. Be careful not to deepen the cut for fear of injuring the eye by letting the gouging tool reach it.
If the eyelid doesn't appear at the first cut, it may be necessary to increase the depth of the cut slightly and gently until the eyelid appears. Then you should draw it out as we have explained before. You should then soak a probe in a solution of vinegar and water and place it on the area, tightening it with a bandage. Some people use salt for pressing instead.
He should place it in the cavity of the cut to dissolve what is left of that moisture. Then, he should treat it until it heals. If there was heat and an inflamed area occurred at the site, it should be treated with soothing ointments until it heals.
The eleventh chapter.
In the methods of eye watering.
If a new eyelash grows above the natural path under the normal eyelashes, it can harm the eye and cause various diseases such as constant watering of the eyes, drooping eyelids, whitening, and swelling. This can even be a reason for the failure of the eyesight itself if not treated properly.
Eye watering can be done in four ways: either by rubbing with fire as described under the section of rubbing, or by using a strong medicine as previously mentioned. Alternatively, it could involve cutting and sewing, or dabbing as I have mentioned.
You should make the eyelid head towards your finger, then flip the eyelid with your left hand. If it flips properly, otherwise insert a needle in the lower part of the eyelash and drive the needle through from above using the thread. This makes sure the thread is close to the hair itself, pulling the thread up by the eyelash.
Turn it with the forceps, then cut in the inner eyelid without cutting excess hair from the lower eyelid, starting from the larger maeck (eyelid) to the smaller one. Then remove the thread and place a small pad of cotton or lace under the eyelid, finally sew on the eyelid with silk.
Like the shape of an Ace card, but it should be according to how much you want to lift your eyelid as this varies among people; some may need to cut from their eyelid enough that suits when their eyelids are relaxed.
And some may need to cut less of this, according to how relaxed their eyelids are. Then you use the forceps along the two lines that you have taught, starting from the larger maeck (eyelid) to the smaller one. The incision is made close to the natural hairline with a firmness akin to pressing with your finger nails.
Then, the needle enters one of the corners of the skin, then removes it completely. The lips are sewn together using a needle and a fine thread of silk or wool. The blood is wiped away, and what remains of the threads is attached to some hanging things if necessary.
You may do it as you wish, or it doesn't matter either way. The stitches and threads will stay for about three to four days, then treat the wound accordingly. You could leave the cut open without stitches and treat it with something that dries and constricts, because when the wound heals and the edges come together, lifting of the eyelid occurs. Stitches are better in this regard.
This aspect of the incision, I mentioned at the beginning except that it has a drawback on the blind, which is effective and without danger. Another aspect in the incision is that you should make an incision on the eyelid like the shape of an Ace card as described. Then lift the eyelid with three needles that are either separated or grouped as in this picture.
Then cut the excess eyelid with small scissors as shown in this image, cutting appropriately.
If you cannot hold the needles and they slip from your hand, take an iron needle with a thread and insert it in the middle of the shape as shown in this picture. Then, bring another thread close to the larger loop and a third thread close to the smaller one. Gather the threads between your fingers with moderation, then lift them up in a moderate manner.
And lift the taught skin as described. Then stitch both lips of the wound together with sewing, and treat it until it heals. If there is a hot tumor upon cutting or splitting, use the cimicifuga (a type of plant) and similar soothing ointments to alleviate it.
The lower eyelid may also cause its lashes to turn inward. It is necessary to use the methods of cutting, sewing, and cauterization mentioned earlier, as well as applying medicine or cauterizing with fire for it. Applying medicine or cauterizing with fire will either be more intense or gentler on the patient than cutting and sewing, depending on the specific situation.
Caulking with a tube is done in this manner; you turn the lid over and cut along the inner slit as described. Then, make two or three sticks about half an inch long, parallel to the length of the eyelid and narrower than its width.
I have borrowed from each end on both sides, where the threads grab hold. Then gather them gently with what is preferable of the eyelid. Pull the sticks together firmly from each side. Leave it for some days as the tightened skin dies, turns black and decays.
Until she spontaneously stops, if her bleeding slows down, borrow her the amount of a loan and then treat her until she is healed. If the swelling decreases and her eyelashes do not fall off, this is how you should create the image of the two eyelids: they should be formed in this shape and size, both in length and width.
The second chapter.
In lifting the falling eyelashes through needle.
If a hair or two is causing trouble, what you should do is take a fine needle and insert there a thread of fine, smooth silk. Then gather its ends and make them a very light knot, the length of the thread being about a yard.
Then, on the smaller sticks, insert another fine thread shorter than it. If you wish, tie its ends together, then have the patient lie down with his head near your lap and close to the sun for better visibility of the work, which is precise. Then, pass the needle through the root of the excess hair with the smaller sticks.
And execute it on the eyelid with the wheel until it comes out from above the natural hair. Then draw the thread above the smaller sticks and insert the hair, whether one, two, or three, no more than that, into those sticks.
Then pull your hand with it until the hair comes out along with the sticks in the eyelid together with the natural hair. If you pulled the sticks but the hair didn't come out with them, you've pulled the sticks down with the thread that was inserted into them until they come out of the upper hole.
Then insert the hair again and pull them. Do this until it rises in the upper hole and you can see it, then release the sticks and thread and remove them. Tighten your eye for two or three days till it secures the hair in place and flesh grows on it.
If the thread is short, either you add to it a long hair from your natural hair which will grow with it, or you leave it until it grows longer, then when that happens you cut it.
The thirteenth chapter.
In the treatment of trichiasis that occurs in the upper eyelid.
The one affected by this trichiasis is called an arnautical. This trichiasis can be either natural or accidental. The accidental kind arises from a surgical incision, a cut, or tearing and so forth.
The purpose of the operation is to cut through this adhesion and separate its edges, leaving a thread-like opening between them. It should be held in place until it heals. There should not be used for treating such issues things that dry out or constrict.
If you do that, the trichiasis will return worse than before. Instead, use things that relax such as the hoop and the tenter with water that has been infused with a little myrrh, cotton juice, Diakhil's ointment dissolved with some fat, and grease it with it and treat it accordingly.
The solution to treating it is to try every possible way not to return to its initial condition. The operation we mentioned is some kind of repair for the trichiasis, rather than restoring the place's shape according to how it was originally.
The fourteenth chapter.
In the treatment of trichiasis that occurs in the lower eyelid.
This trichiasis that occurs at the bottom is actually called trichiasis. It can be either natural or accidental. The accidental kind arises from a surgical incision, cut, or tear and so forth.
The method is to take a needle with two threads and pierce it in the flesh, then penetrate it from the left margin of the wound to the right margin until the thread becomes inside both sides of the flesh. Then elevate the flesh by the needle and cut it with a broad scissor.
If the eyelid returns to its original shape as it should, otherwise you take a thread and place it at the site of the cut. Then you turn the eyelid with it, making two cuts inside the eyelid's edge. The ends of these cuts are from the corners of the cut area until they meet; forming an angle. Even if they join, its shape becomes similar to this form:.
And it is the Greek letter lambda, then you remove that flesh as much as its sharp side is below what follows the eyelid. Then you join the separated parts with two threads and sew them with wool thread. Then treat it with the medications we mentioned before the relaxing and bleeding ones until it heals.
If the incision, stitch, or line was exposed, then it should be cut with a simple incision without removing any hair. Then separate between the lips by bleeding as mentioned before.
And the saying in treating a horizontal or vertical incision is to perform the operation according to how you determine from the shape of the incision, for it can have many variations in appearance. The surgeon devises the trick with whatever means he can manage.
Until the appearance returns to its natural state or gets close to it, and the disease itself guides you as to what is suitable for work and machinery in most cases.
Chapter Fifteen.
In the joining of the eyelid to the eyelash or the cornea.
This kind of adhesion may cause many people to believe that the upper eyelid is stuck to the white part of the eye, which restricts its movement and hinders its natural functions. It should be advised to introduce the hook end under the eyelid.
And lift it up or extend it with a lever, then cut the adhesion with a soft clamp that is not like cutting forceps but rather very gentle so as not to worry the patient when working, allowing the forceps to be used and causing no harm to the eye by its sharpness, making your cut as if you are scraping off this adhesion.
And you may even anticipate that, once the eyelid has returned to its natural state and all adhesions have healed, one might then pour in the eye salty water for washing it, or drip it with camphorated water from a pipette. Then, you can separate the eyelid from the eye with a cotton thread.
And place over the eye cotton wool dipped in egg white, and use the camphorated ointment until it heals after the third day.
The sixteenth chapter.
In cutting the claw and removing deeper wounds.
The claw can be of two types, either it is nervous resembling a soft and thin steel plate, or it is not nervous, resembling a white moist dryness if it comes into contact with iron or breaks when picked up by forceps.
If forceps were not used in it, and both types start from the inner eye to gradually cover it so as to prevent light and movement of the eye. The work involves having the patient lie with their head on a stone.
Then he opens his eyes and lifts the eyelid with your hand. Then, he catches the nail using a very slightly bent hook and moves it up. Next, he takes a needle and puts a horse or cow hair and strong thread in it. He bends one end of the needle slightly and pierces it inside the middle of the nail.
And perform it with the needle, connect the nail with the thread and extend it upwards. Then cut along one side of the nail next to the eye as if spreading it all the way with the hair towards the end, then cut the rest from the root of the nail in a gentle pair of scissors or small scissor, allowing the natural flesh of the nail to grow back.
So as not to allow tears from constant watering, the nail can be extended with the hook alone or with the thread as we have said, then trimmed with a smooth pair of scissors whose tip is like this:.
And be cautious not to allow the scissors to touch the corneal epithelium, causing a tear and affecting vision. After cutting, apply something from powdered salt or zinc oxide to the eye and leave it for another day, then treat it with what is appropriate until it heals.
If the nail is not sensitive and cannot be penetrated by a needle or hold a hook, this type of nail often undergoes treatment with medication. It heals as described in the section. If you wish to cut it, open the eye's pupil.
Take a smooth, gentle pair of scissors like this: Gently shave off the nail from above until you see it becoming brittle and breaking, applying zinc or red scarabs' oil or powdered salt to only the affected area of your eye. Then, hold back the eyelid for another day.
Then, repeat the operation until all of it disappears except if a hot tumor obstructs your vision; leave it and treat the hot tumor until it heals then repeat the operation on her with the scale till she heals. And as for removing the fat of the fatty layer.
If the tooth causes extreme damage to the eye, hang that tooth on the spike and cut off some of it without taking a great deal so as not to cause tear overflow. Then, cut in the nasal passages with red or silver thread until it heals.
The Seventeenth Chapter.
In cutting the weeping sore and what grows as excess flesh in the eye.
It may grow in the eyes of some people a red, accumulated flesh that covers the eye or approaches it, or overflows onto the eyelids. Perhaps, the eyelids might turn outward resembling the weeping sore.
The procedure involves having the patient lie down with his head on a pillow. Then, you open their eyes and collect all of that red flesh using instruments suitable for this task.
Or you could hold it with a hook or a spatula, then cut the red flesh piece by piece until all of it is cut and saved from the eye so as not to harm it during surgery. Your cuts can either be made using the saw we described for cutting the toenail or with a small scissor. Like what you see in this picture of the door below, how one might use tongs to grasp what comes next.
When your cut is done and all the weeping sores are gone, fill the eye with salt water or pour red beads and similar drugs into it. Then place cotton that's white like egg whites over the eye from outside to prevent heat from the tumor.
If there remains a trace of redness, your patient's blood is abundant, and I fear heat in the tumor, leave the eye alone and treat it with what calms the tumor. Then proceed with surgery until it heals. Similarly, deal with the excess flesh that appears around the eye of this type.
However, you should avoid treating every weak eye through tattooing or exposure to the elements by iron treatment and do not engage in any of these operations until you see that this organ is compatible for such action.
The eighteenth chapter.
In the case of sand in the eye.
The sand, red vessels that weave around the eye, prevents vision and weakens the eye over time. It is essential for you to first observe; if the eye with sand is strong and does not have any other illness besides the sand.
When that happens, the process involves instructing the patient to place their head on your knee. Then you should suspend those red vessels using a single or two pins according to your comfort; make sure the pins bend in this manner:".
Or have them form a single double pin structure like this:
Then, using a gentle pair of scissors, carefully cut those vessels and wipe out the blood periodically until you see that they have disappeared from the eye, and that the blood has dissipated. Be cautious not to harm the eye with the edges of the scissors. Your work should occupy half your day under the sun.
And ensure in your work that you only cut these red or green vessels, making sure to pinch the remaining sand in the eye when you're done. If you can't remove all of it at once, cover the eye with what soothes its pain.
Leave it for days until the pain subsides and settles in the hot tumor, then resume her work with this formula to dispel this image of pain from her.
Leave it [with the teacher's head on the student's stone, and the other end causing tears to fall and achieving a fogging in front of the eye and its tip]. The essence of work is to open the eye with fixed or triangular openings that the student holds.
Looking, with the teacher's head on the student's stone, and the other end causing tears to fall that achieve a fogging in front of the eye and its tip. By choice, you can start by pinching from above the eye or below it, preferably causing two tears in the upper bony part; one at the back of the lower eyelid and the other at its beginning.
Hold it between the middle and the index finger, then attach tubes below them. Then hold it between the heel and the nail, lift your hand slightly to see all the channels raised. If you use the scissors, cut from the smaller western side; if a gentle pair of forceps is used instead.
Enter the needle into the threads and inspect all of them until they rise on their own, don't cut the tears, for if it's wet with both tears and blood, it will stick to you.
Then cut with the scissors what is above and below the lower eyelid so that nothing remains except in the cornea. If possible, you can lift it from the cornea using a scalpel; this is better. However, some people may find it easier.
And after cutting it, the wound heals for days until the pain subsides and settles in the hot tumor, then resume working on it.
Chapter Nineteen.
In directing the hair towards the nose.
Doctors who treat the hair, called Nasour, use fire or the hot ointment as described previously. If it doesn't heal, then the only trick left is to cut through the tumor when it ripens and extract all the moisture in it or pus.
Until the bone is revealed. If the bone is revealed and you see decay or discoloration in it, remove it using this tool as depicted:.
The file is called the head, made of Indian iron. Its head is polished like a rasp with fine carvings from the lathe or miller's tool. You place it on the decayed part of the bone and then rotate it between your fingers while slightly moving your hand to feel that the decay has been removed.
Do this several times, then apply the dried compress medicine to that spot. If it closes up and new flesh grows there, and if it stops bleeding after a certain period, and if forty days pass with no recurrence or complications, then you can be sure of its healing.
Know that if it has healed. Otherwise, the only way to treat this is by redressing the Nasour towards the nasal hole in this manner; it involves revealing the bone again with iron or a hot ointment. If the bone is revealed, take on using these tools as shown:
The tip of the hammer should be triangular, with its shaft conical and tapering towards the tip as you see it. Place it on the bone itself; have this close to your face but slightly away from your eye. Then, guide your tool with the hammer until the bone penetrates and is felt by the patient.
If he finds that the wind escapes when he holds his hand on his nose, then force the site with the compressed dried medicine as you have been taught. When the flesh grows and the place hardens, the substance which was projecting outward returns to the nose, may God will it to be less burdensome.
The twenty-first chapter.
If the eyes water.
If the eye squints as a whole, but no harm or loss occurs to the vision, it should be made easier for the patient. Then its development in terms of eye care should be detailed. It should then be placed on the inner corner of the eyelid without any condition and sucked gently.
Then place on the eye a poultice made from sesame, patience, milk and ewe's butter. Then tighten the eye above the bandage with many aids. The description of these aids is to take very soft ashes that fold each break in it into four folds, making many.
Then place one on top of another according to what the eye needs, then pull it with a hard thong tightly and repeat applying the poultice without any condition. Then remove the poultice and leave the eye bound day and night.
If the band tightens during this time, you should loosen it gently. Then remove the bandage after a day and night as we said. If I see that the eye has returned, otherwise, redo the bandages, aids, and tightening until it does return.
The twenty-first chapter.
In cutting the raisin.
If a fissure appears in the raisin layer, then it pustulates and protrudes outside the eyelids like raisins, disfiguring the human figure. If you want to cut it, follow my instructions for its treatment.
It is to insert a needle into the root of the grape from below upwards, then to insert another needle with a double thread from the side of the wound, pass it through and leave the first needle as it is.
Then cut the place where the double thread has bent, tie some grape around the needle with it, pull tightly several times. Then remove the needle and place cotton dipped in the white of the egg on the eye, leave until the threads come out along with the grape. Then treat the eye to strengthen it.
Until the wound heals, and the grape is pulled from every side in a circle with a needle until the eye becomes smoother. Then, it's moistened with a fine gouge that reaches into the eye cavity, allowing the white of egg to seep out and cool the eye down till it shrinks at its place. It's then pulled tightly until the wound heals.
The Second Twenty-First Chapter.
In treating the lump.
This is the condition called 'kmenah' which gathers within the eye like water that has not fallen, and there is work to be done in this that you place the patient upright on a stool. Then take his head with your hands from both sides.
And move him until the depth moves down to your eye, then fix it and don't remove it. The light will emerge and the patient will see things as he used to. If it doesn't move down, we know that it is water. If the condition of falling depth hasn't been achieved as described.
Otherwise, sit the patient between your hands. Then take a fine gouge and make a small incision above the corneal membrane at the point of contact between the suture and the corneal membrane in the eyelid, until you remove the substance.
If a warm water only has been applied to the eye, mixed with honey or boiled in milk and honey, then proceed with all other treatments until it clears.
The twenty-third chapter.
We have mentioned types of water in the previous sections and which ones are suitable for dripping, explained in clear, understandable language. Take it from there for health purposes. Then, when that happens, you should sit comfortably with your back to the light near the sun, having your eye under consideration.
And tie the healthy eye and tighten it tightly, then lift his left eyelid with your left hand if the eye with water is the left eye, or lift his right eyelid with your right hand if the eye is the right one.
Then, place the nozzle of the syringe close to the eyelashes with a firm press on the same white part of the eye near the inner corner. Then push the syringe forcefully while you guide it with your hand until it goes into the white part of the eye and feels that the syringe has reached an empty area.
It should be that the depth of the syringe's passage is equal to the distance from the child to the end of the black part, which is the eyelash, as you would see copper in the same observer what he sees with his eye for clarity of the conjunctival sac. Then move the syringe upwards to the position where the water is located.
Then press it down once after another. If the water comes out of its socket, then the patient sees what his eye was opened to from his socket and the syringe in his eye, then he rests for a little while. If the water rises, then press it down again without removing the syringe.
If it has stabilized and not ascended, then take out the instrument gently while you pull a little bit of your hand with it. Then dissolve some pure Egyptian salt in water slightly and wash the eye from inside through this. Afterwards, place all around the outside of the eye, either wool or cotton that's been dipped.
Apply some rose water and egg white, then attach the correct eye to it. As for us and those of our time, we place ground cloves with egg white on top. If the instrument cannot penetrate the eye due to its hardness, one of the people might have an extremely hard eye. You should take the tool known as the 'mail', which is illustrated this way:.
Pierce the patient's cheek only with it, not penetrating deeply; instead, gently tap the area around your instrument, then insert the tool as we have described. After completing your work, prepare for your assistant to lie flat and tight on his back in a dark room.
Avoid all movements and coughing, provide him with food that softens his nature, do not move his head to the right or left at all. The bandage should remain in place until the third day, then let him recover in this dark room, testing his sight afterwards.
Show him things then return the bandage until the seventh day. It should not be done during treatment or after the operation for your time, but it should be avoided before the water rises quickly with intense vision.
If a hot tumor appears, it is necessary to open the eye before the seventh day and this can be done by calming the tumor until it subsides. When it does, then you release his vision and place a veil over his face for several days while he remains in that dark room. Then.
Exercises are carried out gradually and he deals with its causes, and know that the scratch is unable to do without observing the learner sometimes when then performs the operation, and I have heard from some Iraqis that he mentioned that he makes a draining device in Iraq which absorbs water.
And I have not seen anyone in our country doing this or read about it in any of the early books, and it may be new, and here is a picture of types of hydrometers for which they stand due to their ignorance.
It is made specifically of copper and its tip has this specific sharpness, it's triangular at the tip with a sharp point.
Chapter Twenty-Four.
In treating the growing flesh in the nose.
The nose may grow different kinds of flesh, some resembling many-legged creatures with numerous limbs. Some of it is cancerous growths that are hardened like red marks. Others have a kind of flesh that is not like the color of the skin.
If the flesh is soft and not malicious or cancerous, it should be placed under your hands facing the sun, open its mouth, insert the thorn in that flesh, then pull it out. Then cut what you've identified with a sharp delicate scissor on one side.
Until you know that all the flesh has gone, if there's still something left that you can't cut, remove it with one of the smooth and gentle machines until there's nothing left. If blood overcomes or a hot tumor appears.
Deal with it according to what is suitable or from malignant tumors, then cut them until the blood stops and all the flesh disappears. Then put it in the nose after cutting, water or a drink if the nose opens and sucks moisture down to the throat.
Know that if he is freed, but the moisture does not reach what it should, know that there is tender flesh inside under the loose bones that did not reach the instrument to its cut. Then it becomes necessary to take a thread of cotton yarn that has some thickness.
And there are many knots in it, and she makes between each knot a width of one finger or less. The patient then inserts the end of the single thread into his nose using suction, or whatever is possible after he has made something like a button, and pulls on it until it reaches the navel.
And it comes out on his neck, and often children who write do this action as the boys do, which is easier for those who want to perform it. Then he gathers both ends of the single thread that came out at the mouth with the other end that remained in the nose.
Then she uses spreading the flesh with the knots in the thread. She does this until she knows that the tissues have cut with the thread knots, then removes the thread and remains in the nose after wiping the bleeding floss it has absorbed from the Egyptian ointment. She does this for three days or more.
Until the ointment eats all that is left of the flesh, then it becomes the last thing in the nose a copper tube for days until he is freed. If it needs treatment, she used this and let it dry.
And this is an image of the tool with which dregs and medicines drip in the nose:.
He places one made of silver or brass, similar to a small candlestick with its opening filled with grease and also having the same oil flow.
And if you wish, the tube is made closed like the reed and the surface of the spoon is smeared with grease.
It has a grip at its end, like what you see, hold it when the fat or any of your desired juices or liquid things get heated.
The twenty-fifth chapter.
In the humid mornings, in the end part of the nose.
It often grows in the end part of the nose a hair, which becomes larger and increases over time to spoil its appearance.
Therefore, it is necessary to cut it at the first sign of its appearance and remove all of it. Then you should cover the area with something either like wax or with burned medicine that replaces wax, if you miss cutting it, until it grows bigger look for whether it becomes hard and dry like little skin which has less sensation.
Don't cut it with iron, as it's a form of cancer. I have seen many cases where after cutting this tumor, there was a huge recurrence on the owner, and if the tumor is soft and malleable without being like little skin, I saw that the full removal can be done in all parts. Excrete the pus and cut it without caution or hesitation, then treat the area with something that dries and tightens until it heals.
The twenty-sixth chapter.
In suturing the nose, lips, and ear. If there is a separation from its connection at the wound or something like that, know that if an interruption in any of these organs has occurred, it can only be managed to some extent in certain individuals.
When you need to expose something from this, observe if the wound is moist with its blood, then stitch both lips of the wound together and treat it until it heals. If separation of connection has occurred and split both lips, they become two separate healthy gaps; it's necessary to cut out each gap by skin thickness until it bleeds.
Then the lips are joined by suturing, tension is applied to them, and they are dusted with powdered saffron and milk. A paste made from the beeswax ointment or other embrocations is placed above this. It is left in place for two or three days. Then it is removed.
Then the medicine is changed, and it is left until the threads break on their own. Then it is treated with ointment until recovery occurs. The suture technique involves joining them only to separate the connection either by needle as we described in suturing the abdomen or by thread as you were taught there.
Chapter Twenty-Seventeen.
In removing the bandages shown on the lips.
Many people may have small, hard lumps inside their mouths that resemble some of the poppy seeds, others are smaller and larger. It is necessary to turn the lip and cut through each knot, attaching it with a thread.
Then cut it from each side. After cutting, fill the place with a poultice until the blood stops and then rinse with vinegar, salt and treat the places until they are healed.
Chapter Twenty-Fourth.
In cutting the excess flesh in the gum.
Often, excess flesh grows on the gum which the ancients called Apols. It is necessary to attach it with a thread or hold it with a rasp and cut it at its root. Letting the wound bleed for some time then place a poultice of powder on the area.
Or one of the dried gripping teeth. If this flesh returns after treatment, it often returns. Cut it again and cauterize it; it doesn't return after burning.
Chapter Nineteen
In counting teeth with iron.
Dirt and rough, unpleasant scales may accumulate on the surfaces of teeth both inside and outside, as well as between the gums. These can become stained, yellowed, or even turn green. This decay can extend into the gum and deteriorate the teeth, causing them to rot.
You should sit the patient facing you with their head on your lap and undress any teeth that show scales or resemble sand, making sure to remove everything. Do the same for the blackness, greenery, whiteness, and such until you have cleansed them.
If what is removed from the first act of cleaning remains, then repeat it on another day, and a second, and a third until you achieve your desired outcome. Remember that teeth require different shaped scrapers with various forms depending on what becomes suitable for your task.
In order for the scraper that removes teeth from inside to be different from the one used for outside, and the one used between teeth in a different shape; this is several scraper shapes you should have all prepared.
Chapter Thirty
Extracting teeth.
You should treat the tooth by every means to alleviate its pain and refrain from extracting it, for there is no back if you extract it; because it's a precious essence. Even if it is necessary to remove it.
If the patient insists on having the tooth extracted, you must set your mind until you heal the tooth's pain. Very often, the patient deceives their pain and thinks that it is in the correct tooth, extracting it only for the pain to still persist until they extract the painful tooth, as we have seen done by surgeons many times.
If the pain is confirmed in a specific tooth, then it should be that you cut around the tooth with an incision where there is some strength until the gum resolves from all sides. Then move it with your fingers or soft curettes first for a little and little until dislodging it.
Then he enabled the two large pliers to grip well, with the tip of ignorance between your knees having been sharpened and does not move. Then pull the tooth straight without breaking it in order that it may come out. If it doesn't come out or if it does, take one of these tools, and gently insert it under him from all sides. Move his movement as you did previously.
And if the tooth is embedded or adhered, it should be that you fill in that hole with a file and block it with a tight seal from a soft rounded tip lest it escapes when pulling on it with curettes. And it should be that you carefully probe around the gum from all sides for yes.
And hold your strength lest it breaks and leaves some, which will return on him as a sting worse than his first pain. Beware not to do what the inexperienced cutters do in their bridge and rush into removing it without using what we described.
Indeed, many times they cause great discomfort to people rather than it is best for the tooth to break and leave all or some of its roots. Otherwise, it may remove some of the jawbone as we have seen repeatedly. After its extraction, rinse with water or a solution of salt and vinegar if bleeding occurs from the site; this happens frequently. Crush a bit of zagg (a traditional Arabic medicine) and stuff it into the place.
Except if you cut it, if the band does not benefit you, a delicate picture of the cheekbones that move the teeth should be long in length and short in grip, so as not to bend when you grab it by the teeth; this is the picture of large cheekbones.
It should be as seen, with thick handles even if you grab them they do not give themselves or bend. It should be made of Indian iron or hardened steel, and on its end it should have some teeth penetrating each other for a tight and firm grip.
And the ends can be made like a chisel, also being strong to control.
The third and thirteenth chapter.
In
If the tooth root remains after pulling out a tooth, it has broken. You should place cotton with tallow in that area for one or two days until the site relaxes, then you can introduce forceps or cheekbones. The ones that resemble the ends of birds, which is called a blerga. This is how cheekbones look like:
It could be made like a chisel from inside or like an awl. If you are not able to remove it with these cheekbones, then you should dig into the root and reveal all the flesh with a gouge. Then you can introduce a machine that resembles a small pin, this is its image:
Short-ended, slightly thickened but not too smooth so it doesn't break off if the root comes out like that, otherwise use these other tools as shown in this image. The first one has a triangular tip with some thickness.
A triangular nice figure:
And we also rely on this two-branched instrument, and here is its depiction:.
And with other instruments and tools that are mentioned in the catalog of surgical implements, we also rely on this instrument which resembles a large tongs as depicted here:.
A triangular sharpened tool with a slightly rough surface to prevent breaking, and it is not slippery. Know that the instruments for surgical procedures are numerous, as are all other tools; they cannot be counted. The skilled craftsman adapts his creations according to what the work and the diseases themselves suggest.
Because there are diseases that were not mentioned in the first place for differences in their types, if a bone breaks from the jaw or any other bones of the mouth or it becomes loose; look for what fits him in one of these instruments and tools I have mentioned under extracting the roots.
And we rely on this depiction of the pair:
There should be some roughness to control the bone so that it does not escape until the bone is extracted, and we adjust its position with suitable medicines. If there is dirt or blackness on the bone inside, remove it from dirt and blackness until it cleanses, then treat it until it heals.
Chapter Thirty-Two
In spreading the germinating roots on another one.
If the roots have grown on a path other than their natural one, they become distorted in appearance and especially so if this happens to women or slaves. It would be necessary to observe: If the root has grown behind another root.
He could not remove it nor push it back; if it is stuck to another bone, cut it with this instrument which I have depicted here.
And it resembles a small curved beak, made of sharp Indian iron. Its edge is so sharp that you can cut through it in many days due to the hardness of the bone, and to avoid disturbing other bones. If it is stuck tightly like this, pull it out with an Indian ice-plunger which I will depict.
All of it is from India and the engraving on its surface is incredibly fine, like that used in making needles. It cools the bone very gradually over many days with care so as not to disturb the bone which would make it fall out, then you wrap it again with some strips.
If a piece of bone has broken off from it, it can hurt the tongue when speaking, so it should also be cooled until that roughness disappears and does not hurt the tongue or disrupts speech.
The thirty-fourth chapter.
In tying moving bones with threads of silver or threads of gold.
If presented to the old bones, they vibrate and move upon a strike or fall, and the patient cannot lie on anything that can be eaten for fear of falling. Treating it with poultices did not help in her treatment.
The trick is to pull with a gold or silver thread, and gold is better as silver rusts and spoils after days while gold stays the same. It will never undergo this. The thread should be elastic and sturdy according to what fits between the bones.
Illustration of knotting: Take the thread and insert its loop between the two correct tarsi, then weave the ends of the thread between one or more movable digits until weaving reaches the correct tarsus on the other side.
Then, sheathe the weaving back to its origin and gently tighten your hand until the knot does not move. Your pulling force should be just on the thread at the ends of the tarsi so that it does not slip away. Then cut off the excess end of the thread with scissors and join both ends together using a thimble, hiding them between the correct tarsus and the movable one.
So as not to cause swelling of the tongue, leave it like this taut. If it dissolves or breaks, tighten it with another thread so that you can enjoy it this way for all time. This is an illustration of the tarsi and the form of knotting in two correct tarsi and one movable tarsus as you see:
One or both tarsi might return to their place after falling and being tied like we described, remaining in that state. This is done by the maker of a walking companion tool, who carves bones from cattle bones to create the shape of a tarsus, placing it in the spot where the tarsus originally was. And it is tied like we said, remaining and being enjoyed in that way.
Chapter Thirty-Four.
In cutting the band that is exposed under the tongue, it prevents speech.
This band that is exposed under the tongue may either be naturally present in humans, being part of their anatomy, or it could be due to a residual mark from a healed wound.
The procedure involves opening the mouth of the patient and placing their head on your lap, lifting their tongue. You then cut this nervous band across, allowing the tongue to be released from its constriction. If there is some hardness or complexity in it due to healed wounds, insert a stick into it and make cuts across until the band breaks apart and the knot unties.
Beware that the cut should not be deep in the muscle, for if it cuts a vessel there, bleeding will occur and cannot stop. Then, after the cut, soak the wound with rose water or vinegar and cold water, then place under the tongue a wick of cotton which the slave girl holds every night.
So that it does not heal again if there is bleeding, put on the place a poultice of powder. If your blood prevails, cover the area with an occlusive pad suitable for this purpose. Then treat it with all other remedies until it heals.
The thirty-fourth chapter.
In the removal of the worm that is generated under the tongue.
It may happen under the tongue that there is a mass resembling a small leech which prevents the tongue from its natural function and perhaps bone until it fills the mouth, the work in this case is to open the slave girl's mouth towards the sun and look at the lump.
If you see it as a purple or black hard mass that does not feel the slave girl, do not touch him because he is cancerous. If it tends towards whiteness and there is moisture in it, coat it with vinegar and cut it with a delicate scalpel, remove it from every side.
If your blood prevails during your work, put on it a poultice of powder until the bleeding stops, then return to your work until you remove it completely, then wash with vinegar and salt.
Then treat it with all appropriate remedies until it heals.
The thirty-sixth chapter.
In the treatment of a tumor in the breasts.
What grows in the neck from other masses may present within the neck as glands that resemble those appearing externally, and they are called two types of lymph nodes. If treated with what was mentioned in the section, it does not resolve.
And observe: if the tumor is hard like the color of a pale complexion and has little sensitivity, do not expose it to iron. If it's red in color and its origin is firm, also avoid exposure to iron out of fear of bleeding; instead, let it mature until either it heals on its own or it bursts from within by itself.
And if it is whitish in color, long, and its origin is delicate; this is the one that should be cut. The action to take in such a case is: before proceeding with the operation, observe whether or not the heat of the surrounding area has completely stopped (indicating healing) or if there's still some residual effect of inflammation.
In that case, you should place the patient with their back facing the sun and head resting on your lap. Open their mouth and take a servant in your hands to push their tongue down using this device, which is its representation:
It is made of silver or from copper and should be as thin as a knife. When you push the tongue with it, revealing the tumor under it, and when you see its location clearly in your line of sight, take a thread and weave it into the lymph node and pull it out as much as possible without pulling anything from the tissue along with it.
Then, you cut it with this tool resembling a pair of scissors but with its ends being bent like a knife. Each end is sharp like another's blade; it should be made from Indian iron or Damascus steel:.
If you don't have this tool, then cut it with these pliers:.
Sharpness on one side and not the other, so after cutting one lobe, the other is cut in the same type of cut. Then after cutting, the pus is washed with cold water or soap and water.
If it presents with a blood flow, wash it in water that has boiled its pomegranate peels or asafoetida leaves or similar substances until the bleeding stops. Then treat it until it heals completely. In some cases, there might be other tumors besides the lobes on the neck, which should be cut in the same way as described for cutting the lobes.
A woman was treated for a tumor that had grown inside her neck and extended slightly into the voice box, almost blocking her airway. She could only breathe through a narrow passage, which prevented her from eating or drinking water.
She was on the brink of death if she had to survive another day or two, as the tumor had grown two branches extending through her nostrils. I acted promptly and pierced one with a needle, then pulled it out, extracting a suitable piece.
Then I cut it where she understood from the nostril hole, then did the same for what protruded from the other nostril hole. After that, I opened her mouth and pinched her tongue. Then I pierced the needle in the same tumor and cut some of it off; there was only a slight bleeding from it.
Her neck returned, and she began drinking water right away. She was able to eat food as well. We kept cutting that tumor repeatedly over a long period of time; the tumor would heal in place instead of being cut off until it lasted for both her and me.
I opened and removed the tumor inside her neck, causing it to stop increasing. Then I went in another direction and did not know what God had done with me after that.
Chapter Thirty-Seven
In removing a tumor in the breast.
The one that is called 'Unqa' when a vein descends into the breast and swells, being white and rectangular. If it's hard at the bottom and cylindrical, then it's also called an 'Unqa'. When treated with what we've mentioned in the division of diseases, if the treatment doesn't work.
I saw that the hot tumor was isolated from its surroundings, it was thin, and there should be a cut. It had no solid mass, wasn't cylindrical, didn't have length, and was either bloody or of the same color or black, or it didn't feel anything to touch; one should avoid cutting it.
In it, there is a concern about the pus (yilil). If seen with its characteristics such as whiteness and length, one should have the yilil sit on the sun's sandal and use an instrument to squeeze his tongue according to its description. Then insert the pincer in the Unqa (tumor).
And guide it downwards, cut it with one of the two instruments that I mentioned in cutting the double lungs. You should not cut more than what is natural without excess because if you cut more, you harm speech and conversation.
Then, after cutting, apply what we described in removing the double lungs and treat her until she recovers. If the pus does not refrain from cutting, it is necessary to use the trick in its milking without fear or caution; the purpose of milking here is with the sharp medicine, which is placing the head of the pus into your stone (a traditional method for treatment).
Then, she squeezes his tongue with the instrument we mentioned. Then she takes hot water as described in the section on milking and mixes it with a non-quenched mortar dough until it is neither too thick nor too thin. She fills this in the machine of which here's an illustration:.
Place the part of it where you put the medicine so that it is scraped like scraping a spoonful of pus, place the tool with the medicine on the tongue itself and let the patient lie on his side to drain any saliva from inside his throat so as not to descend into his throat anything that may harm him.
Then hold your hand with the medicine while you squeeze it on the tongue for half an hour until you see that it has turned black and calmed the sting of the medicine. If you wish, take a cotton ball and twist it at the tip of the tool and dip the cotton in the medicine.
The tool dipped in cotton goes into the tube from above until the cotton sticks to the tongue. Do this repeatedly until you have reached the desired length of the tongue, then leave it as it will soften and shrink after three or four days. If you need to repeat the medicine, do so.
After the treatment, wipe around the tongue with cotton that has been soaked in oil and remove any remaining medicine from around it. Then rinse with cold water and treat externally with scalp combs and internally with gargles until it heals. This method of treatment is safer than cutting and further from fear compared to other methods.
The tongue can also be treated with what is gentler than scraping and cutting. It is treated with incense on this condition. Various herbs are collected such as Foudj, Zofa, Soutra, Sdab, Shih, Papang and fasting among others which are all gathered either in their entirety or partially into a pot and immersed in vinegar.
Heat the pot with a heated bottom until there's a hole in the middle of the lid where the dried tool is placed on this condition. The tool can be made of silver or brass:.
The practitioner inserts the part containing the tumor into the patient's mouth until the steam rises to the tubing, causing the heat lamp to intensify greatly. Then they apply this treatment repeatedly until it evaporates, and beware not to perform this treatment at the initial stage of a tumor.
If it often increases the tumor, you should do this when the hot tumor is decreasing. If this apparatus isn't available to you, take a tube and put an eggshell on its tip so that the mouth of the patient doesn't burn.
Because the eggshell prevents the hot steam from burning the mouth, this is a good treatment with its safety.
The thirty-fourth chapter.
In removing thorns and what else erupts in the throat.
It often erupts in the throat, a bone or a fishbone or something else. It would be advisable to remove what is visible and settled into it after scraping with the device under the sun.
So that you may see what is in the throat, and what has not appeared to you and hidden in the throat, it would be advisable for you to induce vomiting from the patient before his food digests in his stomach. Perhaps the thing that erupted might come out with vomiting or the patient might swallow a piece of meat or suffer from indigestion.
Or he might swallow a piece of dry bread, or you take a small piece of the soft sea sponge and tie it in a thread. Then he swallows it; when it reaches the location of the thorn, pull on the string quickly. You do this repeatedly.
Often, the thorn or bone sticks and comes out. If it doesn't come out with what we've mentioned, otherwise use an instrument made of metal in this shape:".
To make it slightly larger than the forceps and at its end there is a handle through which the surgeon enters it into a loop gently, while lifting his head upwards. He should be careful not to touch his throat in case he coughs, or pushes the bone or the stick out. Or the doctor may enter it with his hand.
And introducing the forceps to it is better for him to know the location of the protruding object, he can either push it down or pull his hand with the instrument up. All of this depending on what he is prepared to do until it comes out.
The thirty-fourth chapter.
In the removal of the protruding phlegm in the throat.
If the phlegm has not healed with the treatment mentioned in the section using medicinal treatments, then examine at that time the sun's area of the forceps' hole in the patient's throat after you have pressed his tongue with the instrument described to you.
If you see the phlegm, draw it with a small hook or a soft and tight gaff. If you are unable to do so otherwise, take a curved pipe and insert it into the throat of the forceps close to the phlegm, then insert in the mouth of the pipe a heated rod.
You do this several times, and the forceps bears with his water for his entire day, then he takes a cup full of cold water and opens his mouth to it and rinses with it, but does not swallow any bit of it. He moves the water in it occasionally with his hand from time to time.
If the phlegm falls off when she feels the water, then if it doesn't come out as we described you would burn the throat with urine and by the instrument that was described under the incense of god. You do this several times, and it will fall out.
The purpose of the incense is to take a quantity containing a piece of heated fire, and this amount is covered with a cover in the middle of which there is a hole. Then one assembles within that hole one end of the instrument. Afterwards, pour in the incense, place the patient's head at the other end of the tube, seal its mouth so that the incense does not come out until he understands that the incense has reached his throat.
If the ball rolls to the place, if it doesn't roll or else incense is poured again, and the patient endures thirst and eats salt and garlic but does not drink water, then there must be an outcome through this method; this is a picture of an apparatus that attracts the ball from the throat when it comes under its vision.
It resembles the fallopian tubes as you see, but it has this cannula that enters the throat, and its ends resemble a bird's mouth in it. The coldness of the instrument if it touches something will not leave it:.
Another instrument is used for the tongue, it is a wide iron loop that can accommodate the mouth up to the tip of the tongue. It enters the mouth on one side standing, leaving the mouth open without the patient's willpower, and he cannot pull it out until it falls:.
Description of the instrument that opens the mouth on this specific scale.
Chapter Forty.
He makes use of speech in removing tumors and cutting them.
Tumors come in many varieties, each differentiated according to what is detailed one by one in this book. They vary in their treatment and incision based on two aspects: the first being the nature of the tumor itself and what it contains from moisture.
The second type of lesion is determined by the location in the body since a tumor occurring in the head differs from one that occurs in the buttocks, and a tumor occurring in a fever-prone area differs from one occurring in a joint. Each one has its own rule for treatment.
Among tumors, there are those that should not be drained until the pus matures and is complete, and among them, there are some that can be drained even if the maturation of the pus has not reached completion. This refers to tumors that occur near joints.
Because if a tumor occurs near a joint and extends until it starts to rot around it, it might spoil the ligaments or nerves of that joint. This can become a cause for the stagnation of that member or the tumor is close to a main body part.
Because if you delay the drainage until it matures, you might damage that main body part or it may occur near the buttocks. In this case, you should drain it intentionally. But, what is necessary to drain is not fully matured in tumors close to the buttocks to avoid rotting and entering inside the buttocks, which could become an invader.
There is also a certain point where they do not heal completely, and you should learn the time to drain tumors that have fully matured. This occurs when there is no pain in the tumor, the fever has subsided, the redness has decreased, and when there is pulsation under the skin and other signs are present.
It is necessary to place the drain at the bottom of the tumor's location if possible, for easier drainage downwards or towards the deeper part of the tumor and with more precision. Let the drain be horizontal if the tumors are located near the limbs.
In the locations of muscles, tendons, nerves and veins as well as generally in all flat areas without curvature, but if there is a curvature then it should be cut according to that location. As for tumors in muscular areas, it's better to leave the cutting until later.
Until it hardens as we said until the completion, if you cut it before that, its drainage would be prolonged and abundant, it might become very impure. There could also be a risk of stiffening its lips and its cavity. Some tumors may need to be cut on the width of the body when necessary or according to what the organ needs.
It is advisable to use a single cut for small tumors and a wide or many incisions for large ones, according to the size of the tumor. Some tumors may require skin grafting and cutting if they have become like a scratch.
There are cases where it has become like what is observed in many abscesses and hiding places, from which it may split into three angles, and there are cases where it is cut like the shape of an ace card as in the case of the aortic tumor.
Some cases require the use of a circular cut, a crescent-shaped cut and similar incisions, where there is no protruding head like in flat tumors that are not raised. It's best to make a simple single cut for such cases. And when it comes to large tumors that have been treated over a long period, if you were to remove them all at once, it might lead to the sudden release of pus.
Instead, remove some of it first, then pull the tumor on another day and also remove some pus as well. Do this in stages repeatedly until all of it is removed.
Especially if the patient is weak or a pregnant woman, a child, an elderly person, or someone with a chronic illness; the animal spirit often dissipates along with the pus release. It might be that the patient dies without you noticing, so beware of this aspect very seriously.
After the incision of these tumors, it is necessary to clean the wound and examine it. If the tumor's wound is small or if there was a single simple incision, use cotton wadding or old cotton. If the tumor is large and there were many cuts during incision.
You should insert wicks into each cut so that they touch each other, even if the tumor has removed some of the skin or absorbed it. It is necessary to stuff it with old cotton or unmoistened cotton wadding and tighten it until the third day.
Then remove it and treat it with what is necessary of ointments until it heals. If there appears a blood leakage during your work, use cold water and vinegar after soaking a cotton cloth in them and carrying it over the bleeding spot multiple times.
If the bleeding persists, it is necessary to apply procedures and treatments and use the means that we described in many places in this book and its division. If you are in winter time and the location of the tumor has many nerves, it is necessary to warm up (soothe) the wounds with hot drinks and oil.
And place it on the spot, if you are in summer and the places are sweaty, carry the remedies with a drink of water and oil or a drink and oil, all cold until the third day as we said. And then remove the tumor and clean it.
And use what is similar for its treatment until it heals, this is what you need to know about treating tumors in general. As for the detailed procedure, I have explained each tumor how the way to treat it, making a summary.
The forty-first chapter.
In the section on lesions that appear in the scalp's skin.
Exhibiting in the scalp are small tumors, they belong to a type of merchandise that includes pustules which have conditions like chicken's comb and it has many types, ranging from fatty ones to those containing moisture resembling phlegm.
And there are those that contain moisture like gunk and soup-like substances, among others. There are also those that are stony hard. All of them, there is no danger in cutting or removing them unless a blood vessel gets in your way when cutting it.
The procedure for cutting it is to first cut into it with the tool that appears after this description, which is called a needle, in order to know what is inside. If it contains moisture, then cut it lengthwise diagonally like this:
Start by cutting along the line ~b~ to line ~g~, if the moisture has drained, remove the sac that contained this moisture and cut it completely, do not leave anything from it at all. Often it returns if something remains.
Then, soak a cotton in the dried pus if it's available, otherwise in salt water and fill the wound with it and leave it till another day. It eats what is left of the sac, then again or thrice re-soak the cotton on this for him as required.
Until you are sure that nothing is left of the sac, then treat the wound with ointments until it heals. If the tumor contains fatty merchandise, cut it like this:
Cut it as if it were hard and make the needles enter at both ends of the wound, then remove it from every side. Try to extract the pustule that contains it, if a blood vessel gets in your way, do as I described after this and do so for the tumor as well if it is stony due to cutting.
The specific treatment is as mentioned, and cutting into the hardened tumor is easier because it has less blood and moisture. There may be some of these tumors in the head in certain people that do not have any moisture at all actually. This is due to cutting into a lump.
The head of an old woman, I found the tumor hard like a white chapped stone that couldn't be broken even if someone threw it. Unlike other tumors found in the head, this was not one of them, as they are seen on children's heads.
And when it comes to the origins of the ears, cut all of them in a simple cut and make its outlet at the bottom so that the material can flow downwards easily. Then treat it according to what suits its treatment.
The second chapter, the fortieth section.
In the cut for pigs that are often exposed on their necks, these tumors also frequently appear in the neck, under the elbows, and in the axillae. They may also occur in other parts of the body. Sometimes there is one tumor appearing in the neck which might be in large numbers, originating from some others.
Each pig from them has tumors inside a specific gland like in the animals, as well as head tumors as we described. There are various types of these pigs - some are hard, others contain moisture, and there are some that are poisonous and do not respond to treatment.
I observed some of them that were well in health when touched, their appearance was very close to the skin color and they could move towards every direction. They weren't attached to the neck muscle, ligament or vessel, nor did they smell. You should cut her in a simple cut from top to bottom of the body like this line '~a~' to line '~b~':
Excise it from every side and insert incisions in the skin with a needle or two needles, or many needles if needed as we said for head tumors. Extract little by little and let them be on its neck not to cut a sweat gland or a nerve. Let the incision not be extremely sharp.
So as not to increase your hand with cutting or to disturb the patient, cut only what you need to be cut. If by cutting a sweat gland or artery it hinders your work, place in the wound some powder or certain seeds that stop bleeding.
Tighten the wound and leave it until the tumor's pain subsides and the wound calms down, getting ready to heal. Then bleeding will stop at that point. Resume your work until you're done, then use your skilled finger to search for any remaining parts. If they are small maggots, remove and clean them.
If there's a great sweat gland in the pig's head, it should not be cut from its root. Instead, it should be tied by two thin threads and left until it falls off on its own without causing harm. Then, you should fill the wound with used cotton that has been washed with Egyptian balsam, then treat it.
And if the pig was completely cut, you should sew the wound together and stitch it after ensuring that there is no fat left. If I see that there's still some fat from the pig's bone remaining.
If you are referring to cutting off its root and branches, then you will use stitches and what we mentioned. If pigs contain moisture, you may bathe them lightly where you see the place of their ripening, let the bath water flow downwards as we said.
Then, after the pus has been removed by the Egyptian ointment and similar substances, it eats up what remains of the decay until you see that the wound has cleaned. Then, you treat it with herbal ointments for the flesh until it heals.
The forty-third chapter.
In cutting the throat for a tumor that occurs inside the throat.
I mentioned this type of incision in the throat; I have not seen anyone do it in our country and this is their way of speaking. As for those with sore throats, they should avoid making a throat cut because they will not benefit from it.
In order that all the tubes and lung become moist, as for those who have a hot tumor in their mouth or throat or lungs if it is not due to obstruction in the windpipe, it is necessary to use a throat cut to escape from the discomfort caused by suffocation.
If we wish to do this, we should cut the throat under three or four rings of the windpipe, making small cuts in length between two rings. The cut should be within the cartilage and not within the skin. This position corresponds with the cut.
Since it lacks flesh and its blood vessels are far away, if the surgeon is brave, he should extend the throat skin with a thong. Then, he should cut the skin until it reaches the windpipe at its side, provided that he sees something from there.
Then, he cuts the trachea as described, and uses the phlegm that comes out of it along with what escapes, and stops when his fear of suffocation disappears. The surgeon then joins the edges of the wound together with the skin.
His plan was for something not involving the pleura, then they would use medicines that stimulate flesh growth until it heals. He who wrote this book explains what I have narrated from his words; when they saw the patient had sealed their neck with one of these tumors they mentioned.
The emaciated patient was on the brink of death and fearing for their life, they decided to open up the throat. They let the emaciated person breathe at the wound site, a bit of breathing, so that they could escape death. Only then were they instructed to leave the wound open until the cycle of illness completes itself, and its duration is three days or roughly such period.
Then, they were told to stitch up the wound and treat it until recovery. The one who witnessed this personally is narrated that a servant took a knife and sent it to cut her throat; she cut part of the windpipe with it. She was called for treatment, and when I found her dying as if she had been slaughtered, they exposed the wound.
I found that the blood flowing out of the wound was minimal; she had not severed her veins or arteries. Air was flowing out of the wound which caused her to start breathing again. She stitched up and treated the wound until recovery, and no other issue occurred for the servant except some choking in her voice with nothing more following it.
She recovered after a few days to her best condition, thus we can say that opening the throat is not dangerous here.
The forty-fourth chapter.
In the opening on the tumor that appears inside and outside of the thoracic duct, it is called the thoracic duct cyst.
This tumor, which is called the thoracic duct cyst, is a large body-colored tumor that occurs frequently in women and has two types.
Whether it is naturally occurring or by exposure, if it's natural there's no cure and if it's due to exposure, it can occur in two ways. One way is similar to fatty lumps and the other is similar to a tumor that results from arterial occlusion with a dangerous crack within it. It should not be treated with iron in its entirety, except for what is small. If you probe and examine it with a needle, its appearance resembles fatty tissue; it is not attached to anything of the veins, so cut it like cutting into fatty tissue. Remove it if it's contained in a cyst, and if not, then thoroughly extract all of it, and then treat the affected area according to what should be done for treatment.
Chapter Fifty-Four
In the section on the incisions for different types of fatty lumps.
The fatty lumps have many types, and I have mentioned all of them in the section. It is necessary to explain here the difference between fatty tissue and pus because it poses a problem; I say that pus comes with heat, fever, and frightening pain until the excess subsides. The dung continues in that case, then the fever and intensity settle. The fatty tissue does not come with heat or fever or pain, it contains a thin membrane sac which is its own special covering. It has the color of the body and starts like mustard oil, becomes like a seed bean and can be bigger or smaller.
She is on two types, either fatty or she contains moisture, and the colors of the moisture are numerous as I mentioned in the section. If you decide to treat fatty tissue, it should be probed and examined first with a tool called a needle as depicted in the following chapter after this one.
The value of the tumor, then remove the probe and observe what comes out in its aftermath. If a watery secretion emerges regardless of its color, cut it with a simple incision as explained for all tumors in other sections. If no water-like secretion appears after removing the probe, you should know that it is fatty.
Cut her on this image as I have taught you, with a hard incision like the one shown. Fix it with clamps and gently peel off the skin from all sides. Keep hold of the sack if possible to extract it properly along with the substance inside.
If the sac breaks during operation and you cannot extract it properly, this situation occurs frequently. Extract it piece by piece until nothing remains. If any part is left, whether little or much, it will again determine the condition of the substance inside most likely.
If the major part is excised and only a little remains, make deep cuts at the edges of your wound during closure with sharp sutures. Wipe off heat from the inflamed area and treat it with all other remedies until it heals. If the substance inside is large, stitch its edges and treat it to promote healing.
If a harmful or non-harmful sweat obstructs you and causes bleeding, act promptly by applying the moistened plaster to the area. Leave it tightly in place for two or three days until the wound heals and stops bleeding. Then proceed with cutting whatever remains of the substance.
The Sixty-Fourth Chapter.
In illustrations of the machines.
These are illustrations of the probes, which operate in the cut and breach within them. They consist of three types: large ones, medium ones, and small ones.
Large picture of a needle:.
Middle picture of a needle:.
Small picture of a needle:.
The lancets are made of iron steel with square edges and are precisely crafted to facilitate entry into tumors. These are the images of the lancets, they are also called 'the cold' and there are three types including large, medium, and small ones. This is an image of a large lancet:.
Middle picture of a lancet:.
Small picture of a lancet:.
It is suitable for inspecting tumors, wounds, bones and other contents within them. A well-polished, smooth roller, like a chisel made of Chinese or Spanish brass, copper or iron, or even silver, works best with the latter being preferred.
Lancets can also be made from black lead, suitable for sliding through nails that have a stopper to guide them and make their movement smooth. They are divided into three types: those that are long, medium-sized, and short.
The length of each nail hole is adjusted to the size and thickness of every nail, making its hardness suitable for that purpose. This is an image of a large lead lancet:.
Middle image of a lead lancet:.
Small image of a lead lancet:
Images of the forceps, they are numerous types as some have a single hook and can be divided into three categories: large, medium, and small. There are blind forceps which also come in three types. Then there are those with two hooks that also come in three varieties. Lastly, there are double-needled forceps, these too having three types. These are three types, among which are the pipes with three valves. They too can be divided into three categories and each one of these kinds needs its own place, an illustration of a simple large pipewell. An illustration of a simple pipe in the middle:. An illustration of a simple small pipe:.
Illustration of a large dark pipe:. Illustration of a medium-dark pipe:.
Illustration of a small dark pipe:.
Illustration of a large pipe with two valves:. Illustration of a medium-sized pipe with two valves:. Illustration of a small pipe with two valves:.
Illustration of a large pipe with three valves:.
Illustration of a medium-sized pipe with three valves:. Illustration of a small pipe with three valves:.
And these are images of the cutters that penetrate and cut goods and tumors; they come in three types, some are large, others are medium-sized, and there are smaller ones. An illustration of a large cutter:.
Illustration of an intermediate scalpel:.
Illustration of a small scalpel:.
Its blades, with which it penetrates, are limited, while the rest of its extremities are unlimited. This design is made to enable it in removing goods when there is fear of cutting a vein or nerve; it allows for a slight comfort from the pain one feels when removing tumors.
These are illustrations of decoys and they are divided into three types according to their sizes, being some large ones, others medium-sized ones, and smaller ones. Illustration of a large decoy:.
It is made from a type of malleable bronze that can be bent, and in one end there is something resembling a wide spoon-like utensil. There is a concealed scalpel at the head which resembles a bird's tongue, it goes inside and outside as you desire when you want, just like you see.
Illustrations of the scalpels that are hidden between fingers when operating on tumors, they do not feel them by the patient. They are divided into three types being some large ones, others medium-sized ones, and smaller ones. Illustration of a large scalpel:.
Illustrations of the cuppings used to stop bleeding, they are divided into three types being some large ones, others medium-sized ones, and smaller ones. Illustration of a large cupping:.
They are made from bronze or slightly elongated in length like this, they should be at the right curvature. It is necessary for you to have these types of cuppings being large and small so that you can quickly cut off the blood when needed and when medicine does not come to your aid.
However, do not use them for cutting blood in every part of the body. Rather, use them on fatty areas such as the calf muscles, thigh muscle, arm muscle, breast, abdomen and the pubic area, and other wet muscular organs.
And there are other smaller instruments that are made from it which resemble pistachio shells as shown in this picture:.
It is used to stop bleeding if it occurs at the site of a fracture or when cutting sweat glands or arteries. It can be made in the form of a tool as shown in this picture.
The 74th chapter.
In the armpit of men.
The one that resembles women's breasts may swell the breasts of some people to such an extent that they resemble women's breasts, remaining warm and discolored. If someone dislikes this, it would be advisable to make a cut on the breast in the shape of a crescent moon like this.
From line B to line C:. Then, remove all the fat. Fill the wound with ointment, stitch up the edges of the wound and treat it until it heals. If the breast goes down and relaxes due to its size like in women.
It would be necessary to cut in its upper sides with two cuts resembling a semi-circular shape, each one connected to the other at their ends so that the larger line encircles the smaller one as shown in this picture:. From line B to line G, then cut the skin that is between the two cuts, remove the fat, and use the stitching and stitches we mentioned along with any other required treatment until it heals.
If a cut is not wide enough, it may be necessary to make another cut due to concern or bleeding. You should stuff the wound with cotton soaked in ointment and leave it until the remaining fat is absorbed. Then treat it until it heals.
The 41st and eighth chapter.
In the belly area of tumors that appear below the elbow.
These tumors that appear below the elbow are of pig's fat type, contained in a bag. Some of them contain moisture, and from among those containing moisture, it should be cut with a semi-circular incision like this.
From line B to line G. If all moisture within the tumor is drained over time, cleanse it with gauze and leave it until the next day, then remove the gauze.
Treat with the appropriate ointment until it heals. If the tumor is of pig's knot type, cut it as we have described for the cut in pigs; if it extends to discharge pus, use cutting like what was mentioned in previous explanations.
The 45th and ninth chapter.
In the incision of the tumor that appears before the artery or vein, which is called aneurysm.
If the artery is cut and skin over it has adhered frequently, a tumor often results from this. Similarly, phleboliths (venous tumors) may also appear in this area.
And the signs by which to recognize if a tumor or ballooning is due to an artery or vein. If the tumor is due to an artery, it becomes more extended in depth within the body and when you press on it with your finger, you feel like there's a hollow sound.
The one that comes from the vein becomes extended on the surface of the body. The incision for these tumors is dangerous, particularly in areas like below the elbow and around joints or neck, and at many other places within the body where they can be quite large. It's advisable to avoid treating them with iron.
If there is any swelling or bulging either in the limbs or on the head that needs to be avoided, then anything with an enlargement of the artery should have a cut made into the skin along its length first. Then open this cut by incisions and afterwards slit the artery, extracting it completely from clots.
Until it is revealed, then insert a needle and guide it to the other side, pulling on the artery with a doubled thread at two points as you showed me in pricking the two arteries that are located in the axilla. Then compress this point between the ligaments until all the blood within discharges.
Once the tumor dissolves, then apply a treatment that produces pus until the ligaments fall off. Then treat it with ointments suitable for this until healing occurs.
If the tumor originates from a cut in a vein, it is necessary to grasp as much of the tumor with your hand along with the skin. Then insert a needle below where you held it with your hand and guide it until there's a double thread on it, pulling it out from the other side. Then tie the tumor firmly as you were taught about tying grapes from both ends of the string, if you fear that the threads may slip out, then insert another needle with another thread under the entire tumor where the first needle crosses.
Pull your threads in four places, then cut the tumor in the middle until what is inside comes out. Cut off a portion of the skin and leave what was attached to it. Then apply a dressing that has been soaked in wine and oil on it. Then use the treatment which includes bandages and ointments until healing occurs.
The fiftieth chapter.
In the tumor that shows nerve plexus involvement.
The tumor also shows when it affects the artery and vein; similarly, the tumor exhibits when it impacts nerves due to injury, excessive exhaustion, or similar conditions. It is more prevalent in areas of nerve convergence and junctions.
In every place where joints move, it's a movable tumor that resembles the color of the rest of the body and is usually without pain. If you press it strongly, the person feels almost numbness in it. The tumor doesn't gather deeply within the body.
But it lies beneath the skin and moves in all directions, not forward or backward. If there is anything related to joints, it should not be exposed to iron as it might cause damage. There shouldn't be any part of it on the head or forehead either.
Cut the skin with a scalpel. If the tumor is small, hold it with a hook and cut it off at its root. If it's large, tie it to a string and remove it. Then take out the stitches and sew up the wound until it heals completely.
The fiftieth chapter.
In removing tumors that appear in the abdomen.
Many people have experienced tumors in their stomachs and other parts of their bodies. These are called fungal tumors because they somewhat resemble fungus. They originate from a thin root with a hard head, sometimes their tips change color, ranging from small to extremely large ones.
I have witnessed a man with two protrusions in his stomach, they resembled things like fungus, almost no difference, white and thin at their roots, sometimes their tips changed color and got cracked. The moisture kept flowing from them constantly. I cut both of them off and weighed one of them about sixteen ounces, the other was around six ounces.
The operation for cutting it is to look if there's pus inside, and if the pus is white and wet, with a fine original color, cut it with a broad scalpel and may your scabbard be in fire. Often when cutting it, much blood flows.
If the blood overflow, you should stem it. If I saw pus that is hard and fear of cutting with iron, take a tight lead thread from lead and pull it on the pus which has this property and leave it for two days then add more pull on the lead; the lead will still pull.
Every time you exert on the pus until it breaks and falls of itself without effort, if the pus is thick in nature, then when cutting it there are some fears and obstacles especially what is inside the body. However, perhaps it might be possible to cut half of it or some part of it.
Then you should stop the bleeding so it doesn't recur, then treat it until the wound heals. Be cautious not to cut pus that appears as a thin red strand with an impressive appearance; it is a cancerous tumor. We will provide information about cancer after this.
The second and fiftieth chapter.
In treating nose disorders.
Nose disorders can be caused by many factors, either from the splitting of the sinus that is on the head which leads to pus or mucus leakage as it occurs in other nasal passages, or from bleeding due to a vein or artery as previously described, or from congestion of wind (air) inside.
If it is due to the splitting of the sinus and the leakage of pus, then the color of the tumor resembles that of the body and appears yellow without pain and has a different appearance. If it was due to the leakage of bodily fluids before, its condition would differ significantly from what we described. If you pinch it with your fingers, it disappears then returns, and there might be a hard lump inside, along with severe thickening when entering the bathroom or experiencing intense tiredness. If it was due to moisture beforehand, it would be sticky.
If it doesn't disappear upon pinching, neither increases nor decreases in size, and if it was due to blood before, the tumor would appear blackened by these signs. If it was due to nascent flesh beforehand, the tumor is hard and firm, being fixed at one measure.
If it was due to the wind before, touching it would be sticky. The action in this regard is to observe; if bleeding occurred from the artery or vein or wind previously, you should refrain from treating it because there's a fear and temptation as I taught you in the chapter that discusses tumors occurring from arteries and veins.
If the swelling occurred due to bodily discharge or pus, you should instruct the patient to restrain himself and stand upright with his arms extended. Then, learn by tracing around the entire swelling area with a stick. Then, instruct him to lie between your hands on his back. Then, use a broad pair of forceps to pinch the swelling at the spot you learned about using the stick. Next, extend the middle of the tumor upwards with a large needle and then secure the pinched area in place with strong silk or wool thread, tying it tightly.
The knot of the band should be loose. Then, open the center of the constricted tumor above the band and insert your second finger. If you find that the pus has been absorbed by the band, relax the twists and push the pus back into the body. If you find a lump, hold it with a needle.
Cut off its prominence, if you encounter a vessel or artery block the wound and sew it properly. Then take two needles and insert strong threads into them. Enter these threads in two stiff wires that you have made around the tumor, then pull the tumor in four places with the needles.
And if you wish, remove the needles and leave the place until the tightened flesh decays and falls off by itself or cut it when it has thickened and decayed, then treat it with what is required from ointments until it heals, if the wound was inside a newly formed piece of meat.
Or if it is due to moisture, as we said, you should cut the tumor and remove the blood or moisture that you find there. Then treat it with what promotes healing of the place.
The fifty-first chapter.
In treating cancer.
We have mentioned in the section the types of cancer and how they are treated with medicines, warning against treating them with iron for fear that they might cause ulcers. We also mentioned cancer originating from the womb and warned against its treatment.
We have mentioned that when cancer is in a location that can be completely removed, such as breast or thigh cancers and the like, which are capable of being removed as one whole unit, especially if it's small in its beginning. However, for large cancers that appear, it should not be approached.
I have not been able to cure anyone from it, nor have I seen before me anyone who has reached this point. When working on something like that if possible as we explained you should progress by removing the impurities from the black period several times then elaborate on it if there is a clear filling in the veins.
Then the surgeon places the patient in a position suitable for the operation, then inserts into the cancer the tubes that are appropriate for him, then cuts from every side with the skin until nothing remains of its roots and leaves the blood to flow without quickly cutting it.
But squeeze the positions and drain all the thick blood with your hand or with whatever you can of machines. If your work is obstructed by a great gush of blood from cutting an artery or vein, cool the skin until the bleeding stops, then treat him with all other treatments until he recovers.
The forty-fifth chapter.
In the treatment of leprosy.
We were informed in the section about different types of bloodletting and how water assembly should be, along with signs for each type and their treatment with medicine. The one that is treated with iron is only the dry type; it does not come close to using iron on the blood type or the flesh type completely.
If that is the case, it's a battle. If you have treated this type of dry leprosy with medicine and your treatment has not been effective, look to see if the patient has overexerted himself or if he has another disease besides leprosy, such as if he is ill in some other way.
If there is coughing or diarrhea, etc., then you should treat him with iron as it is a strong medicine. If I see the patient and he has abundant strength without any other disease besides leprosy, and he is neither a child nor an elderly person, in that case, your approach to dealing with this situation should be to have the patient stand between your hands. And have a servant stand behind him and squeeze his abdomen with their hands, pushing the water downwards towards the elbow area. Then take on a spinal crutch in this position:.
Limit the incision for a long time, fix the edge like a cutting tool, except that there's some fat in it just so it won't cause damage when working towards the organs, then withdraw. If the tumor originated from an intestinal side.
You should open the cut from her hip to three fingers below, above her knee, if the tumor originated from liver disease. If it is caused by gallbladder disease, your cut should be parallel to three fingers at the right side. If it originates from a kidney ailment, your incision should be in the right side up to three fingers' width.
Also, the incision should not be on the side that the patient intends to lie on, as this could lead to leakage into that weak area. Then use the tool to pierce through all the skin and enter the incision, lifting your hand afterwards.
Using the scalpel between the skin and the fascia as if you are peeling it off, remove about an amount equal to the width of a finger or slightly more. Then puncture the fascia until the scalpel reaches a hollow place - this is where the water collects - then extract it and insert the tool into this hole, as shown here.
It is somewhat similar to a tube made of a thin copper, or brass, or polished steel with a smooth surface. It has a small hole at the bottom and two holes on each side; one hole from each side as you can see.
And it may place its tip in the form of a quill on this pen, as shown here:.
On its upper end, there's a ring. If the device reaches water, it will release from its holder onto the device. It extracts water for an average duration because if you remove more than necessary at this time, it might lead to the death of the patient due to the collapse of their animal soul.
If it shows signs indicating that death is imminent, but you evacuate from him according to his strength and what his condition suggests about the strength of his pulse and the beauty of his color, then remove the apparatus and retain the water. This is because he retains it for his duration.
Because of the skin that holds the hole in the chest which I told you to cover it with this condition, then reapply the apparatus another day if I see the patient capable of enduring it.
And also remove the small amount of water you do it for several days while you are on guard, and be cautious to avoid error until only a small amount of water remains. If you fear for the patient and leave some water in excess, bury this excess by the heat sand.
And a lot of sweating in the bath and sunlight, make him endure thirst and treat him with dried medicines until he recovers. After removing the water as described in what was mentioned earlier, ensure stomach, liver, and gallbladder are strong.
The fiftieth chapter.
In treating children who are born and their places of urination are not pierced or if the hole is narrow or in a wrong position.
Some boys may be born without being perforated from their mother's womb and it should be necessary to puncture him immediately after birth.
With an extremely fine forceps on this image:.
Then place a very fine, thin leaden pin in the hole and fasten it. Keep it for three or four days. Whenever nature calls him to urinate, push him back by hand; then let him return on his own. If you lose the lead, it may be possible that urine which has wandered off its path will not leave it and will close.
And if it has a narrow opening, it is treated with lead as we mentioned before for many days until it widens, and those who have the opening in an inappropriate location, this means that among them are some born with the hole at the end of the bladder so they cannot urinate forward.
And until he lifts the testicles with his hands above or does not beget before that the menstruation cannot reach the womb when it is in a straight line, which is extremely disgusting. The reason for this is that the ill person lies on his back during the treatment.
Then extend it with your left hand for a very long time and cleanse the tip of the penis with an instrument or a sharp large tool like a pen, making sure that you carve something in the middle as if it was similar to a bladder. The hole should be in the center as it should.
And beware of bleeding when you work, as excessive bleeding can lead to complications that are treated by stopping the blood and healing the wound until it heals.
The sixtieth chapter.
In the urine that appears in the bladder, kidney, ash, disease, and adhesion of the bladder to the kidney.
Often, this urine appears in the foreskin which is a fatty layer of skin and can be pus-producing or non-pus producing. The non-pus one should be attached to a soft string.
And cut it until you clean all of it, then apply cotton dipped in Egyptian balsam on it. Then treat it afterwards with the nectar balm until it heals. And if the urine is pus-colored and thick, it should be used in it after cutting and pulling out.
If the urine is in a fatty layer, it will not clot and there will be some urine inside the layer and some outside. It is necessary to remove the urine that is inside first until it vanishes; then it can be treated from the outside.
Because if you treat them both together, there might not be any protection for the layer against bursting. It can also occur in women and within the layer, blackness and rot may appear. It is necessary to remove all that has turned black and it's likely to spoil or has already spoiled.
Then, after that, mix it with honey and peelings of the ground alder, crushed and sifted, as well as the pomegranate rind. Then treat it with all other treatments until it heals. If a bleeding occurs, use this method on the wound using an Helaawi needle: [description of treatment is missing].
If the pomegranate is effective for both situations, meaning bleeding and wounds when they become spoiled, then if the pomegranate mass gathers and leaves as a whole at some point, it should be introduced into the urethra in a lead pipe to irrigate it. As for the attachment of the layer to the pomegranate mass.
This attachment occurs in those whose layer is healthy and has not been made to clot, it may be exposed to attachment due to a wound or tumor. It should be removed with surgical scissors until the ligament dissolves and the pomegranate mass releases from all sides.
If it is difficult to identify them during inspection, it might be necessary to remove a bit of the pomegranate mass and from the layer. This is because the layer is thin, so it may burst due to its thinness quickly, then separate between the layer and the pomegranate mass with a fine silk thread that has been dipped in cold water so as not to stick together also.
Then he treats with a grip drink until it heals.
The seventy-fifth chapter.
In purification of boys and treatment for what they might commit of error.
Circumcision is not something other than the separation of connection like all surgeries, but since we perform it with our will and use it specifically for boys, there should be an emphasis on doing the best work in this matter.
The easiest path leading to safety, so I say that none of her books mentioned circumcision in any part because it was not used in their teachings and it is what we have acquired.
By experience, this is because I found the majority of surgeons and hair cutters using the Moses purification with scissors, and they use the clamp and bandage with thread and cutting with the forefinger. I have tried all these methods.
And I found none better than circumcision and bandaging with thread because the Moses purification often causes skin to stick, as the skin of foreskin is two layers; you might cut the upper layer while the lower one remains.
It often requires another cut and recurrent pain, and the purification with clamp does not result in cutting off the tip of prepuce as it might enter its hole. As for purification with forefinger, the skin might tear, making your work bad or the child's skin naturally short.
Many are born like this and do not need purification, I have seen that. As for circumcision and bandaging with thread, the experience revealed its advantage because the blade from above is similar to the blade from below.
When your hand operates with the two saws fitting at a scale of one measurement and in the same period, it makes the thread line essentially like a wall for the testicle skin from every aspect. There will be no fault or mistake, and the first aim is to trick the child.
Especially if he understands a bit that you are only tying the thread in his testicle and letting him come back another day, then make him happy and pleased with all your abilities and what is acceptable to his intellect. Then stop him before you, erect on his feet.
Let him not sit, hiding the scissors in your armpit or under his foot. There should be no sight of this to the child or anything from the equipment. Then enter your hand into his testicle and inflate the skin until the head of the testicle comes out.
Then clean it from what collects as dirt, then tie the marked position with a double thread, then tie a little below it with a second knot. Then hold your thumb and index finger on the lower tying place firmly, and cut between the knots. Then lift the skin up quickly and pull out the head of the testicle. Leave some blood to flow; it is better and causes less swelling of the testicle. Then wipe him with a wet rag, then sprinkle it with dry burned cypress ash or corn flour; they are both excellent.
Then lift the skin up quickly and pull out the head of the testicle. Leave some blood to flow; it is better and causes less swelling of the testicle. Then wipe him with a wet rag, then sprinkle it with dry burned cypress ash or corn flour; they are both excellent. Then apply the ointment on top in a needle of boiled egg yolk cooked in rose water and beaten with soft and fragrant rose oil. Leave it on until another day, then treat him with all other treatments until he heals.
This is a picture of the scalpel that is suitable for purification:.
Be sure that the scissors are sharp and straight, with a smooth blade for piercing; moreover, the lengths of the blades should match the lengths of the handles equally. As for the fault found in purification, it might involve completely or partially cutting off the inner skin when cutting, so you should extend it using your thumbnail before the affected area swells.
Cut it evenly, if you can't hold it with your thumbnail, pull it using a thong and cut it. If the three days have passed and what is behind the lower part of the skin swells, leave it until the hot lump subsides and then gently remove it.
Cut it according to what suits you, and preserve from the head of the boil. If you cut part of the head of the boil, it doesn't harm that; treat it with whatever promotes healing of the wound as we described in the article on sutures.
And if you cut more skin than necessary and it contracts upwards, this also doesn't cause much harm. Treat it as we've mentioned until it heals.
The fiftieth chapter.
In treating urine retention in the bladder.
Urine retention in the bladder occurs due to obstructions caused by stones, blood, pus, or swelling flesh, and so on. After addressing this issue using what we've described about various treatments mentioned in our sections, it's essential to continue with further procedures as necessary.
If urine doesn't start to flow and you've determined that retention due to a stone has caused damage in the neck of the bladder, it might be beneficial for the patient to lie on their knees with their heads raised. Then, one should place one leg under them while supporting themselves with the other leg at the back, with the abdomen also touching the back. The person should hold onto their own body as much as possible.
When forced, the neck of the bladder is compelled to push out the stone backwards, and then urine begins to flow. If this does not happen as we have described and the situation becomes severe for the patient, it would be advisable to use an instrument known as catheters which has the following depiction:
It is made of silver, and it's thin, smooth and hollow like a feather quill of birds in a thickness similar to that of about a foot and half. It has a gentle closure at its tip, and its head has an attractive design for taking hold of a looped thread which is tied firmly on its end with a string or cotton.
One end of the thread enters at the bottom of the catheter and bends if desired from a piece of wool, to enter in the tube and block it like a button. Then, the catheter is greased with oil or butter or egg white. The patient sits on a chair.
And it's curved and twisted with wet floss or oil, then the catheter is gently inserted into the bladder until it reaches the root of the bladder. Then, the bladder is bent upwards towards the genital area, and finally, the catheter is pushed inside.
Even if the bladder is bent and then force the catheter inside until it's close to the prostate, the male body tilts downwards with the catheter inside. It's pushed further until it reaches the bladder, and the patient feels that something has reached a void.
It is made at this level because the passage through which urine travels in it is tortuous. Then, the thread made of wool is pulled slightly; as urine follows the path of the thread. After that, remove the thread and let the urine out, then reinsert the catheter.
Even until she empties the bladder and feels relief.
The fiftieth chapter of the ninth.
How to inject the bladder with the needle.
Illustrations of the instruments suitable for this purpose are made from silver or perforated brass, having a long tubular nozzle on its tip. I intended to be able to pour water and medicines in it; this instrument is called a syringe, and here is its depiction:.
They are made of silver or perforated brass, having a long tubular nozzle on its tip. The entire body is perforated except for the end which is hollowed out. You can see it has two holes from one side and one hole from the other as shown.
And the empty space in which the needle is placed should be just enough to fill it without excess. So when you draw water with it, it will suck as much as needed and when you push it, it will expel its contents like the oil-spreader used in sea battles.
If you want to inject the fluids into the bladder, insert one end of the syringe into the fluid and draw water upwards with the nozzle. The water gets drawn inside the syringe cavity then enters the bladder through its tip as described in our earlier discussion on catheters. Then push out the water with the nozzle.
And this fluid reaches the bladder in place until it is felt by the patient, and here's an image of a gentle syringe that can be used to inject the bladder:.
They are made of silver or whalebone, with the top resembling a small helmet and beneath it there's an opening where the ligature is placed. Then you take a sheep bladder and fill it with the water you want to inject into the bladder, then tie it tightly between two straws with a double thread.
This excerpt describes a procedure in which the wet substance is slightly heated on fire. Then, one part of the syringe enters the bladder. Afterward, you tightly pull your hand with the wetness on the bladder firmly until the individual feels that the wetness has reached the bladder.
If you do not have a bladder, take a piece of leather and make a circle out of it. Punch holes in all its parts, then insert a thin string into those holes as if spinning them. After that, gather the circle like gathering a pot after placing inside what you want of wet substances, oils, water etc.
Then tie it to the machine and make it like you made with the bladder, squeezing your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
The sixty-first chapter.
In the removal of gravel stones.
We have mentioned in the section the types of gravel stones and their treatment with medicines, we pointed out the differences between the gravel stones produced in the kidney and those produced in the bladder along with its signs. We also mentioned the gravel stone where the action is done by hand and the split one.
And this is the gravel stone that's produced specifically in the bladder, and it forms in the urethra. I am describing this with a clear explanation and brevity.
I say that gravel stones formed in the bladder are more prone to occur in boys, and one of their signs is that urine comes out of the bladder resembling water in its texture.
Rice grains are visible in it, and they disturb its functionality, causing frequent urination in many cases. They hang down then spread out, causing protrusion of the bladder in some individuals. Boys find it easier to experience this issue until they reach fourteen years old; it becomes harder for the elderly. As for young adults, they're somewhere in between.
The one whose stone is larger has an easier treatment compared to the smaller, for the contrary applies when it comes to the treatment. Firstly, it should be injected with an injection that removes all the pus in his body; for there might exist a stone during examination if the existence of the stone was prevented.
Then, the pus is taken with its legs, it is shaken and thrown downwards to make the stone descend into the urethra or be shifted from a high place several times. Then, he is seated between your hands standing upright with his hands under his buttocks so that the whole bladder leans downwards, then you examine him.
Examine him from outside, if you feel the stone in the space, act promptly on your watch by splitting it open. If it does not fall under gentle touch, then it might be necessary to grease the index finger of the left hand with oil when the pus is a child or the middle finger.
If it is a complete slave, insert it into its seat and search for the stone until it falls under your finger. Move it slightly little by little towards the urethra. Then you squeeze it with your finger and push it out in the direction of the place where you want to split.
And you command a servant to press the bladder with his hand and order another servant that he holds women's hands above and with the other hand he stretches the skin under women's parts towards the place where it should be split, then take the clasper that this is its form:.
And you split between the seat and women's parts, not in the middle but towards the left mechanism. The cut should be in line with the stone and your finger is on the seat while pressing it outwardly to form a wide cut from outside and a narrow cut from inside as much as needed for the stone to exit.
If you do not exaggerate, maybe pressing the finger in the kidney stone seat during the crack might make it come out without difficulty, and know that there might be parts of the stone which have edges and letters making its exit difficult for this reason.
From them, there are those that resemble birch trees and are smooth; they slide out easily. If any of them have edges or corners, it makes the crack slightly deeper. If this way doesn't allow it to come out, perhaps it should be manipulated, either by gripping its narrow end tightly which resembles a file.
To fix on the stone so it doesn't escape from him, or else introduce a smooth and finely polished machine under it. If it's not effective, slightly widen the crack. If you have more than a thing of blood, cut it with scissors.
If there are more than one, first push the biggest towards the urinary bladder's mouth then cut it open. Then push the smaller ones afterwards. Do this if there are more than two. If it is extremely large, it would be foolish to make a huge incision on it because it exposes two possibilities: either damaging it or causing infection.
Either he dies, or else his urine continuously becomes congested because the place does not heal completely but try pushing it until it comes out, or manipulate breaking it with pliers to cut it off.
After finishing your work, soak the wound in a bandage and rest for several days. Tighten and cool it with oil, drink or ointment, and cold water to soothe the hot swelling. Then have him lie on his back for the patient period, without changing the bandage until the third day at most.
Once the swelling has subsided, wash and moisturize the area with plenty of water and oil. Then treat it with the camphorated ointment and the balsamic ointments until it heals. If there is an additional hot swelling or pain in the wound, you might see that blood clots are forming inside the bladder and preventing urine from passing through, which can be identified by seeing blood coming out with urine.
Insert your finger into the wound and remove that blood, for if it remains, it calls for corruption of the bladder and its infection. Then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and apply each treatment suitable to its type until it heals.
During all stages of treatment, it is necessary to keep both thighs bound and together to ensure the stability of the medications placed on the area. If the stone is small and has moved into the urethra causing inflammation with no ability for urination, treat it with what I have described before it reaches the break.
Often, I have been able to avoid surgery with this treatment as I tried it and found that if you take a piece of iron from steel wool which looks like this: .
A triangular blade at the tip is sharp and embedded in a stick. Then, take a thread and tie it around the penis under the stone to prevent it from returning to the bladder. Next, insert the needle of the steel wool into the urethra gently until the steel wool reaches the same stone.
And you move the steel wool with your hand slightly on the same stone little by little while trying to puncture its hole until it is pierced from the other side. Then urine starts flowing from it, and you press your hand onto what remains of the stone outside the penis, as it breaks apart and comes out along with urine, then the wound heals.
And if this treatment does not work for you due to an obstacle preventing it, tie a thread under the stone and another above it. Then cut through the stone in the same urethra between the two threads, and then remove it.
Then, remove the bandage and clean out the coagulated blood that has accumulated in the wound. It was necessary to tie the thread under the stone so it doesn't return to the bladder. The other knot above prevents the skin from moving back once the thread is removed after the stone has been expelled, covering the wound.
Therefore, when you tie the upper thread, you should lift the skin above it so that when you release it, it returns to cover the wound as we explained.
The sixty-first chapter.
In the removal of stones in women.
Very little does stone occur in women. If you find a woman with a stone, it makes treatment difficult and there are many reasons for this. One is that the woman might be young, and the second is that you can't find a woman willing to expose herself to a doctor.
If she is a virgin or from those who are under restrictions, the third reason being that you can't find a woman willing to perform this work, especially hands-on treatment. The fourth is that the location of the incision on women's stones is far from the stone itself, requiring an additional incision.
And there is danger in that. If necessity calls for this, it should be taken by a well-trained female doctor, and very few exist. If she doesn't exist, ask for a virgin companion doctor or prepare a suitable trained woman to do things with women or find someone who can give some indication in this field.
You should prepare her and command her to perform all that you instruct her regarding inspecting the stone first. This involves looking if the woman is young, it should be for a finger to enter her place of menstruation and inspect the stone; if found and pressed under her finger.
Then you should command her to make the incision, if she is not young and is thick, the capable one commands that her finger enters in the virgin's vagina and inspects the stone after placing her left hand on the bladder and squeezing it well.
If found, it is necessary to include passing from the mouth of the bladder down to its full capacity until it reaches the root of the thigh, then cut her along most of the lower part at the root of the thigh in any direction where she feels the stone in that area.
And her finger does not leave the stone, pressing it down, and let the cut be small at first then insert the forceps into this small cut. If she feels the stone, she increases the cut as much as she realizes that the stone can exit from there. And know that types of stones are numerous.
They come in small and large sizes, smooth and rough, straight and curved, twisted and with multiple branches. Learn their types so you can use this knowledge as needed. If the blood flow is dominant, soak the affected area with a medicated ointment and hold it for an hour until the bleeding stops, then return to your work.
Until the stone is expelled. Be prepared with the tools you mentioned for removing stones from men, which you can use in your work. If your blood flow dominates and you have learned to differentiate between pulses indicating a severed artery, place the gauze on the affected area.
Apply strong, firm pressure with the forceps and leave it alone without repeating this action. Leave the stone in place as forcefully removing it might result in the death of the patient. Then treat the wound. Wait until the bleeding subsides after a few days and cleanse the area. Resume your work until the stone is expelled from her body.
The Second Chapter, Sixty.
In the cut on the water ducts.
The water ducts are nothing but a confluence of moisture in the white membrane that is beneath the skin surrounding the testicle and it's called the scrotum. It may exist within a special lining made by nature near one side of the egg.
Until he thinks it's another egg, and finds itself between the scrotum skin and the white sheet we mentioned earlier, this doesn't happen except in rarity. This disorder is produced due to weakness that affects females, thus this substance may be found near them after getting hit on the females.
And this moisture comes in various colors, either yellow, or red bloody, or dark brown, or watery white, and it is the latter that occurs most often. The signs by which it is known.
When water accumulates in the white sheet (the scrotum), then if it's in the area we described, the tumor becomes slightly elongated along its length like an egg shape and the testicles do not show because the moisture surrounds it from all sides.
And if the moisture is within the testicle sac, then the tumor becomes elongated in the direction of the egg.
For this reason, one might think it's another egg. If the moisture is between the scrotum skin and the white sheet, it's felt under touch. And if you want to know the color of the moisture, apply a square sponge on the lump that I've advanced in its image, what comes out from the sponge dictates what is inside.
If we are to treat with iron, you should command the patient to sweat if possible and when his body is full, he should lie on something slightly elevated on his back. Then place a large number of holes under him. You would sit on his left side.
And command a servant to sit on his right side, extending his penis towards one side of the scrotum and towards the abdominal cavity. Then take a broad spatula and cut through the scrotum from the middle longitudinally close to the anus.
The incision should be made in a straight line parallel to the line that divides the scrotal skin into two halves until it reaches the white testis capsule containing tubules. Cut through it and make sure not to cut it, with your excision being more from the side that sticks to the testicle, carefully examining the incision according to your capability.
Then, he fills the testis filled with fluid with a wide and deep incision, then removes all of the water. Then, he separates the lips of the incision with scissors and stretches the testis upwards without touching the scrotal skin containing it, cutting the testicle in whatever way is possible for you either as a single cut or piece by piece.
Especially its soft side, if you do not remove the cut piece, water will flow again. If the testicle protrudes outside of its skin during your operation, and after you are done cutting the scrotum, fold it back then stitch together the lips of the scrotal skin with sutures.
Then treat it with other surgical procedures until it heals. If the testicle has been damaged by another disease, it may be necessary to tie the blood vessels in the appendix to prevent bleeding, then cut out the scrotum and remove the testicle. After that, treat it as we have mentioned.
If the water is present in both sides, you should know that these are two testicles. Make an incision on the other side as you did in the first one, whether it suits you to make a single operation or not. Then wipe off the blood.
Insert wool that has been soaked in oil or rose butter into the incisions. Outside, place another piece of wool that has been soaked in wine and oil, spread it over both testicles with abdominal fluids, and place a folded piece of material on top as the cushions. And it is fastened from above with the band which has six ends as seen in this picture:.
Then take two thongs, weave them and stuff them with the fluffy wool as shown in this example. Create the ends which are made from cotton or wet wool that is tied together by knotting; then gather it like a waistband of trousers. One end takes hold on the chair towards the back.
The second one goes towards the elbow, and the ends are on the thighs from below, while the remaining two ends are on the buttocks. The knot is gathered altogether like a waistband of trousers. This garter can also be made with leather instead of cutting through iron.
And you should take a thin knife file, cut the skin of the scrotum as we described until the white bag containing water is exposed. Take another file according to this picture:".
And it resembles the Greek eye, then you cover that scrotum with it until all moisture is squeezed out. Then stretch the scrotum and scrape off the skin with the file on its containing layer, cut it according to what you can until you remove all of it and protect from the egg not to be touched by fire.
And know that this operation is safer and more distant from bleeding blood, and better than the operation by cutting, for if you oppose in the cut or while using leather, or a hot thing or blood leakage or anything else, it should be treated as soon as it opposes what suits its treatment according to what I have said.
And if the sick man is weak and cannot bear this work due to its severity, let him use the incision as I describe it. If it becomes effective for you according to what we have presented as evidence, then it suits your case.
The blisters are watery. It is recommended that the patient sit on a high stool, then press the tumor from below with a broad scalpel, and make the incision along the length of the body to be wide enough for all water to drain out. Then place cotton on the site and tie it in place.
Leave him to drain the rest of the water, then treat until he has healed. If water is still flowing out while he is being treated, it's due to the fact that the white membrane is obstructing in the mouth of the wound and preventing the water from draining out.
In that case, it is necessary to enter the wound with an ostrich feather or the device used by lovers of water which had advanced its image or slightly increase the opening of the wound.
And know that water may return and gather after six months or about that time. If it gathers, press him in the same manner and make the patient stay for several days.
The sixty-third chapter.
In the section about surgical treatment for meaty blisters and their cure.
And know that the incision on these meaty blisters often leads to harm and death, so we see leaving them alone and ensuring safety for me as I remember my work and the types of tumors.
I say that many tumors can occur in bodies that include the composition of females, and this is due to many reasons, either from a discharge heat directed towards females or from blows. The color of the tumor matches the body's color and it does not contain water.
The tumor is yellow, and perhaps the tumor is hard like mud, without touch or sensation. It may be due to the complexity of the veins and their swelling, as mentioned earlier or from swelling of the arteries. If it's from swelling of the veins, this can be identified by observing that the tumor disappears.
If it pinches by your fingers and does not show any redness, while the kind that comes from vein enlargement, nothing disappears from it upon pinching with fingers. This type might cut it and other tissues too.
And it is to incise the scrotal skin, then stretch the testicle upwards and remove it from the white sack, removing the spermatic ligament from the blood vessels, tying the blood vessels, and cutting the spermatic ligament after clearing all directions from the edges of the testicle. If the testicle has adhered to that growing flesh.
You should remove and cut the testicle, if there is adhesion between anything in the sacks or within the blood vessels, you should clear all that adhesion and cut it neatly.
If the growth of flesh occurs in the area of adhesion that is behind, it should be cut completely and the testicle should be removed as we have mentioned. When your work is done, cleanse the wound with oiled wool dipped in oil and wine, then treat it with other treatments until it heals.
The forty-sixth chapter.
In treating those with Daliah (a condition).
Daliah is a tumor that sometimes twists and resembles a knot, causing relaxation in women, making movement, sports, and walking difficult. In treating this condition among the diseases similar to what has been previously mentioned, it involves proximity to what was described earlier.
However, we should note the operation as done at first, so I say that it is necessary for the sick person to sit on a high chair, then push the spermatic ligament of women down, and finally grasp the scrotal skin with your fingers while the blood vessels, which are close to the penis.
The servant holds the patient's limb and extends it to an extreme length. Then, he makes a broad incision with a sharp knife until the vessels are revealed by being brushed with the heel of the hand as explained earlier about severing the arteries in the adductors. After that, he cuts away from both sides as instructed for cutting the arterial sinuses in the adductors. Lastly, he inserts a needle into it with a doubled thread.
And she ties it at the first place that the wetter displayed to her and also at the last, then she makes an incision in the middle of it standing up across the body and removes whatever gathered there from the foul moist substances.
Then, in dealing with the gull, apply treatments for other surgical conditions that you wish to induce over a period of time so that it removes the vessels feeding one of the females; there is nothing wrong with this. If the wetter offers all the vessels for removal, it should be necessary to remove one of the females along with the vessels so as not to deprive the egg of its food. By cutting off the vessels, it collapses and does not benefit.
The fifty-sixth chapter.
In treating intestinal colic.
The occurrence of this colic is due to a cut that appears in the extended anus on the abdomen towards the ovaries from the intestines. The intestines then ascend through that swelling towards one of the females.
This swelling could either be from a cut in the anus or from its extension. These two types of causes happen due to many reasons, such as being hit, struck, giving birth, lifting something heavy, etc., and if it is from the extension of the anus, then it occurs gradually over a long period of time.
And it does not suddenly occur, the tumor becomes level to about its depth before pressure on the contents causes pain. Its symptom is if pain occurs from the first division of the duct strongly, and the tumor appears differently under the skin near.
And that is by the excretion of the contents and its course outside through the duct, and sometimes it may come out with the contents, which makes this type of discharge excretory and pathogenic. It might be accompanied by wind, and there might be feces running in the content and getting trapped there resulting in deterioration of digestion.
Because it causes severe pain and gurgling, especially when pressing. Various treatments for such causes involve iron which might be dangerous so one should be cautious about falling into this treatment. The prescription is to instruct the patient to return his excretion inside his body if it starts coming back.
Then, he lies between your hands with his legs raised. Extend the skin above the scrotum and cut all of the foreskin's skin longitudinally. Then pierce the incision line with small needles to widen it as needed.
The cut should be such that the egg can come out. Then, you scrape off the skin under the scrotum until both white and hard testicles are revealed from all sides. Then, put your ring finger inside where the egg is.
In the space between the white testicle under the scrotal skin and the second duct, you release the adhesion behind the testicles. Then, bend it with your right hand into the scrotal skin, while at the same time extending the white testicle with your left hand upwards, lifting the testicle together with its duct to the incision area.
The servant is instructed to extend the egg upwards and release a full detachment of the adherent thing behind with a complete pull, then search with your finger to ensure there's nothing of the contained innards in the hard white membrane. If you come across anything, push it down into the belly instead.
Then, you take a needle with thick thread that has been spun from ten threads and insert it at the end of the scrotal sac beneath the skin behind the incision. Then, you cut the ends of the thread until there are four strands left. Then, she/he arranges them together in a hard bundle and ties the scrotal sac we mentioned which is below the scrotum skin with a tight band on both sides. Then, she/he also coils the ends of the threads and ties them very tightly to ensure nothing can reach any of their vessels. So that no heat is exposed and there is also a second band outside the first one, more than two fingers away from it. After these two bands, she leaves enough of the scrotal sac beneath the skin as large as an index finger.
So that no heat is exposed and there is also a second band outside the first one, more than two fingers away from it. After these two bands, she leaves enough of the scrotal sac beneath the skin as large as an index finger. And cut the rest in a circular manner and remove with it the egg, then make an incision below the scrotum skin that bleeds like we described earlier. Then use cotton soaked in oil and apply it to the wound. Use the band we described afterwards.
And often, when the white scrotum (sac) is carefully handled after cutting it, there can be excessive bleeding from it. Leave the band until it falls naturally on itself. If it doesn't fall immediately, use hot water to push it down and apply anything that would cause it to fall off quickly.
Then the wound is treated with all treatments for wounds until it heals.
The sixty-first chapter.
In this section of windings, I have not seen anyone dare to treat the windings with iron. It was mentioned that it should be made in accordance with what we described in the winding associated with Dala'il, which is to tie the blood vessels below the cut with care at the bottom.
Then make a cut in the middle and treat the tumor with what opens it until the blood vessels fall, then treat the wound as we have mentioned until it heals.
The seventy-first chapter.
In the hernia that occurs in the inguinal region.
Hernia in the inguinal region may appear as we said, it affects the site and does not descend any part of the intestine. If it descends, it is easier and always returns at all times.
However, if the duration of this is long, the incision in the scrotum increases until the intestine and the testicle descend into the scrotum. This happens from the extension of the scrotum that occurs in the inguinal region as we said. That is, the scrotum extends then relaxes and pushes the site outwards, causing it to descend. Its treatment is with cautery as I have described its procedure.
And it can be treated with iron in this manner; you make the patient lie down on their back between your hands, then make a cut of about three fingers wide at the warm area where the hernia occurs, longitudinally. Then you tighten the fascias under the skin.
Until the white fascia that follows is revealed, you take a thread and place it on the resulting site of the fascia, pressing it deep into the abdomen. Then you sew the resulting sites onto one end of the thread from the fascia, sewing one to the other with the stitches.
Then only treat the inflamed area, do not cut through the testicles fundamentally or touch the eggs or anything else as I taught you in treating eye diseases. Then, treat it with surgical remedies.
And when the threads have been removed and the wound has healed until it disappears, then the nostril tightens and does not increase in size.
And the knee is better in this position because it's closer to safety.
The eighty-third chapter.
In relaxing the skin of the thigh.
Often, the skin of the thigh relaxes in some people without relaxing the muscles inside it, making its appearance unattractive. It is advisable for those who wish to treat it to lie on their back.
And cut all the relaxed skin on the thick skin, then bring the lips together. If you wish, you can stitch it first; stitch the relaxed skin with three or four stitches and check the stitching before cutting the space between the stitches.
Then, treat it with other surgical remedies until it heals and the threads drop.
The ninety-third chapter.
In castration.
Castration is haram in our religion.
And that is why I should not mention it in this book of mine. However, there are two reasons for mentioning it: one being that the doctor should know what to do when asked about it and how to treat it; and the other reason is because we often need castration of some animals for our benefits.
Cattle like camels, donkeys and cats, etc., are examples of animals that may require castration. When performing castration, it can be done in two ways: either through impotence or by incision and cutting. The method involving impotence involves placing the animal in hot water until its testicles relax, soften and sag.
Then apply your hands to dissolve it until it disappears upon touching, whereas castration by incision and cutting, you should seize the animal, squeeze its testicles with your left hand, then tie the clamps and cut through each egg two slashes.
Even if the testicles have emerged, cut them after stripping them, and do not leave any cuts on them except for the delicate one that exists on the vessels. This method of castration is better than the one done through application.
Because application might leave something of the female behind that pleases the animal during mating, then treat the wound until it heals.
Chapter Seventy.
In treating castration.
Castration in men is of two types; one where it appears in the space below or within female genitalia skin, looking like a woman's vagina with hair, and urine can flow from the one found in the skin of the scrotum.
And in women, there's only one type that appears above the vagina on the thigh like the testicles of men which are small and protrude from both sides like a man's penis, with two resembling females. Treatment for all three types.
The two types of men and the one type of women should have excess flesh cut until there are no remnants left, then treat them with regular surgical care until they heal. As for the second type in men that urinates from the skin of the scrotum, it does not require action or cause any problem.
Chapter One Hundred and Seventy.
In cutting the foreskin and the flesh that comes from women's labia.
The penis might increase in size beyond the natural order, becoming thick and unappealing, and in some women it may grow to resemble men's, spreading out like theirs and leading them into intercourse.
You should hold onto the advantage of the penis with your hand or a clamp and cut it off, but do not dwell on cutting nor especially at the depth of the root in order to avoid blood loss.
Then treat it with surgical remedies until it heals, and as for the newly grown flesh, it is flesh that grows in the womb mouth until it fills it.
Or perhaps it might protrude outward like a tail. For this reason, some early names refer to it as the disease of the tail, and it should be cut off in the same way as the penis, both surgically treated until it heals.
Chapter Two and Seventy.
In treating the dropsy.
Drooping is when a woman's vagina is not fully opened or the aperture is small, and this can be either naturally present at birth or due to an illness. The latter results from an excess of growing flesh for reasons that have progressed.
Or a thin or thick opening, which can be in the depths of the womb, on its sides, above or below, preventing intercourse and childbirth, and potentially urine retention. Identifying this involves visual inspection by the gynecologist.
If the obstruction is visible nearby, if not, feel it with her fingers or a probe; if the obstruction is from thin flesh and close to the lips of the opening, then intervene in its puncturing. Make something resembling a cannula on the lips and then place all your fingers of both hands.
The woman lies on her back, spreading her legs. Then the two stumps are pushed strongly until they pierce the thin skin causing the stoppage to open. After that, wool is taken and soaked in oil which is then placed on the area. The woman has to visit every day so as not for the place to heal again.
If the skin is thick and tough, it may be necessary to cut it with a broad blade resembling paper-thin leather. If the stoppage is made of fatty meat, bind it with threads and cut it off. Have remedies for stopping bleeding without pain like henna, onion, milk mixed with egg whites available.
Then, she uses a wide copper tube so that the wound doesn't heal quickly. She holds it for several days and uses dry cotton wicks afterwards. She treats with other treatments for adhesion until healing occurs. There might be another type of meat plant exposed in the womb which may require cutting under these circumstances.
If it is not cancerous, then a cancerous tumor in the womb cannot be treated with iron alone.
The seventy-fourth chapter.
In treating hemorrhoids, vaginal discharges, and red sores that appear in women's thighs.
As for hemorrhoids, it is the swelling of the veins until much blood flows constantly. If hemorrhoids occur, they become discharges. I have mentioned their types and signs in the previous section, we will now discuss them here.
What is acceptable for treatment and what is not, I say that hemorrhoids and discharges if they are deep in the womb and are not felt by touch, there is no treatment with iron. The ones that come into contact with sensation in the mouth of the womb, these are the ones to be treated.
In order that the woman enter a cold house, then spread the cushions with rough material or in thorns and cut them from their roots, then leave her upon bleeding when menstruating from one of the cut-off blood vessels without tickling.
Like garlic, onions, cheese and similar items, then lift her legs to the wall for an hour, then hang them in cold water. If bleeding lasts, seat her in a tub filled with medicated oil from saffron, date tree bark and tamarind peel, etc. Then take the flour of wheat grains, mix it with honey and vinegar.
Support it on his back, if bleeding stops otherwise fasten the bandage over ribs without condition, then take wool and immerse it in the juice of tamarind or pregnancy tongue's juice or sap from acacia branches with date wine, and bind it to that place.
If the swelling subsides, treat the area with the ointment until it heals. As for the red pus, it resembles the tips of the hair, rough in appearance; it is recommended to cut what has appeared from it as specified in the cushions and treat it until it heals.
The fourth and seventy-seventh chapter.
In the case of discharge that appears in the womb.
Various types of tumors can appear in the womb, such as cancer, calcified tumor, ulcers, pus, eating tumors, nails, hemorrhoids, fissures, cushions, and hot tumors. All these diseases and their types and signs have been mentioned in the section.
We must mention in this article the hot tumor that appears in the womb among tumors that gather for a long time. It is characterized by having its discharge like iron. You should look if it has an intense pain at its beginning accompanied by beats, inflammation and fever.
I saw that if it turns red, do not hurry with your movements and treat him with what promotes maturity until these symptoms settle. Then, the woman should sit on a chair with two seats and lean against its back.
And she should gather her legs towards the lower abdomen, have her thighs spread apart and make her arms under her knees, then fasten them with a belt that is suitable.
So the surgeon sits on the right side and uses the tool she would later have a picture of opening the womb, which is after this procedure. It should be noted that when you want to use this tool, you should estimate the depth of the woman's uterus so that the part entering the tool does not exceed the depth of the uterus.
It can harm the pregnant woman if the tool is deeper than the depth of the uterus, so it should be advisable to place plugs on the cervix's lip to prevent the entire tool from entering too deeply into the uterus. It should also be noted that the cylinder moving within the tool should be from the top side.
You hold the tool and the servant moves the cylinder until it opens the cervix. If pus is seen and feels soft, then you should cut it at its head with a wide scissor until all the pus has drained.
It should be that in the wound, there is a soft wick soaked in rose oil or green oil with some stickiness and the wick should protrude from the incision at the cervix. There should also be cotton wool that's been dipped in boiling water, which contains bread dough on both outside of the uterus and inside the thighs.
Then, treat with the ointment suitable for this purpose until it heals after two days.
And the womb and wound can be washed by injecting with water and honey, then with boiling water containing the root of mastic or a long wormwood stick. Then return to the ointment, if the pus is hidden inside the womb.
And you should avoid treating it with iron, but treat it with what we mentioned in this section.
The seventy-fourth chapter.
In teaching the cauterization, how to treat live embryos if they have come out in an unnatural form.
It is necessary for the midwife to first know the natural birth, and you can recognize it when she sees that a woman starts to conceive downwards and feels the urge to breathe deeply, and anything related to delivery makes her feel relieved.
And if the fetus comes out quickly, know that this birth is natural and will come out with its head and placenta or hanging from his abdomen. If you see these signs, it's necessary to rub her stomach so that the baby can come out quickly.
And if it descends on its head, the placenta comes with it. It cleanses from that excess properly. And this birth is natural and good. Any other birth deviates because the baby can come out on its feet and before its head and legs.
And one of its hands or foot, or it comes out with its head and hand, or comes out folded, maybe it overturned on its forehead, and such other condemned shapes. The midwife should be cautious and gentle in all these matters and beware of mishaps and errors.
And I explain every shape of it and how to deal with it so you can use this as a guide and stand by her, if the baby comes out on its head, that is natural birth, and when it's hard for the woman and it's difficult for her to push, and I see her strength has weakened, then sit her on a chair and tell the women to help her.
To extend her womb with cooked stew and moist nourishment, then the midwife inserts a small probing tool between her fingers to cut the afterbirth or uses her toenail to cut it until what is inside of its moisture flows out. The woman's belly is squeezed until the baby comes down.
If the baby doesn't come down, it is necessary for the woman to inject herself with saliva from a stew mixed with an oil preparation. Then she should be instructed to squat and strain using a stick, while holding her mouth and nose. The baby will come out of its place. If the baby's hand comes out first, it is necessary to gently return them one by one.
If she does not manage to enter, place the woman on a stool and lift her legs above. Then shake the stool on the ground, with the woman holding tight so as not to fall when shaken. If neither hand enters, and if the baby has died, cut off both hands, and then pull out the remaining part of the baby.
Or tie his hands with a thong and pull them evenly; he comes out like this. If the baby comes down on its legs, it is necessary to push them upwards. Then turn the baby little by little until you make it straight. Then take one of its legs and extend it slowly.
If they [the legs] go down to the thighs, instruct her to squat and strain using a stick; he comes out like this. If it doesn't come out in the way we described or if you have to push him back little by little until he is in his natural position, then he will come out smoothly at that point. If none of our instructions work.
Take from the saliva of the cat, the saliva of the stew and an oil preparation mixed with water. Then apply all over the vagina well, then rinse her thoroughly with water so that it reaches the uterus.
If you see that there is no bottom to it, make for her a bag and bear it on your back. If the bag stays in place for an hour, then put her on the chair, then rub her and cover her mouth and nose, and gently squeeze under her belly. The fetus will come out from its bag, coming out of the fetus on its knees and its hands.
If it comes out in this condition, it enters with a little of her hands at a time, then the woman lies on her back and lowers her buttocks downwards while she is lying on the bed, holding her hands together. Then gently squeeze above her belly a little bit by little bit. Then remove what is under her feet from the cushions until it is level at the bottom. If the fetus does not come out, take both of her legs and move them abruptly. Then gently squeeze above the pubis a little bit by little bit until the fetus ascends to the top. Then the midwife inserts her hand and adjusts the fetus a little bit by little bit.
And ask the woman to squat until the fetus comes out, the birth of the fetus is obstructed slightly with one of its hands. It takes possession of the back of her hand; if she cannot hold it herself, make the woman stand and make her walk. If she can't walk, have her lie down on.
On her bed, shake her legs hard. Then use the suction tool I described from saliva; if it takes hold of her, make her sit on a chair, then treat in turning her hand and adjusting the baby to its natural shape. Rub the woman and ask her to squat until it comes out,.
The birth of the baby on her back, her hands stretched out, and her face towards her mother's back, should grasp the midwife's hand, then gently turn it a little bit and adjust it softly. Once it is adjusted properly, carry with your arm what we have described from oil and saliva.
Then there is the case where she should move a little, if she does that then make her sit on the chair and ask her to tilt towards the right side. Then there is the matter of sweating and wiping her with camphor as it comes out, the birth of the fetus standing from one side.
If it descends into the womb in this state with the placenta, cut through the placenta with your thumbnail until all the moisture discharges. If it adheres to the face of the fetus or its neck, cut it from the belly so that it does not choke and die. Then push the fetus inside until you make him turn as he should be.
Instruct the woman to sweat multiple times, as it facilitates its passage out easily, birth of twins or many fetuses. Know that twins are born frequently and some may be born alive but three or four might be born together which is rare. However, if there are five, it's something outside the natural order, they will not survive at all.
And they surround him, and even if there are many, there is one placenta and they separate by a barrier of skin between them which is attached in the belly of each individual. They may come out as they would come out separately like one child does naturally and easily; or they might come out in disgraceful birth as we described.
If some have difficulty during birth and become as we described from unnatural forms, then manage them as we describe, let the mother be gentle and do what she does with care and skill, adapting herself to every shape according to the trick or plan that prepares for her safety.
Describe what is conceived in the womb of fetuses, they may be one or two or three or four or five or six or seven and more than ten. It has been confirmed to me that a woman gave birth to seven and another to fifteen all conceived like this.
With the great and generous consideration, this is all that should be in the science of gynecology for perhaps it might happen to her one day, so she should meet it with what is supposed.
The sixtieth and seventh chapter.
In the matter of delivering dead fetuses.
If you treat the dead fetus with the treatment that was mentioned in the division, and it does not come out, forcing you to work manually, you should look into whether she is physically strong and there is nothing of the symptoms that may cause harm. If she is healthy, you should have her lie on a bed on her back.
Her head should be tilted downwards and her legs raised, with a slave adjusting it from both sides or tying her to the bed so that she does not contract when stretching the fetus.
Then, she moistens the womb's mouth with slippery substances like saliva of the mule and sesame oil, as well as cotton seed oil. The surgeon then applies these substances to her hands and enters the womb gently. She then finds a place inside where she can insert the forceps, choosing positions that correspond to this area.
Look, if the fetus is still ascending and wants to come out through its head, insert the forceps into its eyes or forehead, mouth or navel, under its beard, or in places close to its backbones or under the pubic area.
And if it is descending through its legs, then in the buttocks and middle backbones. It should be held by the right hand with its fleshy part between the left fingers, then insert your hand gently and guide the forceps into some of those mentioned places.
Until you reach a space that is empty, then you insert another pin or a third one if needed so that the pull becomes equal and does not lean towards any direction. Then you extend it horizontally for a certain period of time, so that the extension is not only along a straight line but also moves in every direction.
It should facilitate its removal as done when pulling a tooth and there should be relaxation in the pull; if it is stuck in one direction, then it would be beneficial to apply some grease on certain fingers and insert them from that side to rotate what is stuck. If part of the embryo has come out, then move the needles to another location.
You do this a little higher up until the embryo comes out completely. If one hand came out before the other and cannot be pushed back because of being compressed, it would be beneficial to wrap a wire around it then pull it until all of it has come out and you cut it.
Either in the elbow joint or in the shoulder, in this manner you should do it with the other hand and both legs. If the head of the embryo is large and wide, causing pressure when coming out, or if there is collected water in its head, it would be beneficial to insert something triangular between the fingers.
And use it to puncture the head so that the water comes out or you can use a device called the 'shedaqa', which will be illustrated with other devices in the next section of this chapter.
In the same way, if the embryo has a large head naturally, it is necessary to puncture the skull or use the 'shedaqa' as we explained, then remove the bones with the forceps. If the head comes out and is compressed upon stretching, it should be punctured until the moisture in the chest drains.
If the chest joins then, if it doesn't join and doesn't allow for an exit, cut according to your capability; if it is below the belly cut and throw or if it has pus, it should be squeezed until the moisture flows out.
If the fetus is on its feet, attracting it is easy and adjusting it to the mouth of the womb is here. If it is compressed at the belly or chest, it should be attracted by piercing with a needle wrapped around your hand and cutting the belly or chest until what's inside flows out.
If you have removed all the organs and pulled back the head, if it is held in place, then enter the left-hand capable hand. If the mouth of the womb is open, enter your hand into the neck of the womb and pull on the head with it, drawing it in with your fingers to the mouth of the womb. Then enter a tool or two tools and draw it in with them.
If the mouth of the womb has fused with a hot tumor and is wide, there should not be any force applied to it. Instead, at that point, using wet fatty substances and employing ointments becomes necessary. One sits in water that relaxes and moistens.
And if the fetus is on its side, if it can be smoothed out, then use what we have mentioned for living fetuses. If that is not possible, cut and remove it, and it should not leave anything of the placenta inside entirely. After you finish your treatment, use the remedies we have mentioned for treating hot tumors that appear in the womb.
If there is a flow of blood, you should immerse yourself in the water and use other treatments. I have seen a woman who had miscarried but the fetus died within her womb, then she had another pregnancy.
Then the other fetus also died, and a tumor appeared in her abdomen after a long period of time. It swelled until it burst, causing her to vomit continuously. I was called to treat her, and I treated her for a long time, but the wound did not heal. So, I applied some strong plasters on it to induce contraction.
Then, a bone came out of the location, and time passed for days until another bone appeared. She was amazed at this, considering her abdomen to be a place without bones; she realized that these were bones from the dead fetus. She examined the wound and found numerous bones, including those from the fetus's skull.
I continued to follow this until I extracted numerous bones from her. The woman was in the best of health, and she had been living like this for a long time at that location, with a slight discharge moving about. Here I am bringing you something rare.
For it contains knowledge and assistance for what the doctor tries to achieve with his treatment,
Chapter seventy-seven.
There are images of the instruments needed for delivering the baby.
A picture of a tool that opens the cervix:.
This device used to balance books either has two windlasses at the ends of the sticks, but this windlass should be softer than the device and either made of ivory or of the wood of balsam trees. The width of each stick should be as thick as a finger.
The ends of these should be approximately the size of a finger. Their length is about one and a half spans. In the middle of the sticks, two braces made from the same wood are placed and fastened to them; their length could be up to half a span or even slightly more. The width of each should approximate the size of a finger or possibly just a little larger. These two braces serve important functions in their construction.
These two which enter the womb's mouth to open the loops when you guide them, a picture of another device is gentler and lighter for such tasks.
They are made from Ab nouss wood or beech, in the form of paddles, but they have two blades at each end as you see. The length of each blade is about a yard and their width is an inch. If you want to open the womb with them.
Then have the woman sit on a padded bed, spreading her legs apart between them. Then insert these two blades into the mouth of the womb, holding one end of the device at the bottom between her thighs with your hand that is not doing anything else. Then open the device by your hand as you would do with paddles, to whatever extent you want for opening the womb. Until the surgeon achieves what she wants, an image of another paddle that the pioneers had mentioned.
A picture of the cannon that pushes the baby out:
A picture of the catheter used to guide the baby's head:
It resembles scissors with teeth at the tip as you see, and it can be made rectangular like paddles on this image. It has teeth like chisel's edges that cut with and against the direction of the blade.
A picture of a cannon also:
A picture of a sickle:
This sickle has a slight hardness in it to avoid breaking when pulling on the baby with it, a picture of a sickle with two prongs:
A picture of wide spreaders for cutting the baby:
All of these tools, the more varied their types and the better prepared they are for use by the surgeon, make him work faster and be esteemed among people according to his capability. There is no tool that should not have been prepared for use since it's inevitable to need it.
The Eighty-Seventh Chapter.
In the removal of the fetus.
If the placenta is retained after childbirth, you should instruct the mother to hold herself still then induce her coughing with a catheter and grasp her mouth and chin. If it comes out like this, otherwise take some force.
And make a hole in the cover, place open-ended herbs like fennel, parsley, fenugreek, borage, coriander and garlic, all these medicines or some of them into it. Immerse it in water and place on fire. Then put a silver tube over the hole of the pot and the other end at the opening of the womb.
Hold it until the steam reaches the bottom of the womb, then cough as we said. The placenta will come out quickly. If it remains even after this treatment and does not come out, the surgeon should instruct to immerse her left hand in almond oil or garlic saliva.
Then she enters her hand and searches for the placenta, if it touches it she grasps it and gently extends it until it comes out. If it is stuck deep in the womb, then insert your hand as described, until you find the placenta; then pull it gently towards the opening.
So that it doesn't fall out of the womb with strong pulling, you should gently move it to the right and left sides. Then increase the amount of pulling; then she will respond when this happens and free herself from sticking. If the opening of the womb is fused together, then we have described treating coughing and using the pot with herbs for treatment.
If it doesn't come out as described, you may apply force again in pulling, but you should connect what came out from her to the opening of the womb up to the woman's thigh. Then bathe her with the four-part ointment; then she will recover after a few days.
The pus and infection will dissolve and exit, but if it gets infected, it gives off a bad smell to the stomach and head which harms the patient. It is recommended that you use the proper incense.
Therefore, some of the early ones tried using incense such as that used in writing workshops and dried grapes, a picture of the machine that women use to vaporize when there is retention of menstrual flow or after childbirth and so forth.
It is made of lead that resembles a caul or it is made of copper in which the finer tip goes inside and the broader part is placed on the fire, the incense is made to stick until this incense goes away and then she repeats it.
The seventy-fourth chapter.
In the treatment of the non-stung wasp bite.
A large number of boys may have their scrotums not stung, perhaps it was blocked by a thin fold. It is recommended for the capable woman to pierce that fold with her finger, otherwise she should tamp it with a sharp pincers and beware not to touch the testicles.
Then, she places on it wool that has been soaked in drink and oil. Then, she treats it with lotions until it heals. If you fear it will clog, place a lead pipe in the hole for many days, then remove it when the child wants to defecate.
The blockage of the scrotum might also occur due to the healing or tumor of a cut or tumor. It is recommended to open that concretion, then treat it with what we mentioned for treatment and incision.
The eighty-fourth chapter.
In treating the hernias that occur in the lower part.
The stricture that occurs below is a complication and obstruction which happens close to the anus from outside or in the space of one side, and the stricture can be one or more.
If this complication clears up, moisture from a watery white secretion or mucus comes out, which might be originating from these strictures reaching the bowel and the stomach. Those that are not penetrating may indicate what is being expelled along with feces and gas when using the toilet.
Perhaps worms might come out as well, and in some cases the stricture could be present if it was penetrating to the bladder or the urinary passage. It can also penetrate into the knee joint and the tail bone, and there are cases of the stricture penetrating towards the anus without being penetrated.
To insert your dominant finger into the anus and introduce a thin probe made of copper or iron into the stricture, if there is no elevation in the stricture. If it does have an elevation, then insert a thin leaden probe or a hair from horsehair into it.
Until you feel the probe or hair on your finger, if you do not feel it at all and no feces, gas, or worms come out as we said, then know that it is not penetrating. Proceed with treatment accordingly.
If the stricture is penetrating towards the bladder or urinary passage, its indicator is urine coming out from it and inability for medicines to stick at that place. If it's penetrating towards the knee joint or the tail bone, then reaching of the probe there serves as indication.
If there is no elevation towards the bone and there's pain around that side with persistent pus discharge from it, and no treatment helps nor does it heal. These penetrating strictures do not have complete cure possible.
Treating it is a futile effort for those who try on it among ignorant physicians. As for the one that is not implanted and not chronic, it should be cured by ironing off with what I describe and what I have experimented with, which is to make the patient lie down between your hands on his back.
He raises his legs upwards and leans one of them towards his belly. Then the copper or lead pin is inserted through the anus, especially if it's in the rectal passage, until you can determine where the pin ends. If the patient feels the end near the entrance to the vagina, it would be advisable to insert your middle finger into the vagina.
If you feel the pin in your finger to have penetrated on its own, uncovered, without feeling anything between your finger and it through skin or flesh, then you should know with certainty that it is implanted. Do not try to remove it for there is no cure from it as we said.
They have said that it is cured in some individuals rarely, and with a treatment which may prove beneficial, you should apply a thin rod according to the size of the rectal passage as previously mentioned, then insert the keeper within the rectal passage until it reaches near the vagina. Then you should withdraw and replace it two or three times.
Until you understand that it has burned all the excess, constricted flesh resembling a bird's feather tube. Then treat it with a pin dipped in oil until the burnt flesh emerges, then heal it using lye ointments if it is cured.
Otherwise, there is no cure for it with any other treatment. If you insert the pin and it does not reach to your finger in the vagina, and there is a thick barrier between the pin and your finger made of flesh or skin, and if you see the rectal passage below the skin surface, then cut the skin from the first rectum. You pass through the cut with the scalpel while it is in the groove until you reach the end of the cut where the tip of the scalpel is, and the scalpel discharges and falls. Then clean those fragmented tissues that resemble a bird's feather pipe leaving nothing behind.
Then, cleanse it with salve until it heals. If your blood wins and stands between you and your work of removing those tissues, the best thing to do is and the fastest benefit, is to burn them or apply a sharp medicine because burning with fire unites two good things; it burns off those excess tissues.
Cut off the blood and remove the moisture, then treat it with the paste of the antivenin in fat or powdered sulfur mixed with oil until pus appears. Then, when those burned tissues come out through the pus, then treat the wound with the herbal salve for hard meat after that.
These are the medicines that contain constriction and evaporation; if you squeeze it tightly, then it heals without returning. If the groove has reached the depth of the socket and behind the surface of the body, put your finger in the socket and probe it.
If you feel the scalpel and there's a barrier of skin or flesh between you, close to penetration. The effort in this is only on the path of desire and hope; that is, one should use any of three methods: either smoothing it out as we have described.
Or, you might cut until you reach the bottom of the socket to be able to insert the antivenin near it and not extend cutting for fear of severing the surrounding muscle. After that, proceed with what we've mentioned; it may heal as we have described.
Either you will perform this incision and pierce it after cutting through to the bone, as we said either with a lancet or with another sharp instrument, then remove all that fleshy tissue from within the cut until you can reach it through exploration.
Then he would remove all the suture material with the cut and upper mouth until it closes up, leaving the nostril open inside the socket. This will make it easier on the patient; the nostril may be constricted in this manner.
And when you insert the lancet into the nostril and it's in one side of the socket towards the body surface with skin and around the socket, take this moment a sharpened lancet like an awl as depicted here:
And insert a twisted thread from five threads or approximately that number, then insert the lancet with the thread into the nostril until it reaches its bottom. If it is hollow in the edge of the socket from inside near by.
Then, remove the thread from that hole by entering your finger into the socket and pull out one end of the thread. Join both ends together and pull them tightly. Leave it for a day or two. Each time the thread cuts through the flesh, pull it tight with strong force until those flesh pieces between the two ends of the threads are cut and fall off. Then, treat the wound until it heals and disappears.
If the nostril's opening is not hollow, force it open as much as possible but it might be deep. You can't do this because of the muscle, you might cut it. Then treat it as we mentioned until it heals.
A picture of the scythe-shaped incisor which cuts through the nostrils, the cutting edge is extremely sharp while the other side is not as sharp to avoid cutting unnecessary parts as you see:
Chapter Fifty-One
In Chapter fifty-one, dealing with hemorrhoids that bleed and their removal, as well as treatment for fissures.
The hemorrhoids can be divided into two, either they are inside the anus resembling the veins of a horse's hoof or like raisins from grapes, being small and large. Blood constantly leaks from them.
They can occur singly or in abundance, both inside and outside the anus. However, those occurring externally are less common and tend to have little moisture, leaking yellow water or slightly bloody fluids continuously, with a body-like color.
For the hemorrhoids inside the anus, you should instruct the patient to evacuate their bowels and cleanse themselves until they can see the stool coming out, so that you can observe the hemorrhoids. Quickly tie them with strings or pinch them with your finger and cut them off at their roots. If the strings don't stay in due to the moisture and relaxation of the area, however.
Grip them with a coarse awl or a piece of sharpened iron, or pull them with your fingers, then cut them. After cutting, apply some sharp pins to replace the stitches or bandage them as instructed in the section on bandaging.
Then treat it with all other remedies until you see improvement. If the bowels do not allow for proper evacuation, instruct your patient to use an enema containing a little castor oil, which will help cleanse what's in the bowel and encourage quick evacuation upon passage of the lubricated rectum. For those stools that come out from outside the anus, these are simpler cases to manage.
This involves gripping them with your finger or attaching them to a string and cutting them, then treating them with what we've discussed until they heal. If you dislike cutting using iron tools, it might be better to use this method of herbarium; take a twisted thread and insert an awl into it.
Then draw the worms upwards and extract them with a needle from its original place from the other side. Twine both ends of the thread under the needle which is in the way, tighten the worm tightly then tie the thread together and remove the needle. She does this to all the worms leaving one that she does not pinch.
To remove the blood clots from it, then she places on the stool an incision dipped in oil, resin or tallow and puts it on the stool. She commands the patient to remain still and leaves him until he urinates. When the urine is complete, she treats the wounds with ointments and other treatments until she heals.
As for the treatment of fissures, it often appears due to dryness from fecal matter and trapping of the skin. If there are no complications and it has not healed in him, then medication might be necessary, so it should be treated with the scalpel or your finger until it becomes moist and the upper layer of skin that prevents its healing is removed.
Then treat it until it heals as necessary, if it does not heal, repeat the process with more rigor than before until it fully heals and sheds properly. Then treat it again; he will recover.
Chapter Second and Eighty.
In the treatment of inverted and non-inverted needles, dried worms, and ants.
A pincer is nothing more than a loop that is uniformly colored with the body's color, resembling a nail head. It is present throughout the body, particularly in the lower limbs and fingers. Walking causes pain from it.
It is necessary to cut around the pincer, hold it with a rasp or scraper and remove it from its root. Then treat it, if you wish strengthen it as explained in that section under this heading. As for dried worms (thools), one of them is a small rough twisted round nail on top of the body surface.
Many times, it falls into the hands of boys and their treatment involves stretching the testicles and cutting or crushing them with a silk thread or hair until they fall off. If you wish, you can strengthen them as described earlier using fire or medicine.
And the inverted and non-inverted testicles are removed by the device that I have mentioned in treating the worm. As for the worm, it is also a small, thick, sticky insect on the surface of the body going deep inside; if it is hit with cold, she feels as if it was stung by an ant.
And it's throughout the body and more in the hands, its treatment involves taking a tube from an ostrich feather or a strong eagle feather. That tube is placed around the worm until the tube surrounds the worm on all sides. Then you move your hand with the tube to cut what surrounds the worm.
And make it deep in the flesh, causing the worm to come out from its source. If you wish, you can do this with a copper or iron tube as shown here:.
The tube should extend upwards to the scrotum, having a flexible and narrow tip that makes it easy for fingers to control. If desired, the worm can be treated as described in clipping testicles under the section on clipping them.
The thirty-eighth chapter.
In illustrations of the machines used for their injection in conditions like constipation, diarrhea, and colic.
The syringe can be made of silver, porcelain, copper, or hammered brass. The size of the apparatus is small for some users and large for others, depending on their needs. The syringe used for treating young children would be smaller, especially if their seats are narrow or constricted. They should have very gentle syringes. Here is an illustration of a large syringe:.
The top clamp that connects in the sagittal plane should be wide on this condition, having a barrier where the sagittal joins as you see. The lower end that enters the socket is very smoothly pointed down to the softness and there are two holes on one of its sides and one hole on the other side.
The size of the hole should be somewhat hard or slightly harder, and the sagittal used to make drugs from an animal bladder or from the small skin of a sheep should be made in the shape of a small spoon, its diameter being about a span.
It has many holes like a wheel, and there is hardness of an inch between each hole. Then one enters that hole with a thin thread made from the yarn of ten strands or similar, then the sagittal gathers as a spoon does. If you put the medicine in it, then pull strongly on the tip of the syringe between the stones firmly and tightly, then inject it. This is the diagram of the sagittal and the hole:.
And the method of administering it is to fill the skin or bladder with medicine while it's heated as much as possible without making it excessively hot or cold, and be cautious that it shouldn't be too hot or too cold. Then the patient lies on their back and raises their legs above themself.
It is placed under a cloth or bandage. Then, the tip of the syringe is greased with oil, or egg white, or saliva from the horse's mouth, and so on. It then enters the socket gently. The attendant holds both ends of the syringe together and squeezes it tightly until all contents of the syringe are emptied into the stomach.
Then the syringe is removed, and the patient raises their legs to the wall. If the medicine prompts him to relieve himself, he empties as much as he can. If he sleeps through the night, it helps in easing his pain more effectively. Should the medicine be used for bowel movements and its expulsion is hastened, repeat the injection until he recovers.
If there are pain-causing obstructions or growths in the seat, let the applicator be very gentle and smooth compared to those used for boys. This is a depiction of a gentle applicator with its skin tightened onto it.
The 44th chapter.
In the treatment of wounds.
I have mentioned in the division about treating things similar to cauterization, and here I am mentioning their treatment by hand and with medications at perfection. I say that injuries vary according to what is present during surgery and according to where the injury occurs.
The things that are present during surgeries are numerous, like a rock fracture or cut from a sword or knife, or a spear thrust or arrow and such a variety of other things.
And as for injuries according to body positions, like the injury that occurs on the head or neck or chest or abdomen or liver and such organs.
And I am describing the treatment of some injuries to serve as a standard and law for all injuries, particularly starting with simple head injuries because the vehicle will be mentioned in the initial sections of this book's third chapter.
I say that if a simple head injury occurred, and there was no bone fracture, I looked at it. If it was like a rock strike or something similar, causing only skin abrasion but the wound is large, and I feared the occurrence of the hot tumor, immediately take action to cool it down by applying wet cloths on the site. Do not delay this and remove the blood from it according to its strength if it does not prevent dislocation, especially if the blood that comes out of the wound is little. Let the dislocation be from against the injured side.
Warn Al-Buqil against overfilling, drinking and solid foods; if these are prevented from causing obstruction, one should reduce food intake, avoid meat and drinks, and bear the wound if a hot spot occurs by applying cotton wool soaked in rose oil alone or with drink containing its effect.
If the hot lump is confirmed, bear on the wound if it bleeds slightly and has not changed due to the essential oil I will describe shortly. If the air has changed it, apply some ointment on it.
Until the pus discharges and then it is treated until it heals, if the wound is large and came from a sword cut or something similar where its edges do not meet with the sutures, sew them together with the stitches I describe for stitching abdominal surgeries.
If the skin has revealed the bone and is adhered, but his retention was only in a gentle hold, cut it then treat the wound with medications that force the formation of a hard flesh instead of the skin. Instruct Al-Buqil to eat foods that have strength like heads and hares and similar items.
If there is a fungus in the skin that does not adhere to the bone, cut off all the affected area and burn it, then treat. If in these surgeries there is a blood vessel or artery bleeding from it without stopping the blood with medications, search for the blood vessel.
If it affects him, let it be cut by a scalpel and tie it. If necessity compels and what we have mentioned is not effective, bleed until the blood stops. For these small, simple surgeries, they are easy to manage; you may treat them by leaving this essence on them, for they heal through their own blood.
Before it changes due to air, Al-Zahrawi's prescription instructs that a part of the beeswax should be taken, two parts of the sesame seeds and three parts of the extinguished or not extinguished tallow. All are crushed, sieved, used to treat the wound and tightened tightly until it sticks well.
Then it gets mixed with the blood. Afterwards, it is tightened from above using veins and left undisturbed as long as it doesn't swell. It won't come off until he recovers, and if tallow alone does this process without beeswax and sesame seeds being available, it can be done by the tallow itself.
This action can also be performed with two bandages in many large surgical cases if it is properly applied and tightened, as the wounds are moistened by their blood without being altered by air. However, if some alteration has been caused by air to the wound, especially during summer time.
There is no active meaning in placing this zinc as we have mentioned that it should bear some ripened ointments or bear a mixture of sorghum flour made with water and honey until the pus drains out, then treat it with other treatments until recovery occurs.
If, however, the wound resulted in a mild break in the bone, it should be pulled with the gout. I have mentioned the treatment for head fractures earlier, in neck surgery; if the wound is located on the neck, there is no difference in the treatment compared to head wounds that are simple.
If, however, a nerve or artery in the neck has been cut, if it is a nerve there is no trick other than avoiding treating it with something that tightens tightly like the hook and chain and similar things because they injure the nerve and irritate it.
Nothing cold should be placed on the wound because the essence of nerves is cold and their connection with the brain, which is the finest of organs. Treating it with soft medicines such as sandalwood that has been washed in pure water, then dipped several times in oil or rose and henna.
If you also wash it with pure water and other metallic stones in this manner, and wet ointments, then if the wound is large use suturing or bind its lips together with threads. Then treat it until it heals.
If the wound has a hole and there is something hidden at its bottom that has gathered pus, depress it in the lowest place. If an artery has broken within the wound and his blood is bleeding, you should clamp it or tie it, or suture if necessity calls for it.
If the wound has cut through some of the rings or all of them and the ligatures have been removed, gather the edges of the skin with stitches on the socket of the ring. Do not touch the ring but sew it in such a way that its shape returns to normal then tighten the stitches firmly and leave it for several days.
Then treat it with ointments that have a pulling and drying effect until it heals. If the wound has affected the bone, remove it, if there are pieces of bone in it, extract them all or as much as possible. Leave what cannot be extracted until the wound cleanses itself and heals making its extraction easier.
If the wound is soft, sprinkle it with the sand we described. If the bone protrudes and becomes like a node, treat it with what you will find mentioned in its section, under 'surgery of the chest' and between the shoulders.'
If the thrust was from a spear or a sword and you see blood, observe whether there is wind coming out of the wound. If there is wind along with breath in the injured person, know that it's a mortal wound. If there is no gush and the wound is red due to blood, do not immediately treat it. And don't tighten it as this might cause the blood to stagnate within its gash.
Let the heart pull out the dying, but make that wound twice attractive and cleanse it in the day twice. If the remedy doesn't work, put a small piece of cotton in the wound to absorb anything that's exuding from it. Have the injured person rest on the wound.
Do not treat the wound until what collects there has dispersed, even if three days or more have passed since the injury and the injured person shows no sign of shock or bad heart rate, nor difficulty in breathing, and you see that all other conditions are good. Know that the wound is safe, then apply treatment along with other remedies until it heals.
If you cannot see improvement and the bandage continues to become wet constantly, know that he has turned into a patient who needs treatment from its root. The injured person lying on the wound does not allow what collects there to disperse; if the injury was in the chest or back, treat him with the methods of stitching that have been advanced.
If it's large or with arrows, if it's small, if it has affected the bone and broken pieces off of it, then inspect the wound and take immediate action to remove those fragments if they are clean. If not clean, leave them until they become so.
Clean the wound as this facilitates its removal, and as for other acute injuries to all organs, their treatment rules follow what we have mentioned.
Chapter Fifty-Eight.
In the surgery of the abdomen and removal of entrails, and suturing.
A perforation of the abdomen can be large, small or medium. The larger one may expel intestines or several parts of it, making its insertion and suturing more difficult.
A small perforation can also be more difficult for another reason - it requires that returning the organs is even harder. If the intestines do not quickly return to their place, they swell and become hard, making their insertion more difficult. This is why a moderate-sized perforation has proven better than these two types, as it does not make it as difficult to return the intestines compared to them.
Know that sewing the abdomen is on four aspects. The two stitches mentioned are capable of being used in sewing the abdomen and all other body surgeries. The remaining two stitches are general for all surgeries except they are specialized particularly for sewing the abdomen.
And I will describe to you one, explained and detailed. If the wound is small and something of the intestine has come out from it and returning it was difficult, this could be for two reasons: either due to the smallness of the tear as we said, or because the air's cold caused swelling in its passage.
If this is the case, it would be necessary to warm it by immersing a sponge or cloth in hot water only, or perhaps after cooking it with garlic and onions. The intestine should be rubbed until the swelling dissolves.
And it may do that drinking the drink with thickened extract which is better than water alone in dissolving swelling. If you see the swelling dissolved, wet the intestines in cooked soup or baker's broth; he will flow into its place more easily because of this lubrication.
If recovery does not occur after this treatment, the incision should be made slightly deeper using the tool used for making punctures. The first treatment is more effective than making a cut if it can prevent the need to make one. This is done out of necessity and when all other methods fail. And here is an image of the tool.
One of its ends is curved and limited, while the other end is unlimited. The delicate part is not sharpened like the blade but is slightly pointed. This tool resembles a small nail as you see it. If the wound widens and the organs enter, it should respond in its natural form.
The proper position for him is preferable if you are able to do so. However, if the incision is wide and located at the bottom of the abdomen, the patient should lie on his back with his legs raised above his head. If it's at the top of the abdomen, he should have his head and chest raised higher than the lower part.
And similarly, if the incision is on one of the sides of the abdomen, always aim and strive to make the area with the operation higher than the other. This way should be used in major surgeries and medium-level surgeries.
And in minor surgeries, place him as is feasible for you. Then prepare at your side a server who holds the entire incision with his hands and closes his lips. He then reveals something to the needle-tailors one by one.
And this is the common sewing technique; you take one or several needles according to the size of the wound, then leave on each side of the incision a length equivalent to the thickness of the tendon. Then you prick with a single needle without inserting any thread into the skin edges. With my cutting-edge surgical technique, which starts internally beneath the skin and extends from that side, I have gathered the edge of the skin and the margin of the wound, creating four openings. Then, by tightening a double thread around the needle on both sides several times, I ensure that the edges of the incision come together tightly.
Then she leaves the thickness of a finger and pierces another needle, then secures it with thread as she did with the first needle. She continues this process with whatever number of needles she needs until she has drained all the pus from the wound, making sure that the needles are neither too close nor too far apart.
Because needles that are too thin cut through the flesh very quickly and it's difficult to enter them into the skin, therefore it should be midway between the softness and hardness. It is not desirable to pierce the needle near the edge of the skin too closely.
So that the flesh does not cut too quickly and the wound opens before healing, nor should it be far apart with stitching so as to prevent the wound from healing. Then, she cuts off the ends of the needles so they do not harm the patient during sleep, and creates openings on each side for him to touch with pieces of gauze that hold the needle ends.
And she leaves it until she learns that the wound has healed, and this type of needle stitching is very effective in minor surgeries since it may suffice to stitch it with one or two needles or approximately that amount.
Or for the second stitch of common usage, it involves collecting the four edges, meaning both the skin's edge and the wound margin with a single needle that has a moderately soft to hard thread. Then after piercing these four edges with this needle, she repeats the needle from the side where she started.
The thread should be intertwined from above the wound, so that the stitching is according to the stitching of the intestine that is tightened with the thread and there is a tension between each stitch and each stitch after squeezing the little finger. This type of stitching is known by all people.
With this type of stitching, I performed surgery on a man in his abdomen who had been stabbed. The damage from the surgery was over a yard and he had lost nearly two yards of middle intestines. The injury was located in the center of the belly.
He was stitched again after he expelled his feces outside the wound for twenty-four hours. The wound healed in about fifteen days and I treated him until he recovered and lived many years, behaving normally in all situations. The doctors ruled that he would never recover fully.
It is amazing that I did not treat him with a salve, as there was no medicine available where I was located. Instead, I would apply the used cotton to the wound twice a day and promised to wash it with honey water until he recovered.
And as for the two types of special stitching, I remember them according to Galen's instructions. One should begin the stitching from the skin, and the needle should enter from outside to inside. Once the needle has gone through the skin and the muscle layer in alignment with the length of the entire belly.
I left the margin of the scrotum on the side where I inserted the needle, and then passed the needle through its other edge from inside to outside in the other margin of the testicle. Once it had gone through, I passed it again through this same margin from the outside to the inside.
And make a margin of the scrotum on this side, and pass the needle through its other edge from inside to outside. And as you successfully pass it through here in the scrotum, pass it through the margin of the prostate gland in its area until they are all passed through.
Start also from this side of the eye, and draw a line with the edge which is on the other side at the back. Then remove the needle from the skin near it, then return it to that skin and draw the edge of the anus on the other side together with this edge from the colon.
And remove it from the skin on that side, do this again and repeat it until you suture all of the surgery on this example. A whole description of this suturing is that it should be a stitching like the hair follicles of the wool.
That is, to suture the anus once from one side with the edge of the skin and then leave it from the other side until it's emptied. As for the second type of special stitching mentioned by Galen, this is his exact written description.
It is that you should stitch it on a model as some of the surgeons do, by bringing together every part to its corresponding trouble in nature and attaching the edge of the anus to its other edge, and the edge of the colon to its other edge. This would be like what I describe for you.
You should pierce the needle through the colon's edge close to you from outside and push it into its inside alone, then let out my edge of the anus. Then return the needle and push it from outside into the edge of my anus on both sides, then do this again.
And push it from inside to outside in the edge of the colon on the other side which is at the opposite side, this kind of stitching is better than the common easy stitching, which is the one that was mentioned earlier. This is what Galen describes precisely, and some have said that abdominal stitches can be done with two needles. Thus, one should introduce a single thread into them and start by inserting the needle from your side until it reaches the other end. Then, enter the other needle from the opposite side of the first as for suture of stitches. Finally, proceed with sewing according to how stitches are sewn.
Know that the incision, if it is in the middle of the abdomen, its suturing is harder than in other parts of the abdomen. As for healing the wound, its rules concerning treatment are similar to those of other wounds. This is because when you encounter the wound smoothly with its blood before it changes due to air and you apply the ointment and stitch it precisely, it carries the weight of the embrocation.
If the wound has changed due to air, apply some ointments that you have until it discharges and removes the threads and heals the scar and discharge. Then treat it as you would with other wounds until it heals.
If you do not have medicine, apply it since the cotton begins to discharge and replace it twice a day as I taught you until it heals. You will usually not need further treatment in most cases if the wounds are simple; fearing that they may contribute to pain with the main organs.
It is necessary to soak a small piece of cotton in moderately heated oil or rose oil, and place it around the areas between the ribs and the stomach. If you feel pain or discomfort during your application, this often indicates that it may be bleeding; then quench it with a black, foaming drink.
And especially if the pus has reached into the intestines, turning it into an open wound in its cavity. Know that if what was from the intestines is hard, it is easier to heal; and if it's delicate, healing becomes harder.
And as for the pus known as that of the fasting person, it does not accept cleansing from surgery if it occurs in the depth because of its abundance of blood vessels and bones, as well as its thin muscle and proximity to nerve tissue. And if what emerged from the wound was a pit and it was closed smoothly, it returns according to your return of the pus whether it is good or bad.
And if it has passed some time and turned green or black, it is necessary to tighten a thread above the area that turned dark so as not to expose bleeding. There are blood vessels and arteries in the pit. Then cut what is below this ligament.
And make both ends of the thread attached from below inside the wound so that it will be easier for you to slide and remove it when the pit falls out and the wound heals. Remember the wound that appears in the pus, but if there is a tear in the pus and it is small.
And it can happen in some people that I have seen a man who had bled from his belly by an arrow wound and the wound was to the right of the stomach. I sealed the wound and it became soiled, excreting feces and gas through it, so I left him as I did not hope for his cleansing. And I continued to care for him until he was cleansed and the wound healed. When I saw that the area had healed, I feared for his relief that something bad might happen in his abdomen, so there was no worse outcome from it and he remained in the best of conditions. Correctly he eats, drinks, engages in intercourse and enters the bathroom, and prays in his service. And it has been noted by some practitioners that if a wound appears in the pus and it is small, it should be treated according to this characteristic.
It is about taking the larger ants, then collecting their mouths. Then place both lips of the wound, afterwards placing an ant from these and she has her mouth open on both lips of the wound; when she catches it and tightens her mouth, she cuts off its head; indeed, it adheres and does not dissolve, then placing another ant close to the first one.
Then continue doing this with several ants according to the size of the wound, then move it and suture the wound. These heads remain stuck inside until the tissue heals and is cleansed. There would be no harm at all in the process as the tissue can also get stitched with the fine thread.
The one who removes the sticking animal from Egypt, after it enters into a needle, is as follows: First you take the end of this thread from the animal and untangle it smoothly. Then you tie it to the soft end of a thin cotton thread that has been rolled out. Finally, this thread goes inside the needle. Inside, there is an animal thread that gets in contact with the tissue, then it goes back into the body. This way of sewing with beeswax and animal threads is only on the path of desire and hope.
As for when the tear is large and extensive, especially if it's in one of the small intestines, there's no trick or relief whatsoever.
The sixtieth chapter.
In treating the sore throat and the neck pain.
Know that every wound or tumor that becomes chronic, turns into a ulcer and does not heal, with continuous pus discharge is called 'nasour' regardless of the body part it's in. We call this condition 'zakam' or sore throat, and 'nasour'.
It is indeed a complex intertwined solid white mass without pain that has a cavity like the cavity of bird's feathers.
Therefore, some call it a feather, and at times it is wet causing constant pus. It might stop being wet at other times. This wetness can be abundant or scarce, thick or thin.
In the section on surgeries when describing wounds, it is mentioned that if a wound does not heal and no new flesh grows within it, this is due to one of nine reasons. One of these is either due to a lack of blood in the body, or lethargy, or because there may be hard flesh inside or at its edges which hinders the growth of healthy flesh. Alternatively, it could be due to excessive pus and filth, or because the wound itself is infected with bad material. It might also be that the medicine used for treatment is not compatible, or there has been a miscarriage of venereal disease, or there might be a specific condition present.
Alternatively, it could be due to excessive pus and filth, or because the wound itself is infected with bad material. It might also be that the medicine used for treatment is not compatible, or there has been a miscarriage of venereal disease, or there might be a specific condition present. As shown in the city of Sargastra, where it is difficult for diseases to mature and natural regression of tumors slows down, this may be due to one or several bones being present. All these reasons, their signs, and their treatments with medicine have been detailed in that section.
And I should inform you about the treatment of syphilis and jaundice which is done through handwork, know that syphilis can occur in all body parts. Some are syphilis that end up in large arteries and veins or nerves.
Or to chest, or to spleen, or to bladder, or to a rib of the back, or to a joint in the complex joints such as the hand and foot, and some of them may lead to nearness of an important organ and so on.
If it belongs to these conditions in this manner, then they are easy diseases that recover naturally and do not accept treatment or effort, for if it does not belong to the conditions I described, hoped, and longed for treatment.
And if you want to understand this, take a brass or iron probe. If the nazor (a type of bone growth) is straight, pass it through with the probe. If there's a curve in the nazor, use a thin lead probe because lead will glide over its surface.
It becomes slippery upon entry and curves towards the curve. If the nazor has many openings which you can't detect with a probe, puncture one of them. The moisture you inject will flow towards the other openings and drain out.
From there, perform an inspection on any possible way that you can determine if there is bone or nerve present, whether the nazor's bottom is far or close, or if it has multiple mouths. You need to know all this based on your effort and knowledge of the pain when you touch the area with your hand.
Likewise, these are the signs and causes of tumors. When you have identified all this with certainty, then proceed to treatment on faith, that is, if it is indeed a tumor.
The nazor appears close or in a healthy position away from a joint, nerve, artery, vein or any of the places mentioned to you. Cut through the nazor as described and remove the decayed flesh and excess flesh within.
What grows in its mouth from flesh or decay, and such like, treat until it recovers. If the nazor is far below the surface and straight, it should be cut deeply as much as possible then cleaned of all decaying flesh.
Then use the finely ground fly in strong medicines and place it at the bottom of the nostril which you reach with iron. Do this repeatedly until that strong medicine consumes all the remaining decay in the bottom of the nostril.
Then force him with the stimulants that promote genuine growth until he is healed. If he doesn't heal in this way, cut him as described previously. If the cause of the nostril issue is a bone and it's appropriate for you to do so, open it and cut it as advised, unless there is something preventing you from doing so.
Or if it is a nerve or a major muscle as we said, and you find bone opened with some decay and darkness inside, scrape until all the decay goes away. Then treat it to heal it so that it heals properly. If it doesn't heal and continues to produce pus just like before,
Know that you have not removed all the decay. Expose everything on it again, investigate and remove any remaining decay to your utmost ability, then force him. If he heals, otherwise know that there is more decay in a remote area, expose everything on it again.
Investigate and remove any decay to your utmost ability. If the decayed bone is a small bone, you can extract it with gentle forceps that are suitable for this task.
If there are many bones, investigate their extraction completely and do not leave anything behind as per your effort. If something from the ligaments obstructs you that is not dangerous in its section, cut those ligaments and any meat if present, then free the bones.
If it is not within your time to remove the bones, cover the wound with what cleanses it and leave it for days until it allows the surrounding meat and ligaments around those bones to decompose. Take care to ensure that the wound does not heal across the cut you made during your work.
Place on him a cotton ball soaked in powdered sulfur and oil, or a cotton ball soaked in the Egyptian balsam or one of the green ointments. When those ligatures are removed and the bones have healed, it becomes easier to remove and attract them.
If it is a large bone such as the thigh bone or the hip bone, and only its surface was corrupted, then strip it naked until it is thoroughly cleaned of the blackness and decay. Then close the wound, but if the corruption involved a large part of the bone and the decay has reached inside the bone, then there must be amputation.
Cut it all down to where the corruption ends, then treat it until it heals. I will tell you about a case that was presented to someone on their leg which can serve as an example and guidance for your treatment. This man had reached old age.
Around thirty years old, he was shown to him with pain in his leg due to movement within the body that connected the materials to the leg causing swelling and a huge lump. There was no cause from outside. Over time, this worsened with medical errors until the sore became open.
A lot of materials came out from it and he was poorly treated until his leg became inflamed and had many mouths all emitting pus and body moisture. A group of doctors worked on him for about two years, but none among them was skilled in handcrafts.
Until I saw his leg and the materials flowing from those mouths in a great stream, the man had decayed inside and his skin turned yellow. I inserted the needle into one of those mouths, it reached the bone through the needle, then I opened all the mouths.
I found that some of them connected to each other from all parts of the leg, so I pricked one of those openings until I revealed a piece of bone. Upon finding it hollow, it was discolored and foul-smelling, with maggots inside, until the hole reached the brain, spreading what was exposed to me.
I was able to remove the rotten bone, assuming that there is no other type of decay in the bone that I cut and spread it with medicinal salt for a longer period. It did not heal. Then, after some time, I revealed the bone again above the first exposure.
I found the decay connected to the bone, spreading further than what I had seen. I insisted on forcing it but it did not heal and neither would it join back together. I then repeatedly revealed more of the decayed area and cut parts of the bone one by one while trying to force it to heal, but it never healed until I had cut away about a foot worth of the bone.
I removed it along with its brain, then treated the wound with medicine and it healed quickly and cleanly. It was necessary to perform this repetition in his case due to the weakness of his condition and limited ability to heal, as well as my fear for his death given that he constantly over-extracted bad fluids during his illness until he recovered completely.
A firm flesh grew in the place of the bone and his condition recovered within him. His strength declined, he adapted to his circumstances and avoided walking, thus not experiencing any harm that would impede him during his walkings, should a broken bone occur within his body's position.
It is necessary for this condition, which involves taking a bandage and tightening it on the projecting bone end, instructing someone to extend it upwards. Then another bandage of thicker wool should be used compared to the first one.
Then it is attached to the muscle underneath the bone and its end is extended so as to attract the muscle downwards, while you are peeling back the muscle from the place that you want to expose, in order not to damage the bone. You then place a board or plank under the bone firmly from below.
For if you did that, the cutting instrument would not prevent it from cutting away the decayed bone. It should be noted that the exposure is slightly above the diseased area so as not to have decay within the cavity of the bone which cannot be seen by touch and you will have to expose it again.
If the bone is decayed and it's not due to natural causes but its parts are connected with each other, and the decay is in the middle or in some of its parts, then peel back the muscle from all its sides. Then place a board from below, then expose it from the first area where the decay is present.
Once you are done exposing it from one side, expose it from the other side and let the exposure be slightly away from the decay as we have said. If the decay is within a joint, cut out the decayed part of the joint itself, then expose the bone where it connects from the other side.
If the decay is within a connection of two joints, there's no trick other than amputation. If the decay is in the hand spatula or in the thigh spatula, then dealing with treatment will be extremely difficult but you should scrape out whatever decay appears to you and get rid of it and purify it as much as you can.
And in what trick are you to stand when a sweat gland or nerve does not impede you, and know that the sections and divisions for cutting these bones vary greatly depending on the position of the bones, their orientation, their density, their thickness and fineness, their size, and their hardness and porosity. Therefore, it is necessary to prepare for each type of work an instrument suitable for that work.
And know that the works themselves can guide you to the type of instrument you need if you have a long journey and knowledge of the arts of this craft, because skill in the trade and seeing various diseases is required. And he may deduce for himself what instruments suit each illness, and I will show you several instruments in the end of this chapter.
Make it examples to emulate and measure by, comparing it with others if Allah wills, an illustration of a file:.
Illustration of another file:.
Illustration of a small file:.
Illustration of a large file:.
The head of this rasp would be shaped like the head of a nail with its grooves arranged in the pattern of an engraving. It is suitable for working on joints that are damaged or have large, wide bones. An illustration of another smaller rasp:.
Illustration of a broad rasp:.
Its upper arc and its teeth are made of iron, while its handle is made from a tightly fitted cylindrical piece of bamboo. An illustration of it shows a hole:.
Illustration of another delicate rasp:.
Illustration of another file with curved end:.
Illustration of a small file that resembles a hairpin:.
Illustration of another small segment:.
And similarly for its extremity, it behaves in many places on the bone bed, an image alone is enough to represent what has sunk into the bones.
It has a triangular, sharp-edged tip made of Indian iron. Likewise, all that we have mentioned about the bone beds and sections should be made in the same manner, an image alone is required for this.
The seventy-eighth chapter.
In amputations and dispersing of bones.
The limbs may decay for a reason from outside or inside. If that corruption is treated with medicinal treatments and the treatment fails, and you see the corruption advancing in the member without anything deterring it.
It is necessary to amputate that member up to where the corruption has reached, so as to relieve it from death or a great hardship greater than losing the member. A sign of this happening is for the member to prevail even until you think it was burned by fire.
Or if it decays after the blackness until that decay advances below that member and takes a part of the body, act immediately to cut it off. Similarly, if the cause of the corruption is due to the bite of some parasites such as sea snakes or snakes or worms, etc., then take action.
If corruption or the bite is in a finger, cut off the finger and do not let the corruption advance to the hand. Likewise, if it has spread to the hand, cut it from its root and do not allow the corruption to advance until it reaches the elbow.
And likewise, if it has spread to the arm, cut the arm at the elbow in the joint itself. If the corruption is justified and I see that it has spread towards the knee, do not simply amputate the knee; rather there will be death from this and resort instead to other treatments based on the level of capability.
And similarly, if evil entered the finger and took hold of it, cut off the finger at one of the joints. If it enters in the penis shaft, then cut off the whole of the organ where it can be done. If it reaches up to the thigh, cut off the leg at the knee joint.
And if the corruption has reached above the knee, there is no remedy other than leaving it and accepting the weakness to death, or to remove an organ or spread it. A recipe for removing a limb involves tying a bandage at the location you want to cut below, and then tying another bandage at the location above.
The attendant for the lower band extends it downwards, and the attendant of the upper band extends it upwards. You then cut or spread out the flesh between the bands with a wide scalpel until all the flesh is revealed, and afterwards you cut or spread it. It would be desirable to have small holes made on all sides from cotton thread.
So as not to let the scythe hit the correct place and expose the patient to additional pain and a hot boil, if you experience bleeding during your work, cover the area quickly or place it on some clotting agents for blood, then continue with your treatment until the bleeding subsides.
Then bandage the wounded member with a bandage suitable for it and treat it until he recovers. I will inform you of an example to be presented by this embarrassing feature in his part that I am describing, which is that there was blackness in his leg accompanied by a burn like fire.
That corruption was the first thing that happened in his finger until he took all of it, and when the man saw the corruption seeking within his body with such intensity and unbearable pain and burn, he cut it off at the joint and recovered.
After a long period of time, he showed that disease in his ring finger. He came to me and I treated that defect with the medicine on my hand after cleaning his body from his illness. The advantage did not deter and kept seeking in the other finger.
Until the disease took hold in his hand, he invited me to amputate it. I implored him not to go through with it and I was also afraid for his life upon amputation because of his strength tending towards collapse. When he gave up on me, he returned to his country.
I heard from him that he had amputated his hand completely and was cured. I tell this story to serve as a guide for what happens with cases of this disease, and as an example on which one can rely and act accordingly.
Chapter Eighty-One.
In the treatment of abscesses and methods of administering medicines to them.
If a tumor occurs in some of the fleshly organs and prolongs for a period until it has been present for as long as its duration, then it might burst or rupture and all that was inside it from the length of time would come out, leaving the place empty as if it were a vessel.
The skin on it is like a perforation that has healed, not being highly corrupted to affect bone or nerve or ligament. This is why it's called an abscess, rather than a boil, except if its duration extends to affect something of these organs due to the corruption.
In that case, it's called a boil or pustule. Its treatment involves cutting all of that skin as it turns and especially if it has healed to resemble a perforation and you've confirmed that it doesn't stick to the surface due to its corruption.
If you hope that the skin will stick and it has not reached that degree of corruption, where there is thick flesh in the skin, puncture it. This means to look for what's hidden; if it's large and the pus flowing out has a bad smell, treat it with Egyptian medicine.
It is a mixture of honey, oil, and myrrh that when mixed together in a pot and cooked over fire until the medicine thickens and turns into a consistency similar to thickened honey. Then take what you need from it and mix it with water and honey before injecting it into what's hidden, then tighten its mouth. Leave the medicine inside for about two hours.
Then it is squeezed through pressing. You do this for several days until what's hidden cleanses and the pus disappears. If you don't have this medicine, you can use water from burnt wood ash. To obtain it, take the wood ashes of jasmine or birch trees and pour water over them.
Then put it in a row and inject it until you confirm that what's hidden has been cleaned, if there is no smell then either the Egyptian medicine or water from wood ash might suffice. If not, inject it with honey water that contains some powdered myrrh.
Or inject it with honey and wine mixed, because honey has the ability to clean and wash away dirt while wine sticks what's hidden. Especially if there is a preference for the wine that makes it dry out, then do this several times until you are sure that what's hidden no longer contains corruption, after which you should inject it with what grows out of the flesh.
For instance, you might take the dragonfly ointment and mix it with rose oil and a tight wine or inject some other medicines and creams that we have proven their properties in the article on creams. If the opening of what's hidden is narrow and cannot accommodate the applicator nozzle for injection.
Expand it slightly with iron or insert a twisted thin wire in the Egyptian ointment or the Suriqoon's ointment until it expands. Also, if the mouth is also wide, stitch together its lips and leave some on which the injector can enter without excess.
And if its hollow, from which pus flows, is elevated upwards, crack it in the lowest place where pus can flow downwards. For pus, if it becomes blocked in the cavity's depression, prevents the flesh from growing there.
If you cannot cut the cavity downwards as desired, then let it stand like a pillar so that pus can flow from it easily according to what is suitable for you. Let there be no retention of any pus in it at all.
As for the wool ointments that are placed on the cavity from outside and how to place them, you should take one of the salve ointments suitable for what you want and spread it over a cotton thread. Let the thread be as long as it covers the entire cavity. Then, with the scissors, make a cut in front of the cavity's mouth slightly larger than its mouth. Then spread some soft ointments on another thread to the size of the hole and place it on top of it without touching the cavity's mouth. This should facilitate the discharge of pus but do not remove the large thread until after.
For a few days, and as for the one covering the mouth of the cavity, it is the one you remove at all times so that what has gathered as pus can come out, and to know whether the discharge is much or little, ripe or not ripe.
And even with this, you should inspect the place of the cavity itself, whether its owner feels pain in it or not and if there is a lump or not. If your treatment progresses like this and you see that only a small amount of material comes out from the mouth of the cavity.
Know that if the abscess has adhered or is about to adhere, then on the following day or in the third day puncture it. And when the wound has healed, replace the hole with another and renew the ointment. If a thin pus comes out of the abscess after a long time, do not despair of its adhesion.
Heal him soon, for there are people whose healing of their wounds slows down and there are those who oppose it. If pus comes out of the abscess after many days that is not ripe, know that the abscess has not adhered, if the adhesion of the abscess lags behind.
If his treatment lasts long, increase the drying of medicines. Let them be medicines that are moist in their consistency and dry in their strength, like camel's butter if you have added more to it, there is an advantage in adding more milk. And among the most effective things for treatment is taking camel's butter.
He treats with turmeric and applies it after pouring on him moderate old diluted wine, then mixes it well and uses it. He might do such action if camel's butter combined with honey is not available to him when he boils the honey until it thickens and uses it or takes sesame oil and mustard oil, grinds all together and leaves them over honey while heating it. Then apply it over a scratch and tighten on the abscess or apply honey which was boiled until it thickens, then place medicines and put on a scratch.
And it might be used in such cases as the long reed and the root of the jujube tree, and ground buckthorn and hawthorn mixed individually or a mixture which is ground, sieved and left over honey like what was described and then used. If treatment of the abscess prolongs without healing with this medication, know that there must be corruption in its depth.
And it affects bones or in all other hard nerves or ligaments, the treatment of nail removal has been conducted as before.
The ninety-eighth chapter.
In the treatment of the infected toenail, ingrown nail after dressing, cutting extra fingers and splitting of the fingers' union.
The daws is flesh that grows abundantly under the nail of the thumb or foot, and perhaps in other fingers. If it becomes a persistent problem and its treatment is neglected, it inflames and turns hot.
Or, it corrupts the nail bed until it eats away at the nail and may even consume all of it. It might reach such a degree that the corruption spreads to the bone leading to an unpleasant smell coming from the affected area. The tip of the finger becomes broadened and changes in color becoming like red wine. If you treat it according to what we have mentioned earlier, but your treatment doesn't work.
You should cut off all the excess that grows from the nail using iron. Then, let the wound heal afterwards. Cutting in this case is indeed very beneficial. If however, the bone is healthy and the nail itself is also healthy.
The corner of the nail had pushed into the flesh and made it decay and smell bad. It is necessary to put a soft pad under the corner of the nail that pushes into the flesh, lift it above, and cut away that decaying flesh gently.
You should apply the burned medication to the remaining flesh until it completely disappears. Then, treat it with ointments until it heals. If the decay has affected the bone, you should cut that bone out. It will not heal as long as there is corrupted bone in it.
If I see corrosion and decay advancing in the finger, cut it off at one of the interphalangeal joints as previously described, then treat until it heals. If a strike to or protrusion beneath the nail occurs resulting in intense pain, it may be necessary to amputate the distal phalanx first.
Then, with a sharp incision device, cut the nail in a V-shaped groove starting from above and sloping downwards. Ensure that the incision does not reach the tissue beneath the nail; this will cause intense pain on the distal phalanx and result in the overgrowth of excess flesh at the site. Then, treat the area with what alleviates pain.
And as for the extra finger that is produced in some people's hands, it may be all flesh. Or perhaps there are bones in part of it and a nail exists too; some parts of it may grow new flesh at the base of one or more joints of some fingers.
Or, it may grow back in some interphalangeal joints of the finger and not move. In other cases where it grows at the joint of the finger, it might be movable; if there is only flesh from it, just cut off what you can. This involves cutting it at its base with a wide incision tool.
And as for the one that grows at the base of the joint, treating it is difficult. Rather than cutting it off, it twists around during removal. As for the one that grows on an interphalangeal joint of the finger; it should be cut first, then slice off the flesh lengthwise down to the bone. Afterward, spread out the bone according to any compatible opening among those.
Then, treat it until healing occurs. With regard to the adhesion that affects some fingers with each other, this happens often and originates from what a person produces; when there's cessation of an injury or burn from fire etc., you should cut through that adhesion.
Until the fingers return to their natural shape, then place between them a thread or a needle threaded in rose oil so that it does not heal quickly and separate between them or insert between them a thin sheet of lead until the area heals as desired.
And similarly, if the joining of some fingers on the back of the hand is exposed, it should divide that joining according to what becomes ready and suitable for the shape of the limb.
The ninety-ninth chapter.
In cutting ligaments.
The ligaments are flexible, bony, black vessels filled with dark red fluid. They occur in most parts of the body, but more frequently in the legs, especially in the patella, the tibia, and the femur. First, it should be to use the expulsion of the body from the black urine several times vigorously.
Then cut its bursa, and as for treatment with iron, it has two methods. One of them is to cut and remove the black blood along with its appearance, and the other is to sweat and remove him all together. As for cutting, the leg should first be soaked in hot water thoroughly.
Until the thick, viscous blood dissolves. Then pull down the leg of the patient from above his thigh to below his knee using a bandage. Then sweat in one place or in two places or in three wide cuts.
Then, using your hand, you remove the black blood from the bottom of the leg up to above and from above down until you can see or bear enough of it. Then treat her/him and command her/him to avoid foods that produce black urine, and repeat the expulsion and cutting as needed.
When veins are full and this harms the patient, in case of sweating, his leg will be shaved if he has much hair. Then he should take a bath with hot water until it turns red or causes him to sweat, or exercise vigorously.
If a bath is not taken until the body heats up, then make cuts along the length of the skin either at the end near the knee or below it at the ankle. Then open the skin through channels and remove sweat from every side until its presence can be felt.
When it appears, you see that it's red and inflamed. Once it clears from the skin, it appears like a tendon. Then push under it carefully until when it rises out of the skin, hang it with a dark, smooth rope. Then make another cut close to this cut, approximately three fingers' width away.
Then remove the skin over the sweat so that it appears, then lift it with the rod as you did before and hang it with another rope like the first one. Then make another cut or multiple cuts if needed.
Shave it and cut him at the end of the incision near the ankle. Then pull it and shave until it comes out through the second incision, then pull it towards the incision above it and do this until you pull it from the third incision higher up all the way until all of it has come out. Then cut it.
If it does not respond to pulling and shaving, insert a needle with strong thread in a double strand, tie it, pull it, then push through the skin until you can reach every side so that it comes out and ensure it doesn't break; if it breaks, it will make it extremely difficult for you to shave.
An incision is made in the belly of the patient, if he then opens completely it put wool saturated with a drink and ointment or oil at the place of injuries until it heals. If the condition of the belly is loose, with wavy edges, causing it to bend towards certain directions.
And it should not be straight as we said, but you should cut it on every place of its wavy edges and locations, then attach it to the tubes until it is free from all these, and when cutting don't damage or cut the skin, for it would make opening hard for you. So protect yourself while doing this.
Image of the groove through which the belly is opened:
Image of the blind canal:
It should not have capping like all the tubes and it shouldn't be sharp at its tip so as to cut the skin, rather it must be thick and curved smoothly. If it's too thin, it would cut the skin with its smoothness. However, it might prefer being thick as we said.
Chapter fifty-nine.
In opening the civilian's sweat gland.
This sweat gland generates in the legs in hot countries like Hijaz and Arab countries, as well as in other fertile, arid regions with little sweating. It might also generate at other body locations apart from the legs due to skin infection beneath the skin.
It also occurs within living organisms, maggots, grubs, and worms that develop under the skin and between flesh; a sign of this sweat's onset is severe itching in the leg followed by sweating from that area.
As if it is a plant or an animal, when one of its parts appears, it should be wrapped around a small piece of lead weighing from one to two dirhams. This should then be tied and left hanging from the limb.
And every time something comes out, wrap it in lead and tie it. If it lasts a long time, cut off some of it and wrap the rest. Do not cut it from its origin before it comes out completely because if you cut it, it shrinks and enters into the flesh, causing pus and inflammation at the site, resulting in a bad wound.
For this reason, it should be gently directed and pulled little by little until it comes out of the end, leaving nothing in the body. Some people may have sweat that is five to ten finger lengths long coming out from this process.
I have heard that for a man, twenty cubits could come out. If it breaks off during your treatment, insert a thread into the hole and gently pull on it for a long time along with the body until all the substance inside is removed. Then try to heal the area with medications for several days.
Then treat him with tumors remedies. This sweat might have many branches, especially if it appears in a joint or within the foot itself; it could create numerous mouths and each mouth would have its own branch that needs to be treated as we mentioned before under sections and previously explained.
The Second Section, The Ninety-ninth.
In the cut made on the worm that develops under the gallbladder, it is called the cow's cause.
This disease is called "the cow's cause" in some of our countries because it occurs frequently in cows, and it is a small worm that develops between the skin and muscle. It moves throughout the body upwards and downwards.
The sensation of touch when palpating from one body part to another until it penetrates where it did not in the skin at a spot, and then comes out forming pus along with infection from some mixtures as is exhibited by maggots and spots on the abdomen.
It is expected of its injuries that when it festers within the body and rises to the head, reaching the eye, perhaps it may open there and come out, thus impairing the eyesight. This happens frequently, if you wish to treat and remove it, then this should be done when it appears under palpation and becomes perceptible by touch.
You should tighten above and below it with a strong tourniquet, then cut on her and remove her. If she has sunk into the flesh and you cannot find her, apply heat to the spot as if by fire until she is burned, and prevent the worst expected damage to the eyesight, as we said.
If you see that she has become in the head near the eye, tighten under her on the forehead with a strong bandage, then cut her and remove her. It is necessary for the invalid to cleanse his body with medicines that facilitate the elimination of bad infected mixtures, and to beware of foods that cause infection.
Chapter Three and Ninety.
In cutting through the disease known as nafar.
This disease, which in our country is called nafar, is a pain that manifests in some organs and then moves from one organ to another. I have seen it as described for you.
I was summoned to treat an invalid woman in some oases. I uncovered her arm and detected a slight puffing under the sweat of the arm's artery. When an hour had passed, I saw that puff continuing with the bandage as if it were an infection ascending to the elbow like a worm at its fastest speed imaginable, as fast as lead.
If the pain shifted from one place to another, it would disappear from that spot and settle in the thigh. Then, after an hour had passed, it spread throughout her body until it reached the other arm. She then told me that her entire body was rotating as I observed.
I was astonished by the speed at which it moved from one limb to another, and I had not seen this disease with such characteristics before. However, I have observed groups who found that pain would move from one limb to another, but I saw it in this manner for the first time in this woman.
I did not realize this until I understood that the woman was from Bedouin people who are generally naked and have exposed skin. It's due to this that the moving wind could be felt, and it would not occur in those with well-kept bodies and hidden skin.
And if you want to treat him and he feels pain, it will become evident to you as we have described. Tighten above and below him with the wheel and cut him until that trapped wind comes out and cleans the area.
If you do not see it with your own eyes, treat him by purging the body and what drives winds away like the seeds of garlic and the seeds of saffron, among other medicines.
The fourth and ninety-first chapter.
In the removal of arrows.
Arrows can vary depending on their types and the parts of the body where they are located. As for the variation according to their types, some are large and small, while others are made of glass (either hollow or solid), and there are those with three angles and four angles.
Some of them have tongues and others have fragments. As for those that fit with the organs they occur in, they are divided into two types: either the organs are among primary hollow ones such as brain, heart, liver, lung, kidneys, stomach, bladder, etc., or they are not. If an arrow falls into one of these organs and shows symptoms of death that I will describe to you later, it is necessary to avoid removing that arrow from it; for death usually overtakes its owner. If these bad signs do not appear and the arrow is not hidden in the depth of the organ, remove it and treat the wound. As for symptoms related to the brain when hit by an arrow that pierces through bone and wounds the area above the brain, one is exposed to severe headache, fever, and dizziness.
If these bad signs do not appear and the arrow is not hidden in the depth of the organ, remove it and treat the wound. As for symptoms related to the brain when hit by an arrow that pierces through bone and wounds the area above the brain, one is exposed to severe headache, fever, and dizziness. Eye and tongue inflammation, muscle twitching, confusion, fits, and possibly bleeding from the nostrils or ears. Speech may be lost with no sound, and white moisture similar to dough appears at the wound site that leaks out like meat juice.
If these symptoms appear, refrain from treating the wounded individual or removing the arrow if it hasn't already been removed. As for arrow symptoms when it hits the heart and is close to the left chest; you feel as if it has pierced something solid rather than an empty space.
Perhaps the arrow exhibits a movement resembling heartbeats, and blood of a dark color flows from the wound. Followed by the limbs turning cold, a chill sweat, and fainting; know that death is imminent. As for an arrow piercing the lung symptom, bleeding of fatty matter follows from the wound.
The veins around the neck swell, and the patient's urine changes color. They breathe with a loud noise and request cold air to inhale. If the arrow hits the lung shield in the chest, it is usually close to the smaller ribs, causing heavy breathing along with intense pain.
And the organs of the abdomen convulse and move, if the arrow hits the liver it follows this with severe pain and blood comes out of the wound resembling liver in its color. If the arrow hits the stomach then perhaps food emerges from the wound that is not compacted.
His condition is evident. If the arrow hits the abdomen and causes bleeding or pus to come out of the wound or incision, there is no hope for his treatment nor for extracting the arrow. If the arrow hit the bladder and urine came out, then that indicates a different course of action needs to be taken.
Something protruded from it, and the pain intensified for the sick man. Know that he is dead. As for other organs such as the face, eyes, neck, shoulder, back, muscles of the back, quadriceps, legs and similar body parts have accepted the most probable situation.
If the arrow did not hit a vessel or nerve, and if the arrow was not poisoned, I will inform you about some things that I have seen regarding these arrows to guide your treatment. That being said, an arrow struck a man in the root of his eye socket.
I removed it for him from the other side under his earlobe, he was cleansed and no harm occurred to his eye. I also removed another arrow which had hit a Jew in the inner part of his eyelid below his lower lid. The arrow had vanished inside but only its small tip stuck out, attached to the wood.
An arrow was large, one of the composite arrows of the Qaysis (a type of heavy cavalry), square-shaped and made of iron without any feathers. It cleared the Jew and did not cause any harm to his eye. I removed another arrow from the neck of a Samaritan man, and this arrow was Arab-made.
And he who has two ears, we made a cut between his earlobes. He had pierced his navel, and by easing it off him, we removed the navel piercing and healed him. We also took out another arrow from a man whose arrow had hit his abdomen; we estimated that he would die from this.
And after the time period of thirty days or about that duration, without any change in his condition, we made a cut on the arrow and replaced it onto him, then removed it and healed him. He did not experience any bad event afterwards. I saw a man who had an arrow hit him on his back; the wound adhered to him.
And after seven years had passed, the arrow came out from his thigh root. I saw a woman who had an arrow hit her in her abdomen; the wound adhered to her and remained there, without any change in her condition or did she find it causing harm at anything of her natural actions.
I saw another man who had an arrow hit him in his face; the wound adhered to him and he didn't find much pain from it, there are many like this. I also removed an arrow from one of the Sultan's commanders, who had been hit in the middle of his nose slightly tilted towards the right side.
The arrow had completely left his body, so I was called to treat him three days after the arrow hit. I found the arrow wound very narrow and probed it with a delicate probe but did not feel it. He felt fibers and pain under his right ear from the cut.
I suspected that the fibers were from the end of the arrow, so I applied a dressing with a strong adhesive and swelling properties hoping it would cause the area to swell and show a sign of the arrow. I cut him again, but there was no event at the site indicating that the arrow had reached the location.
I continued with the gauze on him for many days and no complications occurred. The wound healed within that period, leaving him crippled until he began to feel a spear one day inside his nose. He informed me of this incident; I put the potent medicine on the wound for several days.
Until it opened and he felt the delicate tip of the spear sticking in the wood. I then increased the opening of the wound with this potent medicine, until we could clearly see the end of the spear, following which time passed for me about four months.
Then, when the wound had widened and I could introduce forceps into it to manipulate it, but it did not respond to removal attempts. So I continued to treat it, changing various machines for it until one day I was able to remove it with tightly fitting forceps as depicted in the illustration at the end of this chapter.
And the surgeons would determine that his nasal bone would not heal on its own, so I made sure to mend it and ensure proper healing, leaving him completely unharmed. I am telling you how some arrows were removed to serve as a measure and proof for things I did not mention before.
For the parts of this craft and its details cannot be understood through description or fully encompassed by a book; rather, the skillful artisan measures small things against large ones, creates new work and new machinery based on what is present anticipating what has been omitted, and devises entirely new tasks during unexpected circumstances.
If you ask me about how arrows come out of the body parts where they have taken root, I would say that arrows only exit two ways: either by being pulled from the place it entered or pushed away from the other side of the body. They always come out from where they entered.
Either the arrow protrudes in a meaty part, it attracts and comes out; if it is not appropriate for its removal from the time when it was inserted into you, it would have been better for you to leave it for days until the flesh around it discharges, making it easier for it to attract and come out. Similarly, if it flared up in a bone.
And if it is not appropriate for its removal from you, leave it and also do this every day: attract and move it. It will come out, but if it still does not become appropriate for its removal after days, it would be necessary to puncture around the arrow in the same bone on each side with a small hole until you expand the hole for the arrow then attract and remove it.
If the arrow has penetrated into a bone of the head and deeply entered one of the cavities in the brain, showing some of those symptoms I mentioned to you, do not try to attract the arrow. Leave it alone until its condition improves after days.
When dealing with attracting the arrow and removing it, if it is extremely protruding and should not be attracted, use the small holes around the arrow as described to you. Then treat the area until it heals. If the arrow has disappeared in a part of the body. And if you lost sensation, examine it with a probe. If you feel the arrow, attract it using some devices suitable for this task. If you can't do it due to the narrowness of the wound and the deep location of the arrow in the hole, there is no bone, nerve or duct involved.
Cut him until the wound widens and allows the arrow to remove it, if it has two ears hold them. Remove the swollen flesh in both directions from every side with any trick you can do that and break them down if you cannot remove the flesh by cracking the ears and let them fall.
And when you try to remove the arrow in any place, use your fingers by touching all directions until you get rid of it and apply utmost care so that the arrow doesn't break making its extraction more difficult for you. If you are unable to do this due to lack of time.
Leave it for a few days until the surrounding flesh has decayed, then resume your efforts. It becomes easier at that time. If blood starts to flow, use the treatment we mentioned in its chapter and be careful not to cut an artery or nerve or tendon. Use any trick available.
Try all the ways you can extract the arrow, do it with care and patience as I have instructed you. When pulling out the arrow, turn your body to match its original position when hit by the arrow because this is more effective.
If you cannot do this, use whatever means are available to you. As for the arrow that comes out from opposite side either it has protruded something outside or you might find a part of the arrow by touch near the surface of skin and see it emerging.
Cut him and let the cut be as large as possible of what your fingers can manage. Then pull it (the arrow). It facilitates its exit, if it is stuck in bone then turn your hands until the arrow impacts on the bone and expands for itself then pull it.
Otherwise, leave it for a few days and repeat until it comes out. If the shaft of the arrow is still inside, push it with your hand. If the shaft has already fallen out and you want to use force, insert the hollow machine into its cavity in the back of the animal's head then push it through.
If the arrow is hollow, push it out with a device that enters into that cavity; this makes removal of the arrow easier. If the arrow is poisoned, it should be advisable to cut away all of the flesh that has become toxic if possible, then treat it with what suits such treatment.
If the arrow is in the chest or abdomen or bladder or flank, and it is close to what needs protection by the haft of a weapon, and if you can make an incision, then cut and be cautious not to sever any veins or nerves, then remove it.
Then suture the wound if it requires stitching, then treat it until it heals. Picture of the calibres that attract arrows with them:.
They have the shape of a bird's bell, designed like a chisel if you grasp an arrow or something that doesn't let go. They can be made in various sizes, large, small, and medium, depending on the size of the shaft, its thinness, the size of the wound, and how tight it is.
Picture of the hollow cannon:
Picture of the engraved rammer:
This is like a pushrod for the tip, making it easier to enter into the hollow shaft and push it.
The fifty-ninth chapter.
In the division of veins.
The channels that were traditionally severed in the body numbered thirty, with sixteen of them being on the head. These include the two pulsating arteries behind the ears known as the basilar arteries, and the two veins in the prominent cheeks, also known as the saphenous veins. The two channels found at the corners of the eyes are known as the observers.
The one that stands in the middle of the forehead, and the channel in the tip of the nose, the two on the neck, and those found at the upper lip of the mouth as well as the two in the lower lip. These are known as the jeher channels or glands, and the two located under the tongue.
As for the channels that are severed in the arm and hand, they are five. One of them is the ulnar nerve from the back side; it's generally called the head channel and ochreous, which is the middle channel. It consists of a branch of the basilic vein and part of the ulnar nerve; this is generally known as the body channel.
The basilic vein is located on the front side, it's also called the biceps. It's generally known as the abdominal channel and the arm cord; it's on the clavicle and it sticks together here, where its appearance can be clearly seen above the wrist from behind. The ulnar nerve (asilam).
And the channel is between the elbow and the wrist, it has two branches. In the leg and foot there are three channels; one of them is below the knee joint on the back side, and the other is the shin, its location is on the inside of the ankle on the front side, which is known as the calf's channel, and its place is at the heel on the back side.
In the other leg, there are also three channels like these. As for the two arteries behind the ears, severing them provides relief for chronic drainage, pleurisy, dyspnea and severe persistent scalp conditions. The method of severance will be described according to what I have outlined.
The procedure is to shave the head of the afflicted and scrape its posterior in the region of sweat glands using a sharp, coarse tool. Then strangle the afflicted around their neck with a girdle until the sweat glands appear above their ears at the lower positions on the head. You then examine them with your finger and where you feel their pulse under your finger is there one must engrave with a pen.
Then take a small scalpel, known as the neshel, and insert it under the sweat gland in the skin until the scalpel reaches the bone. Then lift your hand with the sweat gland and skin above and cut the sweat gland along with the skin in slices. The length of the slices should be around two inches.
Or, in a similar way, you send out the amount of blood that you want. Then tighten them with forceps and leave them until they heal. In the first book, it is mentioned cutting them off, but as for the two veins located on the sides of the neck, their ligation serves well for the chronic sister (or companion) disease, severe headache and constant dizziness, and for rapid excess watering going to the eyes.
And how you describe the ligation of these two veins, it tightens the head of the patient with a girdle until the sweat glands become visible and their pulsations can be felt under your finger. Then, when you learn this by using ink (possibly referring to tattooing or branding for identification), you lift the skin above the sweat gland up with your index finger.
Then, the neshel scalpel is inserted from below and the sweat gland is lifted upwards. It is treated in a similar way to the other sweat glands that you created. Blood is sent according to your need, then you strangle the patient and place your finger on the sweat gland as a measure.
Then place a cotton and bandage on it, and pull tightly from above until it heals. And both of these have been mentioned and cut in the first book, as for cutting the forehead scar, its benefit is after cutting the eyebrows to alleviate chronic conditions on the face like dandruff, ulcers, and the bright redness.
And how to remove it as I describe for you suffocates the wretched by a cloak until the sweat appears, then take the tool called the scissor and this is its appearance:.
You place the part of the scissor which is at the head of the scissors on the same sweat and beat it from above with a comb or something else in that manner, allowing blood to flow onto the container you desire. Then strangle the wretched person and tighten him until he heals.
And it may open with a broad blade, but the blade should not be overly sharp like most blades; rather, it should have a slightly wide tip. It must also be carefully adjusted to avoid distortion because the bone is close by; if the blade is too thin, it might break in such an area.
As for the two sweat stains in the corners of the eyes, their benefit is to alleviate various eye diseases such as smallpox, redness and pus as well as face disorders. As for how to remove them, you should strangle the wretched by a cloak then pull them apart while standing on his head with the cutting being slightly elongated towards length using a small blade that's moderately wide.
If there is no fat in the area, then if the blade's edge is too thin, it might break. Then, you send out the need for blood and place cotton on them, tightening them up for one night, then you separate them. As for cutting the forehead sweat stains, they are beneficial during acute fevers.
Severe headache and among facial diseases like the red eruption that appears on the nose, particularly if it is chronic, and how to treat it by having him hold his beard by pulling down, then grasping his nose with your left hand and taking a thin long thread.
And insert it in the middle of the rabbit itself between the nostril cavities horizontally, because sweat does not appear there; blood will flow from its hole. You should pull a little with your thread to get rid of some blood and then bind him overnight for he quickly dries.
As for the wajdjan, it is beneficial to treat them because of the constriction of breathing and the onset of syphilis and black diseases that appear on the skin like black pimples, ulcers, bad sores, and boils. The treatment involves having someone hold the wajdjan under their neck with a bandage while the surgeon stands at the head of the patient.
The wajdjan is seated on a stool, then the sweat is treated lengthwise. The treatment is broad but slight at first, then you remove as much blood as needed or according to what you see fit based on necessity. You perform this treatment similarly for the other sweat, and then you loosen the bandage.
You should pull the sweat ducts with a medium strength to prevent choking the patient and leave them until the next day, as they help in healing wounds. As for the jecharik's sweat ducts, it is beneficial to treat them after treating the cavyal duct since it aids in cavities within the mouth, gum decay, bad ulcers, split lips, and bad sores.
These are the sweat ducts found in the nose and around it, how to treat them involves having the wajdjan stand before you and hold their neck with a collar, then turn their lips and look at the two sweat ducts that one sees on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; by noting their blackness.
That is also like about two small, black, pitted pieces which are cut with a mutilated cut. If they trouble you and you do not know what they are, aim to remove the larger one and explain it. Likewise, perform on the two pieces that are in the lower lip.
And as for the two pieces under the tongue, it is beneficial to split them after dividing the molar teeth for diseases that occur in the throat such as phlegm and mouth ailments, and how to split them: You should have the patient sit between you with his back to the sun, lift his tongue, look under each side of his tongue individually for the two pieces, observe their color up to blackness.
And divide them and be cautious not to deeply cut them for there are arteries under them which may cause bleeding from these arteries. As for the three pieces that are split in the armpit, they are the ones that were traditionally done on everyone and it can only be done successfully in two ways.
Otherwise, pierce with a wide or grape-like prong or an olive-like one into the groove, and also cut with a small knife. And this is the description of the wide fruit-like prong:
It should be wide as you see, suitable for opening tight, filled-out hollows of the external glans that can contain thick blood like sperm. This is a depiction of the olive-like prong:
This prong is narrower and its ends are more pointed, suitable for splitting the small, pitted pieces that contain thin, watery blood. This is a depiction of the tool 'nashel':".
This 'nashel' is used for splitting and there are types that vary in width and thickness according to the size of the pieces. It can be useful as a replacement depending on necessity, and it is well known among craftsmen.
And as for the basiliac, which is one of these three main arteries, its advantage lies in diverting blood from conditions that occur below the neck and throat, those that lie behind the breast and stomach. When removing it, the surgeon should be cautious and aware that there might be a vessel beneath; if he mistakes this and adds more to the puncture site, it will cut that vessel.
A bleeding occurs for this reason, so it should not be performed using a surgical instrument but rather by making an incision. If the basiliac does not visibly appear, you should avoid performing it and choose another method or ask for assistance from one of its practitioners.
Or remove the arm's ligature if it is evident and can be cut with a simple surgical instrument as we explained. If you want to perform this specific surgery, before pulling on the arm, you should locate the pulse position thoroughly then learn its timing using a sphygmomanometer.
Then, attach the arm and make an incision on the vein with a modified surgical tool as we explained. Ensure you strike away from the vessel's location. When pulling the band, if you notice inflation in the area that you learned about using the sphygmomanometer, this indicates that you've hit the artery; avoid it.
If you see that the blood spurts like a boy's urine and is thin, red in color, then you should know that it comes from an artery. When this happens, act promptly; place your finger on the site for a long time, then remove it; if the blood flow stops significantly, pull on the arm often.
Leave him, warn the patient not to neglect it, and keep your hand on his neck without moving it for days until he heals. If the blood doesn't stop flowing despite your attempts and if you don't see any improvement when treating him, try ligation (tying off) of the artery; if its ends become contracted then the blood flow stops.
Take the skin of a gut and cut it, take half of it and tighten it at the spot of the boil with a tight bandage and supports until another day. If the blood stops, otherwise act according to what was previously mentioned for placing the stoppers that prevent bleeding, and stopping its flow is not difficult in most cases.
Knowing how to locate the minor wound and ensure the bandage stays on in the arm, do this. As for the black boil, its advantage is that it causes blood to drain from above the head and lower body to a location which is made up of a branch of basilic vein and a branch of cephalic vein, as we said.
It is necessary for the surgeon to be on top of his incision, because there may be nerves below it. If he increases in his pricking and hits the nerve, pain occurs that makes observation difficult and perhaps doesn't disappear at all. This nerve often becomes apparent through touch.
If it is hidden in some people and is very thin that doesn't become apparent, it may be necessary to make your incision through a sliver with a scalpel and avoid hitting the nerve. If there are two nerves close together, split the boil along its length. As for the cephalic boil, its advantage is that it draws blood from the head.
It benefits in eye diseases and especially for this boil if you want to incise it; you can do that with a olive pricking tool or with a broad basilisk pricking tool because all veins are under it, as there is no artery or nerve underneath.
Except that, it may be necessary for you when making the incision to avoid hitting only the muscle head with the pricking tool and to seek the soft spot. It does not harm him if he is struck in the first blow and then is pricked again, but perhaps it swells in some people if he doesn't make the incision in the first strike.
But this tumor does him no harm, as for the technique of surgery and its complications and what should progress in correcting it, the first thing you need to understand is that surgery can only be used to maintain health.
And either it can be used in diseases, which is the surgery that aims at maintaining health and its continuity and preventing disease occurrences. This refers to surgery on one of the three main veins found in the plexus - the subclavian, axillary, and basilic veins - and specifically when it occurs at the beginning of the spring when signs of congestion appear.
Surgery is done on Sunday or Tuesday, after three hours of the day has passed. As for surgery used in diseases, it does not have a limited time but can be performed at night or day when need and necessity call for it.
Every hour and at every time, it should not be performed on children until they reach fourteen years of age, nor on the elderly who have surpassed sixty years. If someone decides to undergo surgery for any reason.
It is necessary to cleanse his bile before surgery with a gentle injection if there is much impure bile that has been stagnant, so as not to be drawn towards the veins during surgery from the bile ducts, causing an unpleasant infection that affects the main organs. Surgery should not be performed on those who are bloated or diabetic until their condition improves.
Surgery should also be avoided after sexual intercourse, vomiting, indigestion, over-indulgence in sexual relations, fatigue, physical exercise, staying awake at night, fasting, and any activity that weakens the body's or mind's condition. Then, consider the mixing of blood before this if it is thick.
By eating, drinking, and taking medicines if possible. Then he can enter the bath if there is no obstacle preventing him or engage in some exercise to activate blood flow, so that his surgery occurs during the day as we said earlier. He should also let his chest have a rest from all the bad psychological symptoms throughout this day.
Concerning worries, anger, fear, and all bodily symptoms like fatigue, over-excitement, sexual desire, and similar things, he prepares his sessions with the items that have been used by people in their customs from varieties of good smells, fragrances, entertainments, etc., each person on a scale that they can bear.
Then the one who performs the circumcision sits on a cushion that is higher than the one the patient will sit on, then he extends his arm and the circumciser touches him with his hand two or three times. Then he tightens the ligature around the foreskin and does this two or three times, making sure the tension is moderate.
As the tension, if it is not moderate, either by over-tightening which prevents blood flow or by under-relaxation also stops blood flow. After tightening, it is necessary for the one who performed the operation to rub all his hands together as if to warm them.
Until the veins expand and can be felt by touch, then the one who performs the operation dips his cutting instrument in old oil. Then he places his index finger of his left hand under the skin where he intends to cut a little bit, so that the skin doesn't slip away when he cuts it. This is because there are veins that feel like the radial artery which tend to withdraw during circumcision, and some are filled with air. When a tool was placed on them, they went under the tool and deceived the one who performs the operation, so the one being operated did not open his veins and if he opened them, it would be narrow.
Therefore, it is necessary for the one who performs the operation to be careful in all these matters and then he lowers the tool. If the vein opened with its second attempt, otherwise he should do another try under that place or above it with the wheel if the spot does not swell.
If there is swelling or pain in the urine, leave him for a day or two and do not tighten the belt. Perhaps he will expel a hot stone without needing to take a bath, then he may resume urination if he wishes. If the stonemer is used and the opening is small with thin flowing blood.
And I feared that not enough blood would come out as desired, so reinsert the stonemer in the same hole, make it straight and slightly increase the opening. Do this with the wheel before the area swells, for many people experience swelling at small openings.
And if you see that it has swollen, don't let up on him at all; instead, apply something from the tip of the garlic oil. It helps blood flow and is better in this place than the oil itself or any other ointments.
And use the tip of garlic oil in all your urination for small cuts when blood flow is obstructed. This can be done by the medical advisor or the exorcist, if one places some from either on the area; then blood flows and dissolves if it's thick.
And if there is a large lump in the cut area, it happens often and especially to those who have not urinated properly only that time or whose urine opening was small. Then address it: place an moistened sponge soaked in warm salt water on the lump; hold it for an hour; then it will dissolve.
And it should be done after the blood has fully drained from the same urine or another, if there remains something of blackness or greenness in the area for a few days; this does not harm him. If you wish, you can put some patience and dissolved myrrh on him.
Or a bit of the extract of foding and similar substances, often when there is a lump that grows with prostate cutting, place your hand on him. If you find that it tingles upon rubbing it, if this is an unpleasant lump, be careful not to apply anything like what we have mentioned.
If it may bleed from him blood of an artery, then bind up what is in it with a clot so that the wound will harden, then treat it with all other treatments until it heals, and it would be appropriate for every man to have some blood according to his strength and the predominant color shown by the blood.
If the blood is black, let it bleed until it turns red. Similarly, if you see that it is thick, let it flow until it thins out. Even if it appears sharp, allow it to subside and lose its sharpness. It would be appropriate for someone who is full-bodied and strong, requiring a single release of blood.
He should widen the sweat gland and make it wide, while for the weak one, it is opposite to that. It would be appropriate to remove it in stages with a narrow hole. The best thing used to open the sweat gland is a V-shaped cut without any sharp edges.
This type of sweat gland incision is perfect for bleeding and cutting nerves; it's Ahmed and Aslam when compared to the longitudinal incision during a sweat gland removal procedure. Those who are accustomed to such a method during a procedure should be fed something like soaked bread in water mixed with almond or hibiscus juice before undergoing the surgery.
If it is incised and blood has been drained in three or four stages, then if the temperament is cooled down, he should eat soaked bread in a drink made of maida or honey water before the surgery, or in a sweetened hawthorn juice or a nice fennel tea.
If there is leakage during surgery due to excessive bleeding, and if the cause of this leakage is a large amount of blood discharge, it would be appropriate to drink meat water and a mild fennel tea. He should also use galbanum as an antiseptic and massage his chest with it. And he should apply all that we mentioned in Chapter 13 about treating leakage during surgery.
This is a decision based on the urine output, and if someone wants to relieve their arm and release blood again, it should be done by those who have made his incision for heavy urine discharge and weak strength, that they let out some blood little by little according to the strength in consecutive days.
And if someone wants to relieve their arm and release blood again and their body is strong, they should do this within seven or nine hours from his first incision. But for those who want to attract the blood from their body towards the side it has gone to, it would be good for them to rest on the second or third day.
And for those who have much blood in their body that has become heated and swollen, causing fever, it would be appropriate to remove the blood in one go and extract a large amount from them. Expanding the incision should then take place until bleeding stops following all conditions of making an incision being checked. And place your hand on their pulse while the blood is flowing, so as to prevent death happening at the incision point which often occurs if the surgeon lacks knowledge and experiences neglect, it should not be done if you want to relieve the arm and release blood again.
And if the sweat's mouth has closed and it is difficult for blood to escape, forcefully pressing or applying force upon him can be harmful. Instead, either let it continue until he opens his sweat pores again or slope with the tool what has hardened in the sweat's mouth.
Or you can place something made of salt that has dissolved in water on him, or a piece of the famous garlic or thyme and gently press upon him until blood comes out. If his sweat is swollen, leave it alone.
Do not touch it until the tumor settles, but if necessity calls for a second bloodletting, there is no choice. Either he will exaggerate beyond this place or in the other arm or on the other vein.
And if there is a knot in the arm, it can be replaced by a section of the clavicle and the basilic vein if they are not present or hidden because they are composed of them. The method for freeing this knot involves immersing your hand in hot water until the needle turns red and the sweat appears visibly. Then apply moderate tension with the bandage above it.
Then, the vein is cut slightly off-center without causing a bulge or lengthening. Make sure the opening is wide and place your cut above the elbow joint a little bit. If blood does not come out, put your hand in a pot of hot water again and let the blood flow into the water.
Until you satisfy your need; if you are in summer, you might not need to immerse your hand again in hot water. Hot water makes blood flow better especially during winter months. Cutting this vein is safer than cutting any other veins. Because there is no harmful vein or nerve beneath it. As for cutting the hepatic duct from the right hand, it benefits in liver issues and how to cut it involves tightening the wrist with a bandage or your hand after immersing it in hot water until the vein swells up.
Because there is no harmful vein or nerve beneath it. As for cutting the hepatic duct from the right hand, it benefits in liver issues and how to cut it involves tightening the wrist with a bandage or your hand after immersing it in hot water until the vein swells up. The sensitivity is clearly noticeable, then cut it slightly off-center and if you amputate the whole thing, it won't harm him in any way. Be cautious not to press your fingers too much as there's a nerve under them and the area is bare of flesh. Then return your hand to the hot water.
Leave the wound open so that blood can flow. If you do not keep it in hot water, the blood will congeal in the sweat mouth and impede the bleeding. When you have removed as much blood as needed, apply oil and salt on the sweat gland to prevent quick healing.
So it is also necessary to do the same with every narrow field. If the advantage lies in fisting with the left hand, then its benefit applies similarly to the gallbladder as well. You perform the procedure on the right hand in the same manner as you did for the second one. As for fisting of the abdomen, its use is beneficial for diseases that occur below the body like those affecting the uterus.
Retention of urine and kidney diseases, chronic sores on the thighs and legs, as well as similar illnesses, and how to fumigate him by having his leg in hot water and carrying it with massage until the pores open then tighten above the ankle joint where his leg meets the foot, towards the thumb.
It branches out on the man's face into many fields. So fumigate him in the widest branch or near his ankle where he joins is better and safer. If you fumigate him on the face, be cautious about the nerves under it on the man's face.
Have your fumigation for him resemble amputation as if you were about to cut off his leg. If blood does not come out, make him submerge in hot water and leave the blood to flow until it has drained away. If the fumigator mistakes the sweat gland during the first attempt.
He should reposition the fumigation a little upwards; the location is safe and there's no fear of it being too cold, as long as he cautions against the nerve in the way we explained. The same applies when dealing with the sweat glands on the other woman's legs. As for women's sweat glands, their place is as we mentioned at the heel on the side opposite to the foot.
The benefit of removing the cause of knee pain when it is due to hot blood, and how to perform this removal; you should allow the steam from the hot bathroom to enter the afflicted area quickly, pulling his leg up from the knee to above the ankle with four fingers using a thin long glove. In this way, he will not be visible at all.
If it appears, remove it according to any condition. You may either correct the situation, which is better, or remove it with a cut or split it if its location is safe and remarkably hidden in most people's case. If you can't find it, you might not be able to remove it.
If it doesn't immediately appear, remove some of the tissue that tends to show up. This is found near the back of the foot towards the thigh and shin, protecting nerves and leaving a certain amount of blood vessels as needed.
Then apply the stitch and place cotton on the site of the removal, then tighten the area; it will heal quickly.
The sixty-ninth chapter.
In cupping and how to use it.
Cups for cupping can be made of horns, wood, copper, or glass. Cupping is performed in two ways: one involves applying suction and removing blood, while the other involves cupping without using suction.
And this type of cupping without suction has two aspects.
Cups for the inner canthus, which are the two neck pages on both sides, cupping under the jaw below the bottom of the mouth, cupping on the back, cupping at the elbow joints, cups in the middle of the arms (zenzinds), and cups on the legs, cups on the wrists.
Bloodletting only draws blood from the small scattered veins spread within the flesh. For this reason, it should not be performed in any condition leading to accumulation until the body has completely expelled it.
If necessity, whether from disease or custom, calls for bloodletting, we used it at every time in the first and last days of the month and in the middle, regardless of when.
And among people, some who have too much blood find themselves burdened and with headache. Some of them experience fullness and redness on their face, head, and neck. Some have a rash on their face and cheeks, as well as darkness and spots in their eyes. Some are troubled by itching at the place they were bled from.
And among them are those who laugh excessively. Some of them find the taste of blood in their mouths, they spit it out, and they break with blood. There are those who sleep too much and dream of blood, redness, death, wounds, and other similar things; whenever we notice such occurrences.
Especially, if it is during the middle third of the month, we used bloodletting after two or three hours into the day. As for the benefit of bloodletting by scratching, it alleviates heaviness in the head and water that collects in the eyes.
But it should be after the body has fully expelled its blood. This bloodletting can replace bleeding with a hot iron, and one must beware of using it on someone who has cold blood or a fever; otherwise, it would cause them great harm.
That's why it shouldn't be used by the elderly, or those with cold conditions in their head; it might cause them to lose memory due to its overuse.
Therefore, it is necessary to instruct the cutpurser to lower his hand slightly below the inguinal region in case of the generation of a false hernia. As for the neck cutpurser, she is an alternative to cut the subclavian vessels and the carotid artery.
Therefore, it benefits against asthma and tightness in the breath and disruption of the breathing mechanism as well as coughing and congestion, and it is necessary to lift the neck cutpurser slightly because if she goes down, it weakens the heart and stomach.
As for the cutpurser of the eyelids, it benefits against sudden pains in the head and cold sweat, fever, headache and toothache as well as jaw pain; she is an alternative to cut the basiliac artery. It is necessary that you instruct the cutpurser not to deepen his hand on the carotid so as not to cut a vessel and cause bleeding.
As for the cutpurser under the sternum, it benefits against chest pains in the mouth and gum diseases among other illnesses that occur in the mouth, taking the place of cutting the frenulum between the lips. As for the cutpurser on the shoulders, it benefits against the pain caused by congestion and heat.
And as for the cutpurser of the navel region, it benefits from cutting the three major vessels - basiliac artery, jugular veins and vena cava inferior because it draws blood from all those minute blood vessels that are present in the flesh, and it draws these minute blood vessels from even thicker ones until the suction reaches the three major veins.
It is necessary to instruct the surgeon not to focus too much in cutting on the carotid, as it is bare of skin and underneath are nerves and vessels. As for the neck cutpurser who cuts on the hyoid bone, she benefits against hemorrhoids and bottom sores.
It is necessary to order the surgeon that the patient should be large and made of copper, as the position needs a strong force. Perhaps a glass guillotine might break and there are many conditions required. As for thigh surgeons, their work lacks sufficiently.
Because it draws blood from the entire body and relieves chronic pains in the kidneys, uterus, and bladder, stimulates urination, benefits from warts and boils, performs the role of prostate and epididymis' function instead; however, it takes a lot out of the body and causes deceit among many people. Prostate surgeons have benefits close to those of leg guillotining.
The method of applying the guillotines is that you first place the patient with an empty guillotine and use a moderate suction, do not prolong the position but put it quickly and remove it quickly to accept mixing to the area evenly until it turns red and opens. Then, repeat this process continuously until you see the area turn red and open.
When the blood redness appears, then you should continue with suction gradually and then observe the body condition. If someone's meat is loosely fat with pores throughout, it may be necessary to guillotine them once only because the area might get bruised otherwise.
You should order the surgeon to widen the cut slightly and deepen it a little bit, applying gentle suction with light movement. If the blood is thick, it may be necessary to guillotine twice. In the first time, make way for the flow of fresh blood and water, while in the second time, there's no need to look out for the removal of thick blood.
If the blood is very thick, repeat the cut three times to achieve the goal. In general, if we want to remove a little blood, one cut suffices; however, if we want to remove much blood, we should apply a stricter cut. If we estimate that the blood is thick.
In order to perform, there must be a deep cut and the middle limit of that cut should only reach the skin depth. It is necessary to use certain ointments when setting dressings, and water along with what alarms those who take cold baths. However, for someone whose skin is thick, hard, coarse, and with narrow pores.
In order to prepare the places for the dressings, you should apply ointments that are opened and finely ground. However, if it is during summer time, something like walnut oil or orange peel oil or sweet almond oil or pomegranate seed oil can be used.
And if it is during winter, then something like jasmine oil or caraway oil or honeycomb oil or garlic and so on, if the skin is thick and cold, then use oils such as mastic oil or aniseed oil or beeswax oil or birdlime oil and similar ones.
If the person who takes cold baths has large pores, it is advisable not to use oils. Those ones should wash their dressings with rose water or cold water or raisin vinegar water or pomegranate water and similar things after bleeding. However, for someone whose blood is abundant in moisture.
The places for the dressings should be washed with lemon or asafetida water, and so on. For those whose skin is thick, they should wash their dressings with old wine or mastic water or birdlime decoction or honey and similar things. It is critical to avoid bleeding after bathing.
But it is necessary to use after getting out of the bath for an hour or two. It is not advisable to sleep immediately after bleeding. This is something that should be considered before and after bleeding by the one who performs bleeding.
One must first ascertain whether the septic or hemorrhagic is of a purely syphilitic nature, and if their bleeding and inflammation are severe. It should take cold remedies like garlic, coriander seeds, carom seeds, pomegranate leaves, mint and such things, make its diet consist of soups and mutton stock. The meat of the sheep should be stewed with sour milk, and dishes cooked with sour fruit juices, and so on.
And if his mood is cold, it should be watered with honey drinks or the drink of carom seeds and coriander seeds. It should consume fragrant medium wine that lies between old and new styles and be ordered to reduce food intake. Its diet should consist of soups, burial dishes, sparrows and chicken livers, and when fasting for bloodletting and purification, drinking water should be more than food.
It may be necessary to drink in some cases, for certain people, the powerful aperient or musk medicine or thyme before bloodletting and before fasting or after it, to strengthen the main organs and purify the blood. It should not be given to those who have expelled impurities (referring to those who have undergone bloodletting).
As for the bloodletting without conditions, they are the bloodlettings that are placed on the liver, gallbladder, breasts and also on the abdomen, spleen, kidney area, right thigh because these organs cannot bear to have bloodletting done upon them. It is intended with this method, either to draw blood from one organ to another.
Like we place the bloodletting on the breasts for the purpose of healing, or we use it to get rid of a cold wind that has penetrated into an organ like placing the bloodletting on the abdomen and chest area. It disturbs the organ, warms it up, and eliminates pain through this cold wind.
And if a plug or stone is found in the kidney, by force they may open it or remove the stone from its place. Similarly, when applied to liver and gall bladder under conflicting winds within them, these treatments may be used empty with only medicine.
And it can be used with fire, or filled with boiled water for purposes of treatment. This is because the bag is filled and made large containing only hot water itself, or water that had some suitable herbs cooked in it.
Then it is filled and placed on the area, gripped, removed, and reapplied as needed. This is a depiction of the treatment bag used with fire:.
Its mouth size would be two fingers wide, as depicted. Its depth is half a foot deep, and it has a small hole about halfway through its side that the needle can fit through when made from Chinese brass or yellow brass with thick edges.
It is flat and smooth, folded so as not to harm the organ when placed upon it. It has a small obstruction in the center made of brass or iron in the middle. The candle is placed inside this with fire. This treatment bag can be large, larger than what we described, or small according to the illness.
A new application will be used here; the treatment bags for children and nursing women are not like those of men or adult males in terms of structure, but as for how to use this hot treatment bag on the organ with fire, it is done by igniting a wick made of tightly woven cotton or a small candle from tallow and placing it on the hardened rod that's in the center of the treatment bag.
Let the flame ascend upwards for about halfway in the treatment bag so as not to burn the genitals, then place it on the organ and put your finger over the hole we mentioned. Even if you hold the treatment bag tightly, there's no need to remove your finger.
The steam escaped through that hole and the cup broke upon the support. Then, a wick is placed on the surface and it is reheated if necessary. As for the cup used in the disease of scalding with water, there is no solid rod or hole in it.
And only use it by filling it with water and placing it directly on the organ, this is how it looks:.
And this cup, the larger it was to hold much water, the better it was,.
Chapter seventy-nine.
In discussing congestion.
The 'alq' is only used in most cases in organs where the cups cannot be placed either due to their small size, like the mouth and tongue etc., or because the organ is exposed from the flesh as in fingers, nose etc.
And how to use it is that you would take the 'alq' which has been in pure, disease-free water and leave it in the clean water for a day and night until it thickens and there's nothing left in its interior. Then, the body is first cleansed by fasting or through bleeding, and then the organ in question is wiped clean.
Until it turns red, then it is applied. If it fills up, it falls off. If the location can be treated with cupping, that is more beneficial, otherwise wash the area with soap and abundant water, then rub and squeeze it gently. If after falling off the 'alq', bleeding continues and this constitutes a discharge, use a cotton swab dipped in cold water.
Place it from above until the discharge stops. If there is abundant blood, sprinkle on it finely ground powders or garlic juice or something similar to reduce the bleeding, or place on the area half of the cleaned leek.
Wait until the scab sticks in place, because the blood will stop flowing and it should be that if there is a need for regaining the lost tissue; do not hang any other tissues instead of this one if possible. If the graft refuses to stick then the affected area should be wiped with fresh blood.
Or you can pierce the area with a needle until some blood comes out, then place it. If she feels a little blood, it sticks to its place. If you want to remove it, sprinkle her with something like patience, salt or ashes and it will fall off from its place.
The third chapter.
In algebra.
This chapter is also essential for what one needs in the practice of medicine, which is algebra for breaking and setting bones.
Know, my sons, that this chapter is called foolish by many doctors and laymen, those who have never flipped through the old books on it or read even a single word from them.
And for this reason, this art of knowledge in our country has become extinct. I have never encountered it properly explained. And what I gained from it is what I acquired through my long reading of the early books and my diligent effort to understand them, extracting knowledge from them until old age forced me to test it through experience and practice.
And I have drawn for you all that surrounds my knowledge in this chapter from that. And I have been experimenting on it after bringing it to you and removing all its excessive details, simplifying it as much as possible, clarifying it as clearly as possible, and illustrated many of the diagrams of the machines used in it for you.
This is an increase in explanation as was done in the two preceding chapters, and there is no power except by God the Almighty.
The first chapter.
He neglects and omits discussions on the matter of breaking bones. It is necessary to present them, and before we start mentioning one by one the broken and dislocated parts, it would be appropriate to discuss some points and divisions in this section. Firstly, it forces you to understand and grasp the truth about this matter, not just you but anyone who is eager to learn this noble craft.
And I say that if anyone experiences a fracture, dislocation or laceration or fall, it is necessary to act first by setting the bone, reducing the dislocation or both. If there is no impediment such as weakness preventing it, or if what happened to him was something like a child or an old person needing both actions at once, or if the time was extremely hot or extremely cold.
Then, in terms of diet, he restricts to cold legumes and bird meat and thin soups, prohibits drink and dense foods, as well as any food that fills the veins with blood until the tumor heals and there's no expectation of material accumulation at the site.
And at that point, the ill person should return to his first course of treatment according to his usual routine. If he breaks a broken bone during massage, it is necessary for the ill person to eat heavy and sticky foods with plenty of thickening like lentils, rice, grains, noodles, and beef broth. And the eggs, fish, thick drink and similar foods; with this treatment, the breaking of the bone is faster and better. Know that broken bones in elderly men or old people cannot ever naturally heal to their original state.
Drying of their bones and their hardness; bone can be connected and fused to what was bone in the greatest softness, like the bones of small children. But nature grows on the broken bone from all sides something resembling tar, with a firmness that sticks to it and tightens until it clings to itself.
And it sticks together until it reaches the greatest strength and solidity as it was originally, so nothing hinders any of its actions.
For this reason, the food for the patient should include foods that have strength, stickiness, and firmness as we mentioned. Know that fractures can vary in types depending on the type of body part involved because a fracture in the leg bone differs from a fracture in the head bone and a fracture in the rib is different from a fracture in the back.
Likewise, each body part differs from the others. We will go on to explain each type of fracture separately and in detail compared to another, and it may also vary in itself for the type of bone fracture.
Because it may be a hairline fracture without the occurrence of shards, or the fracture may occur along the bone and have shards that are clean or not. The fracture can also come with cuts in the skin, and there is a small crack as well.
For every type, there is a specific method for correcting it as will be described in its place. Through these, one recognizes the bone fracture by its curvature, narrowing, appearance to touch and vibrations when you tap on it with your hand.
If there is no apparent curvature or vibrations, and you don't feel anything when touching the bone, and you don't find many reasons for pain, then it's likely not a fracture. Instead, it could be bruising, or a soft fracture or even a small crack; so it shouldn't be disturbed with stretching or tapping movements.
But apply to him of the medicines which will be mentioned later when it suits the place, then gently tighten him, and know that if the bone is broken and crushed by two without any fragments happening in him, yet each part has left his own.
You should promptly correct and adjust him as needed before a tumor appears. If a hot tumor does appear, leave it alone for days until the heat of the tumor subsides, then adjust it in any way you can using kindness and skill.
Remember that correcting and adjusting a bone without fragments is easier than one that has broken pieces, then you should apply pressure to what will be mentioned next. If the bone contains fragments, it's necessary to extend the broken limb from both sides whether with hands or legs.
Either with your hands if the limb is small, or with two ropes, or with a rope and your hand, place the limb flat on its natural shape until part of the broken bone extends. Then, return any excess back to their places using all means of skill and kindness that you can manage.
Make sure that in your efforts, you do not cause unnecessary pain or discomfort on the patient. Strive to keep both bones together as they should naturally be, and during this process, gently touch and manipulate them with your hands. Should you notice anything out of place, adjust and correct it according to your ability.
And be cautious of excessive force and strong pricking, as many ignorant people do. Often, they cause heat or a temporary discomfort in the limb, something you may have seen them perform repeatedly.
Then, after ensuring proper adjustment and understanding, immobilize the limb with rest and care. Warn the patient to avoid moving it during their wakefulness and sleep, when they're turning or agitated, at bowel movements, and in all other actions. The extent of movement should be minimal, aiming for a position that eases any pain.
That is, if he feels pain or discomfort in the state of his limb when trying to move it from one position to another different position than that state without experiencing any pain and checks to ensure that this state of positioning is flat and straight.
So that no deformation occurs in the limb if it is forced, and as for how to pull the broken limb, it's exactly as I'm describing to you. Know that broken limbs vary in size and shape; not all are small like the arm, fingers, stick and similar.
The bandages for the punctures should be soft and smooth, not rough like the thigh, back, and chest. The bandages around these larger parts should be firm since the wide ligaments hold the large limb in place and pull it equally from all sides without any disturbance.
Then, after you have finished setting [aligning], you begin to carry the suitable plaster. In gentle pressure at the site of fracture, then begin to wrap the bandage around the site of fracture itself, three times or four times depending on what is suitable for the limb. Gently pull the bandage and then take it up towards the upper side of the fracture site.
With less tension than what you would use on the broken site, then slightly spread apart while moving away from the fracture site and gradually loosen the tension until it achieves a proper adjustment, then take another strip to wrap around the broken area as well.
Wrap in layers, then move the wrapping downwards from the break. Let your actions of pulling tightness and relaxing be as we described for wrapping on top of the first one higher up. Place a gentle pressure or puncture between bandages that is suitable for correcting the deformation of the break.
If there are deformities, leave it alone, then bind it with another bandage. Then place the bones of your hand on this bandaging if there is no inflation or hot tumor in the body part.
If there is inflation or a hot tumor, carry it with what calms that tumor and dispels the inflation. Leave it for some days, then tighten it on that moment with the bones. Let the bones be from half-split reed stalks finely carved by wisdom or let them be from the wood of litters.
The ones that are made from cedar or palm leaflets or bamboo or clay and things similar to those, which have been prepared for this purpose. And let each bone be of this size and shape exactly.
Except for the bone that is placed on the very fracture, which should be a bit wider and thicker than other bones. As for the length of the bone, it's made according to what fits with the size of the broken member from its grandness and smallness, picture of the bone:".
Then tighten the bones with another bandage according to your first tightness. Then, you fasten it above with tightly woven threads as we mentioned about tightness; being that your tension on the break point should be more. The tighter as you move away from the breakage.
And the threads should be medium in thickness and smoothness. It is best to use wet, thick camel wool as these are special. If the threads are too thick like what I've seen from foolish people who wind them into strips of matted camel wool; it's a huge mistake.
Because it leads to over-tightness with it, and the smooth threads do not allow you to achieve the tension you desire. It's also not advisable for there to be less than a finger's width between one bone and another.
If the impotent person has been injured by limbs of the testicles during traction in the right places, place under it something soft like flax or spread wool so that nothing hurts him from that. As for when there is fracture along with injury and a breach occurs in the skin, we will discuss this separately.
And be aware that not every broken member should be bound with testicles on the first day. This is because if the member is large, it shouldn't be placed under binders with the testicles until at least five days or seven or more depending on your concern about the occurrence of the hot tumor.
And this is the property of the bandages that were originally used on fractures, breaks and wounds; a general short bandage that supports the fracture and suits most substances. It's particularly suitable for infants, women because it doesn't get hot or cold easily.
And it is to take of the dust of the millstone, which sticks to the walls of the mill when the mill operates. Mix it as it is without washing it with egg whites and make sure its consistency is neither too thick nor too thin. Then spread it.
Another property of a bandage that supports fractures, dislocations and wounds. It's taken from wool, linen, goatskin, leather, and clay in each for every 11 dirhams and half for each other, twenty dirhams from camel hair or Roman clay. Everyone applies it and mixes it with water of clay or egg whites if the impotent person's mood is released. Then, this bandage is used; its good composition quickly supports broken bones and suits most people due to its moderation.
Description of a dressing that also helps with fractures and hemorrhages, it is prepared by taking three parts of mastic gum, two parts of white myrrh, and eight parts of Armenian clay. Each ingredient should be measured out in one eleventh of dirhams for the gum and myrrh, and five tenths of dirhams for the clay, totaling twenty-one dirhams when mixed together finely. The mixture is then sieved and kneaded with water or egg whites, afterwards it can be used.
Description of a dressing for joints and dislocated bones that soothes severe pain and prevents the shock waves from fractures, it is prepared by taking desiccated wool which is then soaked in vinegar and cooked oil. It is placed on the affected area. This dressing does not have enough power to restore position through force.
But it is excellent for calming down hot swellings and driving off severe pains. Description of another dressing that can set broken bones; it involves grinding the pomegranate leaves and the wild fennel and mixing them together with two moist layers, a shorter formula version used in case of bone fracture occurrence.
And you wish to analyze the rest of the tumor, take equal parts from the white thyme, borage, and nutmeg powder. Mix all finely with turmeric if the organ is not loose; if it's loose, mix it with mint water or just water and use it.
Description of another dressing that is stronger in analysis compared to the first one, used when a hard tumor occurs upon bone fracture. It involves taking equal parts from white thyme, cardamom seed, coriander seeds, rose hips, and cinnamon, and mixing them together with nutmeg and borage if the organ is not loose; if it's loose, use just water or mint water instead and apply it.
Mix and knead all ingredients in either bitter water or sweet water, or with turmeric, based on the temperature of the organ and how well it cools off. As for Galen, he did not mention applying it to a broken limb when setting it back into place.
Only the cerate made from wax and oil is enough, nothing else. It should be described as being between hardness and softness. As for Galen, he believed that things which are dry in place of what has been broken when being set, such as garlic, something with heat like mint, cheese, and similar to what we mentioned.
A description of a poultice useful for weakness and pain, it is prepared using fennel, ground dates, human hair that has been combed or bird feathers, salt and parts of honeycombs. It should be pounded, sieved, and mixed together before being applied as a poultice. As for the amount to remain in the bandage.
Then it heals, so you should observe: If there is no reason for the pain or stiffness and the broken bone doesn't move from its place, do not leave it for a long time. But if it causes intense stiffness, distressing pain or swelling in that spot, then treat it.
Proceed to treat it immediately and do not delay this essential action; remove the poultice, then take a soft thread or sea sponge that is wetted with warm water. Dip it into the warm water, wash the area until the itching stops and the pain eases, then leave the limb to rest for an hour.
Then, cover it with the moistened wool, soaked in vinegar and oil or rose oil, bind it to him overnight until the hot tumor subsides, the swelling in the limb disappears, and the pain goes away. Then return it to gentle squeezing and soft padding without applying too much pressure initially.
Continue to apply it until healing occurs. If you observe that the tumor, redness, pain and swelling as well as all symptoms have disappeared completely and require a poultice and squeezing, reapply them as before. If no changes occur in the limb that matches what we've mentioned.
Do not attempt it until three, or four, or five, or seven days have passed; sometimes you may leave it for twenty days. All this depends on what your observation of the condition of the member indicates to you as we said, even if there is a fracture and the joining of the flesh to it necessitates it.
In addition, apply more tension than the initial tension to all of it, and also increase the hardness of the sustenance for the patient beyond what was previously mentioned. If you see that the fracture site has dried out and weakened more than it should, know that food cannot reach there.
Then, pour in slightly warm water each time you do the operation, and let this happen every three days. Lightly decrease the tension a little bit; through this action, food is sent to the body and it heals quickly. As for what the ignorant people create with restoratives of breaking the member again,
Indeed, if it does not exert enough force where it should and instead exerts too much force, their action is a mistake and an immense deception. Even if it was correct at some point mentioned in their books and they practiced it, I have never seen any effect from that among them. The right thing to do is not to use it.
Chapter Two.
In the open fracture on the head.
The types of open fractures on the head are numerous, their shapes vary, and their causes are diverse. Some fractures occur due to a sword strike, which may either completely heal the bone until it reaches the sinus beneath the bone. Similarly, it can be done with wood as well.
Therefore, this type of fracture is called comminuted and may also occur when the sword cuts through part of the bone but does not pierce its entire length. This type of fracture is called a segmental break and can result in either large or small wounds.
This excerpt discusses "fractures that are brittle or compressed, whose cause might be a blow with a stone or falling onto a rock or something similar. This kind of fracture can either puncture the membrane underneath the bone, or it can occur in the face of the bone.
This excerpt continues by stating that the wounds from these fractures can either be large or small, and there are also fractures which remain hidden within the bone in its hair-like structure; they are gradual breaks.
This type of fracture is thus called 'hair-like' or 'hairline', and there are fractures caused by a fall or hitting with a stone, among others that enter the sheet of bone into its interior turning the location into a bending point. Depending on where it gets struck, part of this can enter inside.
This type of fracture is most often found in the soft bone of the head, like children's skull bones. All these types of fractures can have clean or unclean fragments. We will address how to treat all this at their respective places and we will identify each type of fracture by examining them.
This involves examining it with probes, removing the rotten flesh from its surface. For hair-like fractures, you can identify them by inspecting the bone and rubbing with ink; if the fracture appears black. As for treating a fracture, one should first look at the symptoms of disease.
If I see symptoms that clearly indicate fear such as repeated vomiting, extension and loss of consciousness, cessation of speech, fever, severe eye redness and its color changes and other related symptoms, do not approach or treat the disease for him. Death is often inevitable with these symptoms in most cases.
And if I see symptoms that are not alarming and I hope for his safety, then you should proceed with his treatment. For instance, if the wounded person was injured at the very beginning of being wounded, and it happened in winter's days.
In any case, one should strive to remove the bone before the fourteenth day. If it is within summer days, it would be advisable to hasten removal of the bone before the seventh day in order to prevent corruption under the bone from the lining, thus exposing those symptoms which we have described.
If the fracture has reached the membranes covering the brain and there is a comminuted and exposed state, it would be necessary to amputate the diseased, injured part as I have described to you, which involves removing the scalp over the wounded skull.
And when you are able to expose the bone in any manner and according to the shape of the wound, as well as what is apparent on the skull. If there is bleeding or a hot swelling upon exposure to the bone during examination, do what seems appropriate.
And this is to fill the area with a puncture immersed in wine and grease, to clean the wound until the swelling subsides and stops bleeding. Then you should proceed with reinforcing and extracting the bone, which can be done through two methods of operation.
And the first method is to cut the bone with a gentle, narrow saw stroke; this is how it's done:.
And then you use another cut after this one, slightly in front of it; this is how it looks:
And you also use another cut further from the second one. It is necessary for you to have several different cuts, some being wider than others and some shorter; they should be extremely sharp at their ends. They should be made of Indian iron or good quality steel.
And use gentleness in striking the cut so as not to disturb the head and injure it. If the bone is strong and hard, you should pierce around it before using the drills that you called non-submerged drills; however, they are actually known as non-submerged drills.
Because it does not exceed the limit of the skull bone to beyond, in order that for the aperture there is a straight letter below his head sharp resembling a ring or small circle preventing him from dipping and exceeding the thickness of the bone.
It is necessary for you to take several of these holes, each suitable for the thickness of that bone so as to match every pierced skull in length and width according to the thickness of that skull. This is a depiction of three types. From the needles, large, medium, and small:
And as for piercing around the broken bone, you make the hole in the bone and turn it with your fingers until you know that the bone has punctured then move the hole to another location and leave a thickness or about this between each hole.
Then you cut with the cuts between each two holes and do this to the greatest extent of gentleness that you can, as we said, until you break the bone either by hand or with another tool from some of the equipment you have prepared for this purpose.
Like the chisel and the fine hammer, you should be extremely careful that the hole or cut does not touch anything of the skin. If the bone has swollen and separated from the skin when it was removed, then you should remove it. It is necessary to cleanse.
And level the roughness that remains in the bone with another tool similar to the cut, except that it should be finer and softer than other cutting tools. If there is a bit of small bones or pieces left, take them gently with the tools you have.
Then, after that, treat the wound with the ointments and remedies that are mentioned. As for the other side of the work, it is a simple procedure far from complications, as Galen mentions and praises greatly in this statement. It is necessary for you first to start by uncovering a part of the bone from the place of fracture which is most severe and frequent, until you have uncovered that part, then insert this end of this lens tool under it. This is how it looks like:.
The lens part of it should be smooth, not cutting anything, and the sharp part of it has its edges at the length as you see; for the lens part should lean on the cornea and face of the sharp part is towards the bone. Then strike (the sharp end) from one side on the cut portion.
With a small mallet, to cut all the bone gently as it rotates, and you are safe from the membrane; nothing terrible happens there. Even if the surgeon is ignorant of people's conditions and has weak hands, yes, even if he's lazy.
If there remains something of the membrane on the bone in some places of the bone, scrape it off with the tool's blade itself and remove it gently. It removes it without harm or fear.
And if the bone fracture did not reach the membrane, and what was broken of the bone was its face, leaving roughness and small smooth pieces behind. It should be desirable to remove that roughness and extract those fragments with a delicate tool made from various weights which you can use in each place according to what your work leads you to adjust it better.
And the broken bone and its shape, it should be used by you first in removing the wider pieces of this tool then use a finer one afterwards. Continue doing that with loyalty until you use all the finest and most delicate ones.
And as for the smaller hairline cracks and gentle breaks, it should be desirable to use a treatment for each individually based on what leads to improvement, which is something that those who have the least skill in this craft are aware of. Stop at what we wrote and explained about major fractures.
If the membrane remains exposed during your bone extraction, you should take a cotton thread of the size of the wound and immerse it in resinous ointment and place it on the mouth of the wound. Then, you should take another cotton thread that is bent or triangular. And immerse it in a drink and ointment with saffron and place it on the first cotton thread. Do this with as light as you can manage so that it does not weigh down the wound. Then use a wide bandage above it, do not pull it tightly unless it just holds the wound.
And let it undergo this treatment for a day or two until the hot tumor calms down. Then, remove it and thereafter use the medications that you have, such as powdered myrrh like the roots of frankincense, sandalwood powder, and essences of cinnamon and cloves, etc., which consists in preparing these medicines into powders.
And sprinkle it on the wound as dry and in general, use a medicine that has the ability to heal without causing pleasure. Make sure your effort during treatment of the wound is to keep it clean with no greasiness or stickiness and do not leave the pus to accumulate.
Because when the pus accumulates on the brain membrane, it deteriorates and contaminates it. This causes a great harm to the patient, and there is the risk of meningitis in the head wound especially if the wound is not treated properly or at all.
A black spot on its surface, if you look closely, reveals the symptoms we mentioned. Therefore, understand that he is dying without any doubt. The blackness could have occurred due to a medicine applied to it and the strength of this medicine might be responsible for causing this blackness.
It is necessary to take a portion of honey and three parts of rose oil, beat them well together, then smear this mixture on the eye socket. Then treat it with various types of treatment until it heals.
The Third Chapter.
To set the nose if it breaks.
Know that the nasal bone can only break either its upper fissure completely or one of them, as they are bones. The lower part is made of cartilage and does not break, but it is subjected to swelling, bruising, and inflammation.
If one of its fissures breaks, you should insert the small finger into the hole in the nose and smooth out that break from inside with your ring finger and thumb on the outside until the nose returns to its natural shape. Do this gently, and be sure not to cause any pain or injury to the patient.
If the break is at the top of the nose and the finger cannot reach it, you should smooth out that break using a slightly rough end on the inside. If the break occurs in both sides, do the same, and start setting it on the first day after the break occurred.
If possible, then after the seventh or tenth day when the hot swelling subsides, you should insert a thread of silk into the hole in the nose if the break is on one side, or two threads if the break affects both sides.
Make the thread rough enough to fill the hole in the nose. Some of those who set the bone advised at first to grease the thread with tallow and change it every day, but I do not agree with that; instead, you should grease the thread with the white part of an egg mixed with camel's urine.
Then the child is left to grow until the bone sets and cartilage hardens. In some cases, when in place of the incision made during delivery, feather tubes from an owl are inserted into the nose after wrapping them with a soft cut, making it more difficult for the nose to break and preventing the obstruction from interfering with breathing.
And this is not necessary if you choose to create them, or if you choose to create small mustaches. If the nose presents during your work and there's a hot burn, you can moisten the nose with cork or cotton dipped in honey and oil, or something from the deaxilons' ointment.
And if there's no burn and it doesn't appear, it should be treated externally with flour mixed with saffron and saffron beans that have been ground with egg white. Then a soft cloth is placed on top of it. The nose shouldn't be bound to anything at all; otherwise, if the nasal bones break slightly, they do so in small pieces.
Or if it splits, it should be cut open and removed with the appropriate tool. Then the wound should be sutured and treated with materials that promote healing and quick healing from ointments suitable for this. If there's a wound inside the nose, it should be treated with small mustaches and use lead pipes. Until he/she is healed.
Chapter Four.
If the lower beard breaks, it should be fixed.
If the lower beard breaks and it's a break without injury, you should check if the break occurred from outside only and didn't split into two parts. In which case, it is easier to identify.
If the break is in the right side of the incision, you should enter the left thumb into the infant's mouth from the left hand. Similarly, if the break is in the left side of the incision, you should insert the left thumb from the right hand and gently lift the fracture piece inside out.
Other techniques involve working from outside the bone for its adjustment, should a break in the jaw have been fractured into two parts; one would then utilize leverage on both sides to straighten until its adjustment can be achieved. Should tooth eruption have occurred within the bones, it may require attention accordingly.
Or divide what you desired to leave with a gold, silver or ivory thread, then put it on the broken cheek. Then place a bendable stick on top of this and place a large, tight pin or a piece of shoe leather equal in length to the cheek on top of the stick. Then, bind it from above according to the way that its binding should be as per your judgement and suitably to ensure it doesn't break. You should order the patient to rest and take care not to move too much; let them have a diet of soft food from al-Ahsa region. If you suspect any changes in appearance on their face by day three, intervene with treatment immediately.
Then, bind it from above according to the way that its binding should be as per your judgement and suitably to ensure it doesn't break. You should order the patient to rest and take care not to move too much; let them have a diet of soft food from al-Ahsa region. If you suspect any changes in appearance on their face by day three, intervene with treatment immediately. Then adjust the pad that you applied with rhubarb powder mixed with egg white or flour after removing the stick from it, and place a soft sponge on top of the pad. If this pad sticks to his bone without any changes in its state over time, leave it as it is.
Do not treat it until the break heals and strengthens significantly; this break often intensifies over three weeks. If a hot tumor appears during that period, use what we have repeatedly advised in stabilizing it until that tumor disappears.
As for a break that occurs with an injury, if it has healed from the bone pieces or fragments, gently remove those fragments using whatever method you find suitable for their extraction from the machine. If the wound's mouth is narrow, widen it with pliers to your needed extent.
And then if you have removed those fragments and there is nothing left of them, draw a line on the wound's mouth if it is wide, otherwise apply to it one of the swabs that suits this. And let the wound heal until it recovers,.
The fifth chapter.
In forcing the traction if it has broken.
The traction force breaks more commonly at the front of the heel's tip end, and breaking it can occur on one of three surfaces. Either it breaks and splits into two without creating shards within it which is easier to correct; or, it breaks with the creation of shards within it which then are harder to correct.
Otherwise, if there are shards in the break which makes it harder to correct; or, if the break comes with a wound. In such cases where the break is not due to a wound alone, have two attendants ready. One of them will adjust the broken bone adjacent to the broken traction force and the other extends the neck towards the opposite side.
And then smooth the break with your fingers until it takes on the required shape, without any protrusions or deformations. If you need more extension than usual, it is advisable to place under the patient's elbow a ball of tarpaulin or wool.
Its size should correspond to your need, then extend and lift the traction force. Hold the ball with your hand and press it until the break is corrected as needed. If you can't draw out one end of the traction due to its depth, the patient should lie on their side.
A moderate mattress is placed under his heel, and the attendant presses his heel down until the deep end of the traction bone rises above. Then, the break can be corrected and smoothed by fingers.
If you feel that a fragment of the thread has broken and started to move, it should be cut through. It is advisable to cut out that fragment gently. If the fragment is trapped in the bone, manipulate it by making one of the cuts I have planned for this purpose. After it becomes subjected to tension, the machine that preserves the chest is an apparatus made of wood or iron. This is its image:.
It resembles a spoon without a handle, and its width is according to what you need from the size of the bone; its size being bigger or smaller. As for its length, it depends on your capability for work and should have two ends like this you see. The one end will be wider and the other narrower.
If the cut made when removing the bone fragment is large and the tumor is hot, sew up the incision edge by stitch. If the cut was slight or if you were afraid of the hot tumor, widen the incision with cutting and irrigation to the extent of the cut.
If the tumor is hot, apply the cutting in a mixture of oil, vinegar or wine and hold it on. As for pushing bone that isn't from a cut or incision, you should hold it on with the padding made of charcoal dust mixed with the white of egg. Then place a soft weight on it, and if necessary hold the ball under his chest. Take a shawl which is very long and its width would be one hand or around that. Hold a curved rod against the weight and padding, then take a small stone from a thin board. Its width should be three fingers and also its length, then insert it into the incision. Then place that incision with the stone inside the shawl at the position on the shawl which is above the breakage point. Then pull the shawl over the breakage as you would rotate it. And place it on his neck and beneath his pulse, under the patient's pulse, and have him shift it back and forth several times in every direction. I have seen that tensioning the muscle settles the fracture precisely, a fact you should be aware of.
And so all his techniques ensure that the ligament does not slip off the broken bone. Thus, it is necessary to examine the patient daily. Whenever you notice that the ligament has relaxed and the ligament has moved, correct this immediately by tightening the ligament. Then put the patient in a position lying on their back at night. Place a small cushion under their elbow when they sleep.
So that it lifts his arm from his side, lifting the fracture with the elevation of the elbow or tying his arm to his neck. The ligament should not be replaced if no accident involving pain or tumor occurs for twelve days.
Then renew the bandage if you see a need for it. He should be tensioned in the bandage and left like that until the fracture heals, becomes more pronounced, and strengthens even more after twenty-eight days. It may occur in some people in less time.
The Sixth Chapter.
In forcing the shoulder fracture. Consider that a shoulder blade fractures in its wide area and its letters break from it, so when a part of the fracture occurs or breaks in the middle of it and this is known by touch; based on what the shape of the fracture is, the treatment will vary.
Adjust its position and return it to its natural shape through all means possible, then carry on the spot with camphor dust mixed with egg white and soft flour. Place a bent strip of leather over this and put a broad ligament from a board on top.
Carefully make the incision on all sides of the shoulder blade, or slightly larger than it. If it is under the scapula and can be made in a place of the backside of the shoulder, smooth this area of the operation with gentle pressure until the scapula lays evenly. Then pull from above using a long cloak.
Pull firmly on the scapula to ensure it doesn't move from its place, and check the ligament every day. As soon as you notice the ligament relaxes, tighten it up again and smooth out the scapula if it has moved away from its position. Let the patient lie on their right side correctly, and the shoulder should be properly in its place after twenty days.
Wait one day or twenty-five days. After this period, if you have completed the time limit, break up the ligament and you will be safe because they are bones that do not fear breakage or weakening. If there is a fragment protruding from the bone and it withers under the skin, cut into it and extract it. And do what was mentioned regarding breaking the bone in calming down the hot tumor if something like that occurs.
The Seventh Chapter.
Inforcing the breaking of the breastbone.
The breastbone may break in its middle, and though this is less common, it can happen. Its ends, however, are more prone to breaking and cracking. One of its symptoms if the middle breaks is that it tends downwards, making it susceptible to severe pain and difficulty breathing, as well as coughing.
And perhaps there would be a clot of blood and the penetration could be seen in the broken bone. He should lie on his back, with cushions between his shoulders; then he should bend his knees, gather the ribs together from both sides, smooth them out as much as possible in every direction that is feasible.
It is agreed that the bone returns to its proper shape, then apply pressure and strain on it. Place a roller of a smooth board or a rattan piece above it for a short time after tying it with a thong. Then, it is smoothed in binding to the broken bone so that it stays in place. The bandage is rotated around the back several times with a firm pull. Afterwards, the bandage is checked at all times and whenever it relaxes, it is tightened again.
And if necessity demands its removal at meals when there is pain or a swelling, proceed with it and remove the bandage. Correct whatever has occurred due to that according to its cure method, then reapply the bandage if I find appropriate for this situation. And guide him and make him endure the strain until he heals.
The eighth chapter.
In forcing the ribs when they are broken, know that fractures in the ribs occur at the most sensitive areas located behind and near its ends from front. These areas are exposed to pressure because they are of cartilaginous nature. And this knowledge is not hidden by touch examination through fingers.
Force it by trying to align the fracture with your fingertips until it achieves its proper shape. Then, bind and compress the broken bone using a roller if necessary. If the rib fractures are turned inward, they expose pain and severe agony.
And squeeze as you would for someone with a splint, because the bone squeezes on the bandage and also causes difficulty in breathing, coughing, and abundant bleeding. This makes treatment difficult, and various methods have been used to address them initially.
Among them, some say that nourishment for the sick should contain what produces wind and breezes so that it causes bloating of the stomach which expands and pushes fractures outside. We dislike this lest it confirms the occurrence of the hot tumor; if it did not occur before, then its happening would make it increase and confirm it.
Some of them said that the affected area should be swollen and then compressed strongly; it's similar to a measurement, but they fear that swelling could attract impurities to the affected area due to its weakness. Others suggested that the affected area should be covered with a cloth dipped in hot oil.
You should provide nourishment between the ribs until it fills, then when you roll it up, it becomes level. Then treat the sick person with treatments for food and medicine from the dish. If it tires the sick person, it's a severe matter that they cannot endure. Bone would thin the pleura dangerously, causing us concern for the sick person. It's better to cut open the area and expose the broken rib, then place an apparatus under it that protects the chest as described. We should gently cut through the bone and remove it.
Then, if the wound is large, we stitch its edges together and treat it with ointments until it heals. If a hot tumor appears during this time, address it promptly by applying heat-dissolving oils to the area and treating the sick person internally as well to calm the tumor.
He should lie on the side that relieves his sleep until he heals,
The ninth section.
In relieving back and neck stiffness.
If it's a break in the neck bones, fortunately this happens less often and more commonly with pregnancy, as well as the back vertebrae. If such an incident affects one person and you want to know whether they will recover or not. If you observe that his hands have relaxed, numbed and died, he cannot move them or spread them out nor can he clench them. If you pinch them or prick them with a needle and he does not feel it or experience pain within them, know that in most cases he is dead.
And if he moves them and feels them through pinching and pricking, know that the spinal column has given in and recovery is possible with treatment. If you encounter such a backache, and wish to determine whether it will heal as well,
If you observe his legs, if you see that they have relaxed and experienced what happened to the hands, then when he lies on his back, wind and feces come out without intention. And if he lies on his stomach, urine comes out without intention. And if he lies on his back and wants to urinate but cannot, know that he is dead; do not bother with his treatment. If nothing like this has happened before, the situation might be less severe. The treatment for what occurred should involve cooling down the hot lump.
To treat it, apply vaseline alone or with cooked chicken pieces on the affected area. Do this three times a day during the day until the hot lump subsides. Then carry out a damp compress to the place and hold it in position using an elastic bandage. Command him to remain still and decide accordingly.
He should not sleep on the side where he feels no pain until he recovers. If there was a fragment or something that had been healed inside the bone during childbirth, it might be necessary to cut open the skin and remove that bone. Then, sew together the edges of a large wound. Then treat with ointments until he recovers. If the last vertebra in the neck breaks and it weakens the tailbone, it might be necessary to insert the thumb from the left hand into the sacrum.
It breaks and aligns the broken bone with the other hand according to what enables and facilitates the alignment, then it applies bandage and plaster if needed, then it tightens.
If you feel a splinter in it, cut it and remove it, then treat the wound with the treatments that have been mentioned until it heals.
The tenth chapter.
In setting the fracture of the thigh.
Say if any of the hip bones break, breaking means they split at their ends and crack longitudinally, leaning towards the inside. They are exposed to suspicion and pain in their location, swelling and numbness in the leg from which the break occurred.
And setting it by passing your hand over it until you stand on the fracture as it is, if the break is only at its ends, align that break according to what suits you for alignment until it resembles its natural shape.
If the break is longitudinal or had leaned inward, put the patient on their stomach so that you can set this break well. After aligning it, apply a bandage to him then place plaster on him made of wood or leather and tighten it tightly.
Don't fear the movement of the fracture or removal of the plaster. Adjust the friction from the bones to fill it until the tension is established, then instruct the patient to sleep on their back or on the correct side if he has a hot lump.
Release the tension and set it until the hot lump subsides, then bear on him what calms him as mentioned, then return to setting and tightening as it should be. If there are fragments in the bone or it splits from its ends, it is not appropriate to remove them.
Only that which is outside it he touches as we said, and leaves its tension until it is cleansed.
The eleventh chapter.
In levering the fracture of the humerus.
The humerus is between the shoulder blade and the shoulder joint. If it fractures, lever it on two sides. One of these is to take a flexible, smooth, thickened reed in this form:
And tie it at its ends with two straps. Then hang it from a high place, having the sick person sit on a chair. Then lay his broken arm over the reed so that his elbow sticks in the middle of the bend of the reed. Then hang something heavy above him.
Or have a servant extend it downwards, then the doctor will correct the fracture with both hands until the break returns to where it should. The other way is for the sick person to lie on his head and hang his hand from around his neck with a strap.
Then you command servants to adjust one of them above the fracture with his hands, and the other below it, extending each one towards their sides. If you want more strength in the extension, tie a strap under the fracture and another above it, making each servant extend according to his side.
If the fracture is close to one side of the thigh, the strap should be below the elbow and the other under the fracture towards the buttock. Similarly, if the fracture is close to the buttock, the straps should be in that position and on the buttock itself.
Then correct the fracture gently without violence until the fracture settles as it should and sticks together well. Then tighten if it does not expose a hot lump. If there is a hot lump, leave the tension until the seventh day and then apply moistened cotton wool soaked in vinegar, and use rose oil.
Even if the tumor is located, in that case it should be pulled. The method of pulling requires carrying a bandage over the fracture first, then wrapping a new cloth bandage around the bandage next. Then the arm is brought down onto its own back bone, with the hand spread open on the hip.
And carry the cut and pull on the vertebrae and arm, so that the arm can perform the function of the ribs if it is not hindered by an obstacle and the broken bone has not changed anything. If you fear that it may change something, then use the ribs.
And it is to place on the fracture itself a rib that will be wider and stronger than other ribs. To make between each rib, an extension of one finger. And let the length of ribs according to the fracture increase by three fingers from each side.
And then pull on the rib that I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
And it is to have your pull on the fracture site be stronger.
And the further away from the fracture, the pull should be less. If you find yourself placing and pulling ribs as we explained while supporting your member with your strength, then do so.
And if you fear the hot tumor, leave the pulling and ribs until the seventh day as we said. Then check the bandage every three days to ensure there's no rash or swelling, nor that food cannot reach the body due to excessive pulling. All this can be managed according to what we have mentioned.
And if you are sure that nothing of that sort will happen, the bandage should not be removed for a long time. The patient should lie on his back and his hand on his stomach. There should be a cushion under his arm filled with cotton, well balanced.
And inspect at every time of night or day so that the shape of the broken member does not change, or the ligament relaxes. You should correct all this by your efforts and make the food for fasting as we suggested it to be mild first until the bone desires to strengthen.
And you should strengthen his food, for it is customary for the elbow and leg that they become stronger in forty days then it should be replaced and hot baths should be used and treatments with what is suitable for this, if the fracture was severe satisfying.
Do not replace the ligament until fifty days or until two months.
The Second Chapter.
In correcting the fracture of the arm.
The arm is made up of two bones and it's called the zygapophysial joints. One of them is smaller and it lies under the thumb, and the other one is larger and it's placed below the smaller one from below. It might have been only the largest zygapophysis that broke or only the smaller one, or both of them might have broken together.
If the upper small zygapophysis broke, then correcting it becomes easier and seeing its correction is faster. If the lower zygapophysis broke, then its fracture was poor and seeing its correction was difficult. It was even worse if both zygapophyses broke together, especially if the bone that broke was the upper small zygapophysis.
When correcting it, the doctor should make the process gradual and gentle until it's straightened. If the larger zygapophysis is broken, he should make the process more intense. If both zygapophyses are broken, the correction should be made with extreme intensity.
It is necessary that the hand's shape during surgery be placed such that it is extended on a cushion. The palm of the hand should be higher than all the fingers and the wrist should be lower than the other fingers. The forefinger should be placed upright on itself.
Let the cushion be at an elevation relative to him so that the elbow does not bear the burden of discomfort.
Then, the attendant of the arm extends from below either with his hand or with a belt, and another attendant extends from above in the same manner. Then, the surgeon straightens the bone until it returns to its best possible form. If there are fragments in the bone fracture, they should be removed.
Repair every fragment in its place according to your effort. If a clean fragment appears and the skin begins to shrink with no intention for you to correct it, cut it and remove it on the same method we discussed earlier. If there is a fracture associated with a wound, then separate a section for it.
Then, you take care of that treatment from there. If you encounter a hot tumor in your first operation, use an incision with the tool made by applying rose oil and white beeswax. Make it moderately between being thick and soft. Gently pull on the incision until the tumor settles.
Then remove the tool and apply the prepared bandage made from dust of rhubarb with the whiteness of egg whites. Carry the bones, and ensure that the bandage placed on the fracture itself is slightly wider but stronger. Remember that there will be usually seven bones in an arm.
If the fracture is within one thumb or in both together, make your pull on the fracture place stronger and harder. As you pull up or down, let the pull be slightly curved as mentioned earlier in the first chapter.
Let the incision that covers the fracture be moist and soft, not too hard. And let the thread used to tighten it be made of a special kind of wool, being of medium thickness between tenderness and hardness as we described, then check the member and ligament after some days.
If something happens that needs fixing like a scrape on the member, it should be washed with hot water until the scrape settles and leaves the member loose for one night to rest. Then you can resume tightening it.
If the tightening has relaxed and the bone has settled or something like that, then you should fix all of this according to your effort, also look if food is unable to reach the member due to excessive tightening. It may be necessary to relax it a little and leave it for days until food can reach it, then tighten it again.
If there is no reason for the cause as mentioned, it should not be released except after twenty days or about that time. Then hold the patient's hand to their neck and let their arm be moderate in position. They must avoid vigorous movements of effort and should sleep on their back.
And know that this fracture in the arm may take thirty days, or possibly twenty-eight, and it might take twenty-eight days as well. Each of these depends on conditions of health and strength.
The thirteenth chapter.
In correcting the fracture of the hand and fingers.
Fingertip and finger fracture rarely occur due to the force of a blow, but rather due to the wrist. If the hand or wrist is broken.
In order for the patient to sit up and have a throne in front of him on level ground.
Then he places his hand on it stretched out, and then the attendant extends the fractured bone. The surgeon adjusts it until a good union is formed. At that point, the dressing and strapping should be applied unless there is heat from a tumor. Then a poultice is placed from above according to the position.
And I have included it in a thin sheet. If the fracture is downward toward the palm, make a semi-spherical cutout in the sheet and ask the patient to hold it with his fractured hand, then pull on it with a long sheet.
And the poultice should be made of skin that is soft, so it can adhere to all curvature of the palm and should be pulled tight as necessary. If the fracture is outward, then the poultice should be placed above and another one below in the palm to keep the hand open upright.
Then the tension is carried as if one was rotating a hand, and tying between fingers with the bandage. If there's an exposure of a metacarpal bone, if it is the thumb, let it be adjusted properly then apply pressure while moving the palm. And if you want to make a small poultice standing up to stabilize the fracture.
And it does not move. If the fracture is in other fingers like middle finger, ring finger or forearm, then align them and bind with the next correct finger or bind all to the palm, which is better or place a small poultice standing on top of them.
As we said in the thumb, inspect during bandaging and distance from hot tumor, confront with what is necessary whenever something like that occurs, according to repetition of its description.
The Fourteenth Chapter.
In the levering of breaking the thigh bone.
The thigh bone, being large and prone to fracture due to its exposure when felt, often moves forward and backward. To correct such a break, one should pull two ligaments; one over the fracture, another under it, with the patient lying on their back.
Then each ligament is extended in its direction to counterbalance this, if the break occurs in the middle of the bone. However, if it's close to the beginning of the thigh, a softer ligament should be pulled, either from wool or something similar.
At the beginning of the thigh towards the elbow, pull upwards with one ligament and downwards with the other. Similarly, if the break is near the knee, place your ligament closer to the knee for upward pulling. Then, fix the bone with both hands until it returns to its natural shape.
The bone is properly set. If the member does not swell or becomes warm, carry the splint and apply pressure. However, if a warm lump occurs, leave it for several days until the hot lump subsides, then return to treating it.
As for the splinting, it should be done with a solid and wide band twice or three times. Keep some of it. Then lay the leg down so that the heel is at the beginning of the tendon. Insert a long string between the thigh and the leg near the knee from below, making its ends stick out from both sides above.
Then turn the remaining part of the band on the leg and thigh, put splints exactly at the break location on the thigh bone. Create one splint on the thigh bone and fill the gap between thigh and leg with soft plaster to smooth out the pressure points.
Start by pulling strongly from the center to the break site three or four turns, and each time you pull with the band further away from the break, let your pull be weaker, softer, and gentler.
Then, proceed to the end of the thread you inserted between the thigh and leg. Secure it with what follows above then pass both ends of the thread downwards until they reach the ankle. Firmly pull the other ends of the bones from the opposite side as well.
So that the band doesn't move from its place, leave your pull on it as long as there is no communication with the member or tumor or swelling and such. If anything like this happens, address it promptly and correct everything that occurred according to what we have mentioned repeatedly.
If there is a piece of bone that breaks off, it should ideally be smoothed if possible. If not, cut it and remove it. Treat the wound as described previously until it heals. This fracture from the thigh may heal without needing the addition of parts from the leg bones.
As we mentioned for the back and arm, except that its strengthening does not expose it to being thrown upwards. If only strengthened without including the leg bones, there will inevitably be someone who is thrown up forever due to it.
And know that the thigh strengthens over fifty days, or a little more or less depending on variations in conditions and other circumstances.
The fifteenth chapter.
In dislocation of the knee joint.
Dislocation of the knee joint seldom causes fractures, but it can be frequently associated with sprains. If a fracture does occur in this context, it could either be due to a crack or a tear within its components, and this could happen alongside a wound or without one.
The entire process is carried out by feeling, and she adjusts it by separating its parts with the fingers until they meet and fuse as much as possible according to the capability of adjustment and care and skill. Then she applies the bandage and if needed carries a turning roller on top of it.
You tighten from above to the corresponding tension, then you reconcile all conditions we described in other fractures such as hot swelling and similar cases by meeting each case with what suits it until it recovers.
The sixteenth chapter.
In correcting the fracture of the leg.
The leg has two bones, one is thick and called the thigh bone, and the other is thin and called the tibia. They are subject to various types of fractures that affect the bones of the upper arm. Therefore, the treatment of a broken leg is similar to that of an arm. If both bones break, the leg turns in all directions. If only the thinner bone breaks, the leg turns forward. If the thicker bone breaks and it's below the knee, you can see this on your own.
Use the methods of stretching and adjusting, and tie the braces according to this method. However, if a leg fracture is very severe with many fragments, the stretching should be less and lighter, and you should apply your effort carefully in correcting it.
In the leg, there is an extra aspect compared to the arm. If you have adjusted the braces and completed all your work, take two walnut twigs that are used in flattening grooves placed between gaps of plates or they can be strips of date palm leaves or similar items.
Choose one that is slightly hard but not brittle, and make sure it's not too thin. Its length should match the length of the leg from the knee down. Wrap two strips around each piece longitudinally, placing one strip on the leg and the other strip on the opposite side.
Let it be from the knee down to the ankle, then bind the femoral arteries at three points on each end and in the middle. By this method, the leg cannot twist left or right and gets a proper support. A strip of wood may also be used as a splint along the length of the leg.
And it is placed to hold him from movement and much more should this be done in the case of fracture if he has a special wound. Then, you must check the leg every day with great care to see whether there are tumors or swelling or anything else related. If anything of that sort occurs, deal with it according to what should be done until he recovers. The swelling in the leg is forced to subside within thirty days or around that period.
The Seventeenth Chapter.
In the case of breaking bones in the leg and toes.
As for the heel, it does not tolerate breaking of the bone; however, bones in the leg can be broken and so can toes. But the bend (or flexion) is more commonly affected than breakage when it comes to toes.
If the bones in the leg are broken and you see that some of these bones have been pushed against each other, then place the patient's foot on the ground upright like a shepherd. Then stand on what has risen from those bones and rub and smooth it.
Until it returns to its place. Then put the bandage and effort under the bottom of the foot with a small board having two flat ends, then pull the foot tightly after wrapping it with strips of linen and all that you need.
If it has passed three or four days, then loosen the bandage. You will find that if some bones are broken or cracked, do as you see fit. As for if a few toes have broken, force and smooth them according to what I described to you for forcing fingers of the hand.
Then for the broken finger, make a splint along the length of the finger and slightly offset it. Then place under the foot this board which I described to you and tighten it firmly; if two or three or more bones have been fractured.
For each finger, make a splint as strong as it can be made in the groove of a soft rod and tighten the board under the foot. Let each head of the splint stick out slightly from the sole of the foot to ensure proper fit.
And you must not forget to apply what we have explained to you about all fractures of the conditions that we mentioned, and respond to each symptom as appropriate.
The eighteenth chapter.
In the eighth, the breaking of the wife's rib and the pain endured by both the man and woman.
If a woman's thigh bone breaks, have her lie on her side and bend her slightly towards her back. Have her grip from behind, then place cotton in the crotch of her vagina until it fills and becomes like a ball inside her.
Then shake the woman gently, lifting her slightly. The cotton will come out until it is at the vaginal entrance like a ball and will allow for the fracture to heal. She should then lie on a splint on her back. If she wishes to urinate, remove the cotton gently so that she can void.
Return it to the position in which she first inserted it, and resume her initial splint. Do this for seven days or a similar period; then it will heal. If you wish, you can also use a sheep bladder and insert its mouth with a tube, letting the entire bladder enter her vagina.
Then inflate the tube with force until the bladder inflates inside the urethra, then the fracture returns. Then bind it with cotton and keep it for a few days as described, until recovery is achieved. As for when the thigh bone breaks in men or women, a splint is used for immobilization.
And its correction is as described in the thigh bone, and there's no misunderstanding for you in these strange fractures which happen rarely, especially for those who have some experience. If you understand this book correctly, yes, because the fracture itself will guide you most of the time.
On the right path for setting and splinting, understand it. As for mentioning the man if he broke, take an ox tibia, insert the penis into it then wrap it with a bandage and tie it for three days or about that time until recovery occurs.
The Nineteenth Chapter.
In setting bone fractures where there is also a wound.
It is necessary for the one who encounters a fracture accompanied by injury, especially if the bone is large such as in the thigh or elbow bones and so on, that he should immediately intervene and examine it from his time when the circumstances of the fracture have helped him as we provided.
If the wound is bleeding, it should be quickly cut and you should apply a poultice of crushed roots on it if there's nothing else that can help. Then set the bone fracture in this day with care and don't delay it.
If no hot tumor occurs, and if a hot tumor does occur, leave the setting for nine days until the hot tumor subsides. Do not approach it on the third and fourth day as it might cause bad symptoms.
If the broken bone, exposed on the skin, requires repair, you should gently and gradually return it to its place with your hands. If returning it by your hands is not possible, use this tool instead. This tool is made of iron, its length being about seven or eight fingers. Present the tool according to the size of the wound.
So, the doctor should take three or four of them according to what he needs for each type of fracture treatment. They should be made in a way that has a slight stiffness so it doesn't bend when used during work.
And it should have a sharp tip with a slightly curved end. Its upper part should be hard and the lower half is extremely smooth. This is its appearance:.
And they call it in Greek as Perimyces, meaning a small tool. It should have a sharp curved tip on the end of the bone and push it with one strike until after the bone returns and settles partially, you make an adjustment so that the ends of the fracture settle against each other.
If the broken end is delicate and the tool does not take it properly, it should be cut at that bone tip to allow the tool to take from it. If you are unable to return the bone exactly as we described, cut it according to our mentioned cuts.
Or spread it with one of the files as much as possible, then remove the roughness and scales left on the bone. If after returning the bone you find a severe painful inflammation, understand that the bone has not returned to its natural position.
If you are able to return it to its natural position, do so. You will greatly benefit the patient, and when your work on the bone is done, dip a needle in a tight black wine especially if it's summer, and do not cover the wound with oil or anything that contains grease.
To prevent infection and decay, use the bones after you have removed the muscle from a bone fracture. Leave the wound exposed by cutting into the fascia with scissors to make a hole according to the size of the wound.
Be extremely cautious not to pull the wound along with the fracture, as many unskilled doctors have done this causing either death or malabsorption or necrosis on their patients. May your pulling be gentle and different from all other fractures.
If the wound is bad or it's a large wound and I'm afraid of some bad symptoms as we described, and if he feels pain in that place and it's irritated, then you should not put bones on him. Instead, make him bandages from hard gauze where the bones are supposed to be and pull them with this.
If after one or two days, you see that the wound has begun to produce pus, remove the gauze that was placed on him with water. Then use remedies like tallow and ointments which we usually apply to wounds such as the four ointment, etc. You should also have a ligature ready.
Check the wound in the evening and morning every day until it heals and is free of infection. It should be positioned so that pus can flow down easily. If days pass and the wound has not healed, nor has there been any cessation of pus coming out from it, then you should know that there are small fragments of bone inside.
You should examine the wound with a probe. If those fragments are not free, remove and extract them. If they are not free and cause atrophy of the limb and pain upon removal and extraction, do it through all possible ways you can manage.
If pus, an ulcer, or another form of infection and contamination appears in the wound, then for each manifestation thereof it should be met with a treatment that corresponds to what was provided in his chapter.
And when you say it, and you imagine if a large bone breaks and dislocates in the body like the thigh bone or the back bone and such large organs, do not be concerned about its pull nor its removal. Many times it results in death, but leave it until it becomes putrid; perhaps it will detach itself naturally after twenty or thirty days.
And then, when that happens, treat the wound if you see a place for treatment and otherwise leave it alone.
Chapter Nineteen.
In treating the complication that appears after some fractures.
Complications often occur following fractures, especially near joints, where the shape of the limb might be altered and it could prevent natural function.
If you notice that the complication is soft, use medications that have a constricting effect such as saffron, milk, vinegar, honey, and similar substances. Take some of these individually or in full amounts, mix them with a drink that has a constricting effect or the white part of an egg, or with lemon juice.
Carry it out on the complication with effort, pull it tightly for a while, and leave the pulling without stopping for many days. Then stop the pulling and start again until the complication leaves, God willing, or secure a sheet of well-polished lead over it.
Lead has the property of removing all that is stuck within organs. If the complication has hardened and tightened to such a degree that removal becomes necessary, cut through it from above or remove the fatty outgrowths or cut them off with some small pieces until it goes away, then treat the wound until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-One.
In treating fractures, if the patient was forcibly manipulated and afterward found soft or waxy in texture, not according to its original state.
If the bones are forcibly broken and afterward, the member remains soft and weak, there are many reasons for this. One of the reasons could be either excessive manipulation of ligaments and tying them in a way that is not appropriate, or pulling the ligaments excessively to the point where food cannot enter the body, or because of extreme beating, or excessive movements at inappropriate times, or due to lack of blood in the emaciated person's body making it weak.
To treat this condition, one should feed the emaciated person and enrich their body so that there is an abundance of blood in it. The use of baths and bringing joy and happiness to them can also be helpful. Then, hanging weights on the limb can help attract much food or keep it moist with warm water for a long time. Until food starts to go through him and return to its natural state.
Chapter Twenty-Two.
In treating broken bones, if they are forcibly bent and prevent the limb from functioning as it should.
If an organ that has been forcibly manipulated after its healing, appears twisted or bent due to the deformity of the broken bone or complications resulting in a distorted appearance of the limb. However, if the limb is still able to function naturally, there should not be any acceptance of claims by those who falsely claim they can break a limb from its root. Many of our doctors and enforcers have been doing this in our country.
This action is highly condemned, leading to a great deception through the tight pinch, but if the deformity and intricacy are nature's design, it would be advisable to use water that has boiled with relaxed herbs such as mint leaves, its root, crown of the king and similar.
It is sealed with softened ingredients like the tight substance of the da'axil or a drop from the root of mint is taken and mixed with chicken fat, then applied. Or a drop from the sweet fig is soaked in it along with hen's dung, or other medicines called as those that prevent buckling.
The complexity is dissolved through constant, gentle rubbing done with hands and the movement of limbs towards all directions at all times. If deformity has occurred and worsened to become rigid, it becomes necessary to treat it with iron when such a condition arises.
It is necessary to cut through the upper part, releasing the connection of bones and cutting off what has been preferred of complexity or bone in thin segments. Effort and care must be used in this process, then treat the wound as described until it heals.
The twenty-third chapter.
The jaw is a joint that, when it moves out of its place, hinders movement and disfigures the organ, causing severe pains and discomfort to the patient. If someone presents with a jaw problem, one should promptly take action to correct it immediately.
There should not be hesitation; for if one delays, it allows swelling to accumulate in the area which makes it harder to correct. Therefore, there is no reason to delay, nor move or stretch it while it's swollen since this often results in pain and discomfort to the patient.
However, if it is presented like this, one should promptly remove the pus then leave until the lump settles slightly. Then apply water and oil to the member and return gently, treating each part as described in its appropriate place.
The sections on dental extraction have also been arranged according to the order of presentation in fracture from above the body to below it.
The twenty-fourth chapter.
In the treatment of dental extraction from below.
The alveolar bones come out only in rarity and when they are removed, it happens on two conditions; either they leave their places gradually with a slight removal and settle slightly or they completely detach themselves until they relax. Up to around the chest until saliva starts to flow freely and he can't hold it, and he can't bear to remove his dental floss and his tongue begins to move by talking. However, if his removal was slight, then in most cases, he will return to himself better than before.
And if the removal was complete, then it is necessary to hasten his return quickly and not delay him at all. The idea is that he holds onto the attendant of the patient's head and enters one hand of the doctor into the root of the jaw inside his mouth if the jaw comes from one side.
Or he enters both his thumbs if the jaw comes from both sides, and all other fingers of his hand are outside moving along with it. The patient is commanded to relax their jaw and release it to go in every direction. The doctor smooths out the jaw and pushes the jaw until it returns to its place.
If it is difficult to return them, especially if all the cheek bones are affected, then use camel's wool in hot water and grease until their return becomes easier. Do not delay their return as we said. When they return and align, and when the patient's mouth has closed tightly without relaxing, then place on them bandages for abrasion with a stick made from wax and grease that has been applied.
Then gently tie it with a non-stretch strap, and the patient should sleep on their back. Their head should be cushioned between two pillows to prevent them from moving left or right. They are not allowed to chew anything; instead, they should have light food like soups.
Until the pain goes away and the jaw tightens, he can eat what seems fit to him. He should use this gently, not forcing himself to open his mouth when eating, drinking or yawning until the jaw tightens and recovers.
If the jaw bones are difficult to return, especially if they remain separated for a while and do not return to their original positions, it often leads to various fevers and constant headaches. There may also be abdominal pain and frequent vomiting in some cases. If you notice this, know that there is dislocation.
Many people die from experiencing such symptoms within ten days.
The twenty-fifth chapter.
In returning the hip bone and the lower leg joint.
As for the hip bone, it does not detach from the inner side because of its connection to the chest. It may detach outward, which can be perceived by touch, and to correct it, one should have the patient lie on their back with their arms extended.
Then, press the area with your palm firmly. It usually returns to place. Then, apply bandages and band aids, tightening them. As for its lower end that connects with the leg, it does not detach except in rare cases; if it were to detach, then it should return and align as mentioned previously, ready for you to proceed according to what we have discussed.
Then place the bandage, supports and tightening, and order the patient to rest and avoid strain until he heals. With this same treatment, if the affected limb also returns to its original position, it will heal by that very method.
The twenty-sixth chapter.
In the treatment of relieving hip dislocation.
Know that the dislocated hip can move in three directions: one, it may move towards the knee and downwards; two, it may move towards the chest, or even upwards, which happens rarely.
It does not move backward to the place of the shoulder, nor forward to the location of the nerve. It mostly moves downwards and outwards towards the knee, especially in those with little flesh because it quickly exits and re-enters them.
As for those with ample flesh, it behaves differently; it exits and enters with difficulty. Sometimes, due to a hit or fall, the hip swells up hotly and one might mistake this for dislocation. It should be tested in such cases until its health is confirmed.
Then, when treating it, you advance in its cure. When examining dislocation, if the displacement is downwards towards the knee, upon comparing between the deformed and the healthy hip, you would notice an apparent difference between them, finding a deformity on the head of the deformed hip, and feeling like a small egg when touching below the knee at the level of the knee.
The patient cannot raise his hand to his ear, nor can he perform all movements. Similarly, if the dislocation is towards the chest or above, you will find this obvious upon palpation.
This dislocation can be facilitated in returning it if the bone is curved or if the patient is a child, and to return it; have a servant raise his hand above then you place your index fingers under his elbow and lift the joint forcefully upwards to its place while the servant raises his hand and extends it upwards.
Then press it down; he will return quickly, if it does not return as mentioned and the dislocation has existed for many days since then, it may be necessary to immerse the child in hot water and use relaxing treatments that soften and soothe like cooking garlic, mastic resin, and the royal diadem in water, and use them.
Then the child lies on his back, and under his elbow is placed a ball of wool that is moderate between softness and firmness. Then the doctor places himself behind the ball, holds the child's hand with his hand, and extends it downwards.
Then he pushes the ball with his foot, and it returns to its place; if you want to return it this way, prepare a leg longer than the child's, stop him from the side, put your knee under the elbow of the child, raise his elbow until the child is suspended in the air. And another servant pulls the child's hand down towards his belly. If the child is light, it may be necessary to attach something else to him to weigh him down; then he returns the dislocation from its place, and it can also return on another way.
And you should concentrate on the ground a long wooden beam that has a rounded tip like the front of an iron rod, not too thick nor too thin. Then place it under the elbow of the patient after placing a small hole on the top of the wood, and the patient stands along the length of the wood.
Then extend your hand from the other side downwards, also make his body extend from the other side with strength. The joint will return to its place quickly; if it is difficult for him to return as we have mentioned, then apply this treatment which involves taking a piece of wood whose length is around two arms. And present it with four fingers wide and make its thickness the width of two fingers, which will have a round head to facilitate its entry into the depth of the elbow on this image.
Then, on the round head, make a soft scratch so as not to damage the fragile wood. Then insert it under the elbow and extend the whole hand and arm down onto the wood. Attach the wood to the shoulder blade, elbow, and wrist.
Then place the arm on a support. Slide it across and extend your hand downwards, leaving the rest of the body suspended from the other side; as such, the joint will enter smoothly, and when it enters in any way possible, you should place a medium-sized ball of wool under the elbow.
Then, the bandage prepared with dust from the incense burner and frankincense and egg white is held all around the buttocks as it rotates from above. Then, tighten the ball under the elbow tightly, rotate it with the strap from above, and attach his hand to his neck.
And leave him not to move his hand for seven days. He should make the food of the fragile person be little until the muscle strengthens, as it is faster with strength. Then release after the seventh day or the fifth and start exercising with movement; if he has stood firm and did not relax, then he is healed.
If the joint repeatedly dislocates due to moisture it was exposed to or another reason, then it should be used in applying heat with three saffron preparations as mentioned in the section on heat application. If all of this has been done and the bandage is released after seven days but the joint still does not stabilize.
Tying the bandage and pulling on it several times did not work, it slipped off and relaxed. You could not lift it above. Know then that the nerve in the buttock of the patient has possibly broken or extended, or relaxed. Then you know that the joint will never stay in its place permanently.
And as for the jaw that is towards the chest and breastbone, and to the back, if it deviates, it returns through pushing and pulling with hands until it goes back. All kinds of binding and treatment are used on it until recovery takes place, should there be a delayed appearance of the body inside the organ and a slowness in movement after recovery.
He should use hot water repeatedly until that lump softens and returns to its original nature.
The twenty-seventh chapter.
In treating the dislocation of the shoulder.
The shoulder joint dislocates with difficulty, and it also returns with difficulty. It dislocates in all directions, especially forward or backward. The dislocation of the shoulder is not hidden from you because it occurs under your sight and touch to whatever shape it has dislocated into.
And when you compare the dislocated shoulder to its original position, this reveals it to you clearly with palpation of the joint. It cannot bend the arm nor touch itself to you due to its inability. You should hasten and return the dislocation before it is presented to you by applying a hot pack.
If it is presented to you with a hot lump, it becomes difficult to return and may not completely heal. Especially if the dislocation is towards the back, it is the worst of all types of dislocations and has the most intense pain. It often results in death along with it.
Adjustment if theman can return to a position where he extends both his hands and arms, and the doctor's hands are above the shoulder and below it, pushing the joint with all his fingers or even by the base of his palm until it returns to its place.
And if the jaw is in front of the nose, it can be treated by bending the hand once until it strikes the back of her bent palm that follows his, if the jaw does not return to its place then use extreme strong stretching and have him extend both arms.
The slave holds the arms also so that when he extends, it doesn't move away. Then swing the arm to each side after wrapping on its hand a folded cloth or a wide piece of fabric. If you grease the joint with oil while the doctor's hands stroke it, this would make it easier to fit the joint.
Then he pushes the joint strongly until it returns. Afterward, it should be covered with a bandage containing grip and drying, along with raw egg white, and firmly pulled to tighten it, then hang the arm from around the slave's neck, leaving for several days.
Then check, if the joint is securely in place, remove the bandage from it and leave. And if I saw that the joint did not harden enough, yes, redo the bandaging and the strap, also leaving for several days until it hardens, then remove it. If he developed a body after returning the joint and removing it.
If it is difficult to move, then use the application in the bath and mild rubbing and gentle massaging until it softens or make a hinge on the joint like that of a fatty goat, then tie it and leave it for a day and night on him, then remove it and introduce him into the bath, if he sweats, then scrub the joint with an appropriate scrub.
Then renew the operation once, twice, and thrice with entering the bath until it softens. If you wish to make his leather (of the wound) as wet as a buffalo's hide that is soaked in fat and taut, then do this several times; for it will soften and return to its original state.
The twenty-ninth chapter.
In treating the dislocation of the elbow.
The elbow of the hand is often dislocated and when it is reset, it is easier compared to other joints. However, it should be quickened when it needs to be set back immediately before the site gets cold or when there is a hot lump present.
When resetting the dislocation, you place the forearm on a board and stretch the patient's arm with one person supporting it. The doctor then places his hand on the joint and pushes until it returns to its position. However, it is necessary to check if the dislocation has moved inside the wrist.
Let the patient place his palm on the board during stretching and contracting. If the dislocation is pronounced towards the front of the hand, let him place his backhand on the board so that the doctor's hand can rest at the same joint point. If it returns immediately, otherwise apply a compress with an analgesic for any lump.
Leave him without making him resume the position, for he cannot bear it nor can he be reset after days have passed. The joint remains in its unnatural position and this does not harm the patient except if his hand was relaxed and unable to hold anything.
Then, you will realize that the nerve has been severed or tolerate it; there is no remedy for it except to apply pressure with your hand. It may help or not at all. After successfully resetting the elbow, apply the mentioned compress then have him hold it every five days.
Then the hand is treated and practiced, if its movement fails and there appears something of the body on it, it should be moistened with heated water and vinegar until it softens.
The twenty-ninth chapter.
In treating the dislocation of fingers.
The fingers can dislocate in all directions. If one of the fingers has dislocated to the back or palm of the hand, extend the finger and push the dislocation with your thumb until it returns. Then tie the end of the finger and hang it towards the direction where it dislocated.
Leave it for two days, then release and stretch it until it stands firmly on the first day. If this is done at night, tie it in the same manner; she will continue to treat her by movement during the day and tie it at night, repeating this process for several days until it strengthens.
And similarly, do the same with it if it dislocates towards the palm of the hand. Tie her in the direction of that side and do what you did for your first treatment until she recovers. And do this with her whenever it dislocates to any other directions, respectively.
The thirty-first chapter.
In treating the dislocation of the shoulder blade.
If a vertebra in the shoulder blade or neck, or a complete dislocation of the vertebra occurs or if many vertebrae have been displaced from their places, there is no cure for it as death hastens towards the invalid.
That is indicated by the excrement of the sick person being uncontrollably released, unable to retain it. It often relaxes and loses some of its parts either in his legs or arm or both. If one vertebra has been displaced from its place, it tends to keep displacing.
Their diminishment is towards four directions. One in which it goes backward, it is called an ulcer. As for its treatment, if the ulcer occurred during childhood there is no cure nor exemption from it. If it occurred after falling or being hit and so on, then there is a cure.
They initially mentioned various types of treatment with extensive language, much of which was not beneficial. I have summarized the necessary parts from that, providing a little but sufficient explanation for what they brought forward in understanding the concept and illustrating how to use the equipment differently than what they indicated and explained.
I say that if an ulcer occurs in front of the chest, there is no remedy or exemption from it. The same applies for ulcers on both sides as well. However, ulcers that develop on the back, especially those I am describing, can be treated. This involves covering them with a dressing.
On a flat stand close to a wall, you spread out a damp mat under it so as not to harm his chest. Then you place an upright plank in the ground, dug into a hole at one end of the stand towards his head, and another plank at the other end of the stand towards his legs.
And a servant holds the plank, let it not be firmly set in the hole. Another servant holds the other plank in this manner. Then wrap it around the back of the patient and under his ribs with a thin, tight cloth. Extend the end of the cloth to the plank at his head and bind it there.
Then, using another cloth, pull it over his buttocks and above his knees, near his waistline. Then, gather all the straps together and tie them to the other plank at his feet. Each servant then holds their respective plank with the strap towards their side; do not remove the planks from where they are attached.
Except that they are not documented as we said, and the doctor puts his hands on the pin with strength until it returns or places a board on it then leans on the board with his legs until it returns. If it does not return with this treatment, you take a board to be its length about three arms.
And you excavate in the wall, as we said it should be near the door at a place where he enters one end of the board, then places the middle part of the board on the crack. The doctor puts his foot on the other end and pulls tightly with great strength until it presses the bolt.
And it returns to its place. If you want to do it with a screw that fits in the hand, you plant two pieces of wood in the ground at the head of the door at the end of the room, both measuring an arm's length, and under his feet also at the end of the room, two more wooden pieces.
And let there be a space of a cubit between each piece of wood, and for each piece of wood, a hole is made in which the screw runs. The wood is firmly embedded in the ground to prevent it from moving even if you use a wooden rod that fits into the holes. This wooden rod goes through both holes.
And at its end, there is a hole that is firmly embedded with a wooden rod of one cubit length which goes through it. The same is done in the other two pieces of wood. Then tighten the rope that you tightened in the chest of the patient on the screw near his head and the ropes that you tightened in his legs at the screw near his feet.
And then stands by each screw, holding the tool with which it is screwed into the screw in his hand. The doctor adjusts the hole according to what we have provided, this is a view of the screws, doors and door hinges:.
Then, after the pus has subsided and regardless of the position, it should be recommended to hold the dry bandage with the whiteness of the eggshell, then press. Afterward, place a plaque over the bandage that is three fingers wide or slightly more, and its length should match what fits in the cup's position.
And on some accurate points, it should be tied with the required bandage. Use gentle food to cleanse until it is clean, and if there remains some residue in its place at the end of the healing process, then medications that relax and soften should be used alongside the board we have described for a long time.
And for that, you could use a lead plate. Sometimes, there may be residue at the end of back points' healing which might seem like peeling; it is an extra bone that has not healed properly. This treatment should not expose it as it might cause death.
The thirty-first chapter.
In treating the dislocated hip.
Know that the hip joint and the knee joint are only subjected to dislocation, not the slight wear or indentations that other joints may experience. The hip joint dislocates on four sides.
And that is because it can dislocate inwards and outwards, as well as forwards and backwards. However, it more often dislocates inwards than outwards or backwards. A sign of an internal dislocation is if when you compare the healthy leg to the diseased one, the diseased leg appears longer.
The knee is usually beyond the normal position. The patient cannot bend his leg at the point where it should be bent, and this point behind the bend becomes swollen and clear before the thigh bone reaches there.
The sign of the one whose jaw is exposed outward is symptoms contrary to these symptoms, and the sign of the one whose jaw is exposed forward is that he extends his leg fully until there's no bend in it unless there is pain in the knee, and if he attempts to walk, he cannot do so up ahead.
His urine is retained, and he experiences pain in his anus. When walking, he has difficulty due to the heel of his foot touching first. The sign of the one whose jaw is exposed backward is that he cannot fully extend his knee before bending his ribcage. Also, his leg length is shorter compared to the other side.
The ribcage is relaxed, and the thigh bone can be clearly seen at the place of the spine. As for the opposite cases of this jaw position, if you look closely, when the old jaw has become accustomed to its owner and hasn't tried to return to its original state and has remained in that condition, there is no definite cure.
It should not be allowed to return to its original state. As for the one who has undergone a recent jaw surgery, regardless of what type it was from the four types of jaw surgeries, prompt action should be taken to rotate and extend the joint, moving it inwards and outwards, moving it left and right; this might help.
He returned without needing any other treatment. If he doesn't return like this, it's advisable to have a strong attendant who can extend his leg from below either with their hands or with a strap tied around his thigh above the knee for another attendant to support him from above.
He should insert his hands under his armpits, then pull with a soft strap at the base of his thigh, holding onto one end of the strap. Another attendant can support him from below. The attendant can either be positioned in front, moving from the position of the ribcage to the position behind the knee, or from behind towards the back area.
Let all of them die once until the pus rises from his body to the earth and remains hanging. This type of death is a common characteristic of the four kinds, if the jaw returns as we said or otherwise, then for each kind of treatment that I mentioned there must be a specific therapy.
And if his jaw goes inside, it should lie on its right side. Then make two pillows under the thigh bone between the thigh and the place below the ilium.
Then extend the belt from below the ilium upwards to the top of the body towards the pectoral region. Then, another attendant supports the weaker side with his arms and embraces the thick part of the thigh. They should push it out strongly. He returns to its place.
This type is easier than other treatment types that result in this organ's reaction. If it fails and you are unable to perform it, then this particular kind of treatment requires you bind both legs of the patient with a soft but strong bandage around the ankles and knees.
Each of them should have a distance equivalent to four fingers from each other. The diseased leg should be extended more than the others by two fingers. Then, the patient should hang upside down on a wooden plank in his home, with it being one arms' length away from the ground.
Then, order a strong slave to hold the thigh and another slave holds onto the diseased side. The slave holding the disease then pushes forcefully on the one who is holding the thigh. This results in the joint returning to its place quickly. If the jaw was pushed outside, the specific reaction would be...
The diseased one should lie on the cot as described with us regarding the patient in the vessel. The bandage should be tightened especially around his diseased leg and on his chest. Then, two wooden planks are placed: one under his feet and the other under his head. A longer plank is also put in the middle of the cot, very securely fastened.
If he sweats on her, to prevent injury to the patient, make it a board between his thighs so that when he is extended down, he doesn't slide downwards. Then each servant holds towards him and the doctor adjusts the hip with his hands, if it responds to return (to the correct position).
Otherwise, place the board on him and fasten it as we mentioned in the previous section either way; however, it is necessary that the patient lie on his correct side. If the dislocation is forward, then it should be required to extend the patient's leg once while he is in this position with the aid of a mallet.
The doctor places his right hand on the lower abdomen of the patient, then presses it with the other hand. But this pressing should extend downwards to the area below the knee; if the dislocation is towards the back, it should not be required to extend the patient's leg downwards.
He is elevated on the ground, but it should be laid on something hard as it should also be that his waist and hip are extended outward according to what we mentioned about positioning him on the mallet while he's lying down on his back, and the bands are tightened.
As we mentioned earlier, it should also use the clamps with the board on the place where the joint has moved to. If the hip joint returns to its proper position as required and the sign of return is not hidden from you, which is that the patient's legs extend.
If you see them at the same level and the patient is able to flex and extend his legs without discomfort, know that the member has returned as it should. In that case, you must bring together the hips and carry the dressing while pulling tightly with a girdle so that the hip does not move in any direction.
The compulsory absence is three or four days, then the bandage and dressing are removed. If you see both sides equal in size, know that the fracture has set, and release the patient for walking. If you notice any sign of relaxation in it.
Return, re-bandage it according to the first tightness and leave it also for three days. Then remove it and allow walking on it gradually for some days until it heals well, if God wills.
The Second and Third Chapters.
In treating dislocation of the knee.
The knee dislocates on three sides: to the inside, to the outside, and downwards towards behind. It does not dislocate in front of the patella. The sign of its dislocation is that the patient instructs to bring their leg up to their groin.
If it does not stick to the thigh, know that the knee is dislocated. All means of putting it back should be tried until the patient sits down with their legs extended if they can do so. Sit behind them to hold him in place and gently guide him backwards for a little while, then sit on his thighs.
You should press your back against their head and place their leg between your legs. Then, hold onto their knee with your hands and interlock them on top of the knee while touching each side of it firmly. Another assistant should extend their leg until you can return the knee to its place.
The sign that it has returned is when the leg sticks to the thigh smoothly and without discomfort, then secure it and have the leg stick to the thigh. Then bind them all with a bandage for three or four days, and then release them. Only slight walking should be done until healing occurs.
If returning it as described to you is not possible, then resort to the powerful ligatures which I have provided instructions for in treating the hip until it returns.
The thirty-fourth chapter.
In the treatment of freeing the heel.
The heel may detach slightly or completely, and its dislocation can be either inward or outward. The sign of a heel dislocation is that you will see the heel protruding prominently in the direction to which it has detached.
As for the treatment of a slight detachment, it is easy to reposition; you simply need to gently guide and adjust until it returns. However, in treating complete dislocation, one should have the incapacitated person sit while being supported by a strong attendant from behind at the waist.
Then, with your right hand you grasp the top of his foot and with your left hand from below at the bottom of the foot, in the position of the pubis. Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand and then your left hand twice, then extend it with your left hand and push the front of the foot towards the leg without force.
You perform this twice as described, then in the third time push the front of the foot towards the leg while pulling on the pubis. If it returns after one or two repetitions with this technique and you see the foot level, otherwise redo the operation upon it because it will return.
If returning it as described to you is not possible, then I will have the incapacitated person lie on their back on the ground and dig down deeply into the earth with a pointed tool so that it comes between his legs. Then he wraps him tightly but not to harm the incapacitated person, and then adjusts his thigh strap.
Then a second attendant holds either his hands or binds them with a rope around the neck of the patient, then each attendant extends their arms against that of their companion and a knee is placed between the thighs of the sick person which they hold to prevent their body from sagging downwards during extension. Then the surgeon equalizes the jaw by hand.
And another attendant holds the healthy leg downwards, causing the jaw to quickly return. When the jaw returns and its return is evident, carry the dressing and pressure and tighten it with tight bindings, placing the ankle by the binding downwards. It's advisable to avoid the nerve located above the heel from behind.
So that the bandage isn't too tight and hurts him, leave it on for two or three days. If the bandage relaxes, tighten it again and release it on the third or fourth day. The patient should avoid walking for forty days.
If he walks before this time, there's no guarantee that the jaw won't break and cause harm or that he will accept treatment afterwards. If he experiences a hot lump, it may be necessary to use what we've described in previous sections of treatment and dressing until it goes away.
The fortieth chapter.
In treating dislocated fingers of the hand.
It is necessary to reposition what has dislocated from its place with a gentle push for only a short time. This is not difficult but rather easy, if the dislocation occurred in some parts of the foot, it may be required to place the sick person's leg on an even surface on the ground.
Or on a plank while standing like when walking, then you stand up place your foot where the joints are and then press it with your foot with force until it returns and appears to have returned properly in its position.
Then make a board under his foot, so that the whole foot has two ends. Then tighten it firmly for three days. Afterwards, let him rest and avoid walking for many days until it strengthens and he is ready to walk if God wills.
The thirty-fourth chapter.
In the types of jaw dislocation which occurs with injury, or with fracture, or both.
Something like that happened and its treatment was performed often leading to death.
Therefore, it should not be treated in haste or rashly. One must be cautious with the process and have patience, carefulness, and a stable mind without being hurried or confident. Initially, only use medicines that can calm hot swellings, and give them time to work.
May it be by your will, O Lord, anything other than what I hope for safety from sickness with mild symptoms and some glimmer of hope appearing in him. Reject his response from your decree at the very beginning before a hot tumor appears.
If the member returns as desired, then use the procedure that calms hot swellings and treat the wound with what is suitable from dried ointments. If the jaw occurred with a fracture and fragments were removed, discard them if they are clean. Follow in this what we have mentioned about simple diseases as detailed in their respective sections.
Exert yourself and purify your soul from entering the path of errors as you have been advised. This will protect you and ensure safety for your condition if God wills.
