Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begins the words of Albucasim.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O, sons, when I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, by its completion in it, and by its expositions and declarations, it has become clear to me that you will complete with this treatise, which is a part of the action by hand, i.e., surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For the action by hand is prohibited in our realm and in our time is deprived of all prestige, while greatly risking the science of it, and its traces are obscured; and nothing remains of it except a few small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which they altered and led to those errors and hesitations that closed their minds to it and diminished its strength and skill.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it has become clear to me that I will animate this through the arrangement of this treatise in that second way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and so that it might come with the forms of the tools of cauterization and other instruments of the work as is fitting for addition of the declaration, and for preparation of it, which cause is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	But the cause for which there is no good craftsman by hand in our time is because the art of medicine is long, and that its practitioner must be practiced beforehand in the science of anatomy, which recognizes Gaulish in that it knows the joints of the members and their forms, and the connection and separation of them; and have the knowledge of bones, nerves, and tendons, and the number of those, and their emanation.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And so Hypocras says that by name is much, but in the work is little, and especially in the art of the hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	But we have already said that in the introduction to this book; for whomever is not learned what we have said of anatomy, it is not permitted that they might fall into error by which men will die, as I have seen too many of those, for some are formed in this science and throw themselves from it without experience.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For I saw a foolish and experienced physician pierce a scrophula on the neck of a woman, and piercing some arteries of the neck so that much blood flowed and the woman died in his arms.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another physician who extracted a stone from a man who had proceeded in his state, and the stone was large, and he came to him and drew out that stone with a piece of the bladder, and that man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I had called to extract it, and I saw that for the size of the stone and for the disposition of the patient over him that he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another physician who took stipends from a duke of our land for surgery, and there came to him a broken black slave; and preparing with his ignorance, he extracted the fracture over the plague with powders and splints with strong compression, and did not allow the wound air.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And then he discharged it according to his desires, and then bound it, and then let it remain for some days and commanded that we loosen the dressing; and it became so that the thigh and leg were pustularized, and came to ruin.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I was called to him, and prepared to loosen the dressing, and achieved tranquility and eased of his pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But however, corruption was confirmed in the member, so that I could not restrain it and the corruption did not cease wandering in the member as the patient perished.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another physician who pierced a cankerous ulcer, and was ulcerated for some days, as the wickedness of it increased with its lord.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause of which is that the cold choler is pure, and then it does not come to him from iron at all, but that there be some member suffering from it.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And so, sons, it is necessary for you that the action by hand be divided into two divisions: one is in operation to him who is associated with health, and the other is in work with which there is peril in the major dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already discussed that in every chapter of this book in which there appears operation in which there is error and fear; so that it is necessary for you to guard against that and leave it, so that the foolish might not hinder your way and disgraced you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And thus take up your arms with solicitude and the protection of God, and your patients with gentleness and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the better way by the grace of God and to bring about health and praiseworthy success, and lay aside the terrible diseases of difficult cure, and take up your arms from what makes you fearful so that solicitude in your faith and in your name does not escape you: for it remains to your glory, and more in the world and beyond to your saintliness.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Gaulish has already said in some of his books:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"Do not heal evil ill, so that bad physicians are not named."
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have divided this book according to three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begins the division of the book, and first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter ordered from the head into feet, in the forms of the instruments and the tools of cauterization, and what is necessary in the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, of bleeding and piercing, and of cupping, and of plagues, and of extraction of arrows and like things, all chaptered and ordered from the forms of the instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, of restoration and of dislocation, and of cure of torque and like things; chaptered from the head into feet, and of the forms of the instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	Of cauterization by fire and by acute medicine and reminiscence of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	With that begins the treatise of all the book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	We will say the quality of the humors of that cauterization and of the pains of it, and in what condition cauterization is prohibited.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	So I say that the speech of the quality of the humor of cauterization and the pain of it is long speech and prolix, and subtle by science, and secret hidden; and many have spoken greatly of it, and from it are disagreed, and for me a little of their speeches suffices, fearing prolixity.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And so I say that cauterization confers to all universal complexions, which are by matter or without matter, excepting two complexions, which are complexions of phlegm without matter.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the complexions phlegmy and dry with matter discorded; for some said that cauterization is beneficial to it, and others said the contrary of that, that cauterization is not convenient in ill of which is by quality and dryness, for the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and inconvenient that ill of which is phlegmy and dry be healed.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And he said the contrary of that, that by cauterization is made humor in all ill which is phlegmy and dry that one sees in the bodies of men, for when you compare the body of man and his humors to the complexions of fire, you rub the body of man dry.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say by the speech of that, that experiment that to me some times have discovered.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	However, let the one who comes to this topic not be ignorant of what is already written and practiced in the chapter on cautery by various authors, and has understood the diversity of human complexions and the disposition of diseases in their bodies, and their causes, and their accidents, and the space of time of them.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	But in other complexions you should not be afraid, especially in wet and damp diseases, for all doctors have agreed about them and are not in disagreement that cautery is beneficial for those.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, children, that the secret of healing by cautery with fire and its goodness is that cautery with burning medicine is that fire is simple, whose action only affects the part being cauterized and does not affect another part except for a little harm.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	But the action of burning medicine reaches all parts, and strongly brings about a difficult-to-cure disease in the part it affects, and strongly helps it.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	But fire, by its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not do that except that it expels the surplus. And it is known to us through experiment and through the length of service in the study of art upon the truth of causes; and because of this I am excused from the length of speech. And if it were not that my free time was not read in this pause, a secret hidden from you by fire, and the quality of its action on bodies and its expulsion by which you expel diseases, with philosophical speech demonstrated, which would be acute in your minds.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, children, that they disagree on the time when it is convenient to perform cautery, and pause in the best time of spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cautery is convenient at all times, in order that the harm by the accidental time is submerged in the benefit of what is drawn by cautery, and especially if cautery is for pains or necessary pains, strong and feverish, which do not endure delay so that malice does not come, which is greater than a little harm due to the passage of time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And therefore do not wonder in your minds, children, that this is not considered except by the common people and foolish doctors; it is that for that disease which is healed by cautery, there is no reduction of time at all, and they pause in that consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not as they think, for cautery is not but in the place of medicine which alters the complexion and dries up the moisture which are the cause by which pains come.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	But cautery surpasses medicine in power of its strength and value of its action, and greatness of its lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that the disease may return at some time according to the complexion of the patient and the location of his disease, and the strength of it, and what is prepared in his body from the aggregation of surpluses in him, and what comes to him in his acquisition in food and likeness of these causes; unless the disease for which cautery was administered was a subtle disease in a part of few surpluses and moisture, so that cautery for pain and its likeness in it, it is possible that the pain will not return in him, but this happens in small things.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	But the vulgar saying is that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is a true saying, not to what they understand about it, for they believe that there is no cure that benefits from medicine or any other cause except cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is contrary to that; and the intention that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is not but when we administer remedies in some diseases, and those medicines do not confer, and at the end of the cause we administer a man cautery, and it benefits for that.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And from here we understand that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the intention which the vulgar and foolish doctors understand.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and subtlety of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the place of cautery does not do that, unless it is absolutely true, for I have already proven and proven to you that this is not but in some bodies without the others, and cautery with it is good and better than with iron as they said; but when you perform cautery with fire with gold, it is not declared to you, for it is ignited according to the quantity that you want due to the redness of gold, and because it prepares to receive friction; and if you apply an igniter over it, gold melts by the fire, and some sheets fall into the fire so that the craftsman catches them due to the occupation of that.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And for this, cautery with iron is done more lightly and closer to the rightness of operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have ordered this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the head among the feet, so that I may ask for what I want from him.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Of cautery of headache by coldness and moisture.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization confers to moisture and coldness above the servile accident of which there are two causes, it is the cause of soda and multitude of fluxes, called headache, from the parts of the temples and ears flowing, and multitude of sleeping, and toothache and of the jaw, and generally of all disease that comes by frigidity, as well as paralysis, stroke, and likeness in those diseases.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cauterization is this, that first of all you command the patient to be evacuated by laxative medicine, the head being washed clean, for three or four days according to the strength of the patient and his age and habit.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command him to shave his head with a razor, and then let him lie between your knees on a low bench and let him lie on his feet.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then pause the edge of your palm palm up to the point above the nose between the eyes.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	But however, when your middle finger's location is reached, signal that location with the tip of the thumb and then ignite the olive cautery of which this is the form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then pause it on the marked location, in such a way that it descends, and your hand be constrained little by little, and you revolve it.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then lift your hand lightly and look at the location, and if you see that some quantity of the head is already uncovered, as well as the quantity of hair, then lift your hand again, and if it has not returned to its original location with that iron, with another one, if it is cool, enter until it is seen by you that which I have said to you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a little salt and dissolve it over the location and let it be for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then pause on it cotton dipped in vinegar and let it be on it until the scar of the fire is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the location with four-part thuốc long into it has healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And they said that when the Roman plaster is open, so many honeys are put in it, because it is better and more beneficial.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And they said that the jaw should be cauterized within the bone, and the cautery should be applied until some part of the substance of the bone is burnt.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then scrape off what is burnt and then heal it.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	Others said that the cautery arrived at the end, passing through the strong bone while the bone collapsed, and this is the form of small alphecati.
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they believe that from that place, the vapors of the head expire.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And when there has been a wound open for a long time and it is cured while still unhealed,
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	But I have never seen these two species of cautery in anyone, except some people according to the way of fear; and that person, for me, is better off healthy than ill, because the head is devastated by the solution of its continuity with it as we have testified in other members, and especially when the patient's head is of a foul nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first kind of cautery is more safe and better for me; and that person uses it and works on that with health.
Capitol segon.	Chapter Second.
Del cauteri del cap.	Of the cautery of the head
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When in all the head there is chronic and long-lasting pain and this is prolonged in the patient, and he uses lances and cupping glasses and head purges and plasters and poultices and hot stones and bandages and similar things, and especially if he has already been cauterized by a cautery which did not help him for any of those causes, then consider that if the patient's head is of strong creation in its nature; and it is foul and finds great friction there, then cauterize it with another cautery under that one a little.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And if it is necessary to cauterize under the head and it benefits him another form of cautery by which the wound is held, then cauterize with a cautery on the crown of his head where the scalp is split.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	The scalp is split and the amount we have measured is uncovered from the bone and that is cauterized with a cautery in the back part of the head at the place which is called a vein — and it is the place where the ventouse is placed.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And put your hand on it, and do not uncover the bone, because the patient through that finds much more pain than from any other cautery of the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I say that this cautery is in its place, because the cautery by which they cauterize the horns of the head and the occiput is more subtle cautery than that by which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is how it is done:
Capitol ters.	Chapter Third.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Of the cautery of non-ancient migration.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When a sudden pain is in the front of the head, or pain is stretched into the eye, the head must be evacuated by cleansing medicines, and other treatment must be administered, which I have written about in the beginnings of illnesses; and if all this does not help, cauterization of it is in two ways: either by acute burning medicine, or by iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	But a cautery by burning medicine is that you take an onion, and cut it up and season the ends of it on both sides with salt.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	Then pierce the place of the pain in the temple with a pointed lance so that it penetrates under the scalp and is hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	Then tighten it with a binding bandage so that it presses down strongly and leave it there for three hours; then remove the onion and treat the wound with ointment, and leave the wound for two or three days, then put your hand over the place while immersing it in warm water so that the place becomes swollen.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then cure it with ointment until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you want to do this with some other burning medicines which I have written about in the two tractates of burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	But the cauterization by iron according to this way: heat up an iron cautery and this is how it is done:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	And it is called closed claw nail, because the head of it is like a nail with some curvature and in the middle part of it there is a small prominence.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	Then put your hand over the place of the pain — so that the iron which is underneath is not burned — and move the iron little by little quickly.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the quantity of it which is burned by the thickness of the scalp is according to the size of it, and raise your hand so that the artery underneath is not burned which is underneath, so that there is no flow of blood.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then dip the wound in salty water and put it on the place for three days; then put a bandage moistened with wine on it and cure it with ointment until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you want, cauterize with the tip of the scalpel according to cautery and beware of incision of artery in this non-ancient migration.
Capitol quart.	Chapter Fourth.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Of the cautery of ancient migration.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you cure migration with what we have said about the previous treatment and what we have said in the divisions of illnesses, and the treatment does not help, and you see that for the illness which is not sufficient to it what we have said about the first cautery by medicine or the cautery by fire, then wherever you ignite the cautery-scalpel so that it turns white, measure on the place of the pain a length of line of which the size of the finger is, or whichever, and put your hand aside for a while and tighten it so that you pierce the artery and it comes into the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However it is necessary for you to guard against the continuance of the jaw, which is worn down because of mastication, and that the vein not be burned and the nerve which controls it, and that no spasm come upon it.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the custody and caution of flow of blood from the artery which is split, because in its splitting there is danger, and especially to him who ignores what he does and is unskilled and inexperienced; and leave the operation at the beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And I will come with remembrance of the regimen of accidental flow of blood from the artery according to its way in this free book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see that this illness does not help this cautery and you see the body of the patient tolerable, cauterize it in the middle part of the head as we have measured, and cure the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you want to administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter of stretching of the artery with cautery having two points, and this cautery is better and more certain.
Capitol .v.	Chapter Fifth.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Of the cauterization of pains of auricles.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When in the auricle there is pain because of friction and it is cured by lancing and by the other treatment which I have said in the division, and the pain is not relieved, then ignite the cautery, and this is that one which has the name puncta, and this is how it is done:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	Then pierce the ignition and let it be carried around all of the auricle as it is turned, or in the circuit of each of them if the pain is in any of them.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Apply the cautery at the base of the ear slowly, little by little, until you have felt the area with the tip.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery makes points on the entire ear, and he feels that, then cure the places inside which are healthy.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Of cauterization by torture.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Torture which is cured and treated with cauterization is only of the humors which come from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of illnesses.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterization of the humors which come from dryness or from nervous spasms.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that kind of torture with poultices and clysters and washes, and your treatment doesn't work, then you should cauterize the patient in three places: the first at the base of the ear, the second a small spot below his temple, and the third at the junction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And apply your cautery against the direction in which the illness is traveling, because softening will not come except through the part that appears to be healing.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the way of cauterization is that you cauterize it with the cautery at the right side of the highest part of the ear, a little above the horn of the head; another at the temple, the length of which should be according to the length of the finger nail, and apply your hand with the cautery inside until the amount of the half of the size of a peppercorn is burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cautery; it is a kind of scalpel, the shape of which is in front like a table.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	But indeed more subtle is that one little bit here and there; and where it cuts through excessive thickness a little.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the place with that which is in front processed until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	Of cauterization of old apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it with what we have said and your treatment doesn't work and the patient doesn't have a fever, then cauterize that in four places: especially on all the horns of his head; and with cautery and the middle part of the head, as we have said; and with cautery in the groin.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the way of cauterization is done according to what is above the finger nail.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And indeed it has been cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; and that is the most rear; and indeed let it be cured with what processes.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Of cauterization made for oblivion caused by phlegm.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Let the patient be given in the beginning large poultices and purging pills, the servant cleansing agents.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And then scrape the entire head of the patient and apply over the groin a poultice of cedar described in the treatise on poultices.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And apply that several times, for that is the way of cauterization.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do that according to the order of which I have already said.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And if he is healed by those, well and good; and if not, then do to him three cauterizations in the rear part of his head, which descend from the highest part of the head to the lowest part of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And apply between each cautery the thickness of a finger nail, and then cure the cautery with that which it produces.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	But if you feel an increase and the patient can tolerate it, then do to him cauterization in the middle part; and if you feel a greater increase, then cauterize that on both horns.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Then cure that until it is healed; and let the cautery be olive-colored according to the shape given before.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	Of cauterization of parasites and of softening of all the body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Let the patient be cleansed in cleansing of the head with poultices and with that which we have said; and then scrape the head of the patient, and then cauterize that with cautery in the middle part of the head, and with cautery on all the horns of the head, and with cautery on the rear part of him, and do to him three cauterizations on the spine of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the illness of softening of the body of trops and the illnesses tolerate that and the illness is strong, then cauterize that with four cauterizations on the spine of the neck, and lastly with cautery inside until the peppercorn mot of him burns, and raise your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	Then cure that until it is healed; and let that be cauterized olive-colored.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Of cauterization of epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	An epileptic is not cauterized unless that epilepsy is caused by phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore let the brain of him be cleansed at the beginning of his illness with herbs and with the other cure which we have said in the division when the patient is large and can tolerate the exception of medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if the patient is a child who does not suffer medicines, then administer to him washes and masticables, the servant cleansers, before the days pass, with the benefit of foods.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then scrape the head of the patient, and then cauterize that with one cautery in the middle part of the head according to the previous way; and with another cautery on the back of his head, and on each horn of his head cauterize it.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and can tolerate it, then cauterize that with cauteries which I have said, having paralysis and softening of the body on the spine of the neck and the spine of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And let it be cauterized olive-colored according to how it was before.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child, then apply a subtle cautery according to this way.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	Of cauterization of melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humidity and phlegm, then cauterize that with the cauteries which we have said in the case of paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is excess of decline into melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then let him drink that which cleanses the brain of him according to what has preceded in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And then scrape the head of the patient; and then make a turpentine decently made of pine resin over the circle, and then apply that to the middle part of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	Let the patient be in seclusion for sixty days, and let him be kept in all parts.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then apply a poultice; and it is also worthy of being bled from the ear of sheep.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And scorch that over fire with moderate heat according to measure, which he endures when it is within him.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And now you will tie it in the middle of the head, in the circle, and loosen it so that it is relaxed.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this to the patient once a week, with the other treatment until he is healed; or if you wish, cauterize the area by making small points according to his pain, unless you have your hand on a cautery in such an order: this is a special cautery that moistens the brain equally.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	Then put that cut in a soft bandage or gauze.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	Of cauterization of water descending in the hole.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When to you is shown the beginning of water in the hole by the signs which I have said in the division, then begin and give the patient to drink that which purifies the head of him, and guard that from all moisture.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And do that sweat in a bath for a few days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And now command him to wash his head, and cauterize that with a cautery in the middle of the head; and now cauterize that with two cauteries over two temples if there is the beginning of water in two holes, or on one side if there is the beginning of the water in one hole.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Cut with a cautery all the veins and arteries which are below the collar bone; and let the cauteries be in that length in the width of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And guard you from flows of blood when he is cauterized; and if you see flows of blood from him, stop it with some medicine which is possible to you.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And I come with wisdom which is in extraction of arteries and with incision of those and cauterization of flows of blood.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And sometimes he is cauterized in the neck below two bones with two cauteries recently produced.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	Of cauterization of old tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears of the holes are ancient frequently and by the veins and arteries which are in the manifest location of the head outside and it is verified that this is superfluous flowing phlegmatic, then cauterize that with a cautery which we have recounted in the chapter of beginning of water falling into the holes, and with a cautery in the middle of the head and with two cauteries in the neck below two temples, and with two cauteries in the neck below two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if there is need of addition, then cauterize that in all sides of the hole's mouth on the end of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 14.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	Of cauterization of stink of nose.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you heal him with that which we have said in the division and your healing does not help, then prepare and give the patient the clysters for three nights; and now wash his head, and cauterize it with an olive cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And now cauterize that with a cautery of cloves with two cauteries over the two eyebrows below the hair one small.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And guard you from the artery, lest you light it.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And of the cautery of cloves this is the form.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Of cauterization of softening of eyelids of holes.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the hole is softened by illness or by moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with one cautery with this lunar cautery; and this is its form.
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you, cauterize that over the two eyebrows one small with two cauteries in all parts, and let them be elongated from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too much with your hand with the cautery, but according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is inflamed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Of cauterization of the eyelid of the hole when the hair is turned to the parts inside and it pinches the hole.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hair of the hole is turned to the parts inside so that it pinches the hole, cauterize in those according to two methods; for cauterization there is with fire or with burning medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you cauterize it with fire, command the patient to look at his hair as they cut them so that they are elongated and singed; and if he pinches that, then you strengthen his holes with a bandage so that they are not wounded until the hair is born.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Therefore when they are born and singed, then put the head of the patient in the hand, and now sign over the eyelid of the holes of him with a tent, with a mark which is according to the figure of a dead leaf; and let the mark be near to the hair.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	Then put soft bandage in alum of wool or in poultice of poppy over the hole.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And now heat the cautery, of which this is its form.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And now cauterize over the figure which you have marked, bit by bit, in few turns, until it is burned the surface of the collar bone which is as if with a leaf of myrrh, all appearing properly.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And sign of health of your work is that you see the eyelid of the hole already contracted and the hair of it elevated from the puncture of the hole.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And therefore lift up your hand and lay him for three days, and now put over him a bandage with linen until the scar is healed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And now heal that with ointment until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if the hair returns for any cause then let its opening and the eyelid is softened, then do another time the cauterization over that all as you did first.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the hair is in the eyelid below, then cauterize that until it is elevated to its natural location and singed and let not the hair pinch the hole.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	The cautery with burning medicine that you command the patient to look at his hair so that they are elongated and singed; and now let it be made of linen the form of leaf of myrrh.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And now take of soap mixed with honey and of oil of castor bean one unc. .I. Take that, and now mix those causes together, and do that with fomentation so that it is not cold; and now spread of that over the linen which is made thus with the form of leaf of myrrh, and put that over one hole or both; and put under the hole a soft bandage in alum of wool, and let the head of the patient be in its hand.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And put it over the medicine and press that one bit and not wound him until the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for bite is in it as if with fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And therefore when you perceive that the hole is bitten, then look at the medicine and take it away with your hand; therefore when the bite ceases, then remove the medicine and wash the hole with water; and now consider if he sees the eyelid already lifted as it is washed after constriction with fire or with incision, for then let it be; and if he returns to that of the medicine over the location in which the medicine has not acted and not become black until its action is done and is contracted.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And now put over it a bandage with linen until the collar bone of the constriction is healed, and now heal that with ointment dafinicon or other until it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you, in your operation, to guard with diligent vigilance that nothing of the medicine falls into the eye, and if the eyelid becomes swollen after a few days due to some injury from hair in the eye, then apply your medicine again to the place where the eyelid is swollen, and proceed exactly as you did at the beginning, and gradually improve until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the form of the myrrh poultice.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And know that men's eyes are diverse according to their size and smallness, and therefore your incision should be made accordingly.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And do not hide the path of rectitude from him who is being taught this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter .xvii.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	Of cauterization for a fistula that is in the tear duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you are treating a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases and do not perform your cure, then know that you should cauterize it according to this manner: order the patient to rest his head in your lap, and have someone else hold his head steady with their hands so that his head is neither moved nor shaken.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	Then place a piece of cotton wool soaked in honey or in the mucilage of psyllium over the patient's eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And heat the cautery, of which this is the form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which should be hollow, thus in the shape of a cane or of an owl' s feather, from one end of which the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you wish, it may be solid all the way through to the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want it to be hollow inside, then make it thus with an opening.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	However, what is hollow is better for your work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And press the fistula if it is open, and draw out from it pus and fluid to dry up that place.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then open it and extract the matter from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then place the cautery which should be well ignited, and hold your hand close to the cautery near the nose, so that your hand does not shake or the patient be disturbed, and then apply the cautery to the margin of the eye and corrupt it there.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And so if at the beginning of your cautery it penetrates into the bone, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice if necessary, and leave it thus for three days, and then place over that place cotton wool and wrap it up with a bandage until it is healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	But if eleven days have passed and it is not healed, then apply to it a sharp corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed and scrape it according to what is appropriate in that chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And there is another manner of cautery for a fistula which some first mentioned: enter the fistula and open it up, and then place in that fissure fine lead subtilely formed thus: melt the lead and pour it into the eye; hold your hand steady with good retention so that the patient is not disturbed by the molten lead entering the eye, and see to it that you apply over the eye cotton wool soaked in honey or water, for the lead adheres to the place of the fistula and heals it by a marvelously wonderful cure.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about the cautery and the cure, that is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer a cut to the nose and reduce the fistula into the cavity of the nose according to its proper location.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter .xviii.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	Of cauterization for a split nostril.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Many times cracks occur in the lips, and more often in children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore when you cure those cracks with what we have said in the divisions and your cure is not effective, then heat the cautery like a small knife thus:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And its hollow should be according to the thinness of the blade.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then place that edge carefully into those cracks until the cautery penetrates the edges of the crack.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then cure it with wax until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter .xix.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	Of cauterization for a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the root of the uvula or in the palate or in the roots of the teeth there is a boil and it has burst, and it is aged, and suppurates and there is a fistula, and you cure it and your cure is not effective, then know that you should ignite the cautery according to the amount received in the fistula, and then place the iron hot into the opening of the fistula, and hold your hand so that the hot iron penetrates the root of it; do this once or twice, and cure it with what we have said about the cure until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And so if the pus is discharged and it is healed, that is good; and if not, then it is necessary to expose the location and scrape away the corrupted bone according to what comes in that chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter .xx.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Of cauterization of teeth and of softening of gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are shaken, and you cure them with medicines and your cure is not effective, then order the patient to rest his head in your lap, and heat the cautery, of which the form will come immediately below, so that you place the cotton wool over the tooth and push into it the hot cautery quickly, and hold your hand close so that the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth from which it came.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then raise your hand, and repeat the cautery several times according to what you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then let the patient rinse his mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, and then spit it out, because the shaken tooth is strengthened, and the softened gum is hardened, and the corrupted moisture is dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .xxi.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Of cauterization for toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is caused by coldness, or it is cold or red, or the cure with medicine is not effective, then the cautery is in two ways: with a cow' s lard, or with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	The cautery with lard is that you take lard of cows and melt it in the hollow of iron, and then take cotton wool and wrap it around the end of the tooth, and then dip that in the hot lard and place it on the painful tooth until it is numbed.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then repeat that several times until the power of the fire penetrates to the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you wish, dip wool or cotton in the lard and place it on the painful tooth, and hold over that hot iron until the iron penetrates the cavity of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, the cautery with fire is that you take an iron or needle and heat it in the fire until it is red hot, and there is no thickness in it and the keenness of the fire does not penetrate the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	Then heat the cautery thus, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand so that the cautery is numbing; do this several times because the pain will be reduced or in that day or the next day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And know that by pressure of that cautery that the patient fills his mouth with good breath and holds it for an hour, and then spits it out; this is the manner of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize it as much as you can.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the shape of the tube:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter .XXII.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	Of cauterization of hernia.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When hernias are from phlegm and cold humors, and are not cured by digestion with medicines, and you see that those are lightly digested, then you should burn the cautery as much as possible, having two ends so that the smoke of the cautery rises through one end into the hernia, and the other if it is needed for that, while you wait until the hernia comes to the surface.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the hernia is small, then apply the cautery according to the amount of the hernia, and let it sit for three days, and place a bandage soaked in hot water over it while it is still warm from the fire.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with ointment, poultices and linen until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the shape of the tube or cautery must be as follows:
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter .XXIII.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	Of cauterization of sore throat and of contraction of the larynx.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When moisture comes upon the throat of the lung, and especially when that is caused by a coldness of the complexions, then it is necessary for the patient to be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize the root of the larynx in the place which is affected.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And be careful that the cautery does not reach the larynx or burn it, only a little bit of it.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize that with another cautery according to the joint of the neck at the lowest vertebra.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And the cautery for that should be a peg made in the way previously described.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with what is prescribed until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter .XXIV.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	Of cauterization of disease of the lung and of cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and disease of the lung are from cold moist humors, and the patient does not have fever or consumption, and it is an old disease, then cauterize that with two cauteries over the breastbone in the places affected by pain, and with another cautery in the middle of the chest between two nipples; and the cautery should be pegs made according to the previous form.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you want, the cautery can be punctured with the cautery which is called puncta, the form of which is prescribed in the section on ear pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And let there be holes in them; and then cure that with what is prescribed until it is healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And if the cautery has three ramps, the cauterization can be done with that in one go: with one cautery you can do three cauteries according to this form:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter .XXV.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	Of cauterization of the head of the larynx.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the larynx is dislocated because of slippery humors and it does not return to its place until it has been reduced, and especially if it is displaced by a slight movement as we have testified, then first reduce the dislocation, and then let the patient return his head onto his chest or onto his side; and then lift up the larynx which is in the front of the larynx to the parts above with the fingers of your left hand, if the joint is dislocated at the front.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then burn the cautery having two pegs; and this is its form:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the larynx so that it penetrates into the other side; and then the figure of cauterization will be made with four cauteries.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And do this gently according to the amount of tenting; and this is its form:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And sometimes it is adjusted according to that count, for which there are eight cauteries.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then sprinkle salt on the cautery and then make the patient calm down, and the member should not be disturbed for any length of time until it is comfortable.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is at the front and it is done, then cauterize the muscle with pegged cauteries or with punctured cauteries, for the joint is confirmed and the moisture is reduced and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter .XXVI.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	Of cauterization of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When moisture comes into the stomach and it is multiplied within his complexions and if you continue the methods of cure and do not confer with them, then let the patient be laid on his back, and extend his arms and his legs, and then cauterize that with three cauteries: one cautery under the chest according to the length of a finger with a pegged cautery, and two cauteries under the sides of the cautery so that the figure of the cautery is triangular; and they should be spread out so that there is no burning.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is to the quantity of two thirds of the thickness of the larynx.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And let the figure of the cautery be according to this shape, and if you want, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this should be a cautery according to the shape of a circle according to this shape:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And let the stomach be punctured at where that is frightened by this cautery: and you feel on the stomach a point according to the quantity which you want with tenting, and then cauterize that with a cautery in the points; and then cure that with what is prescribed until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter .XXVII.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	Of cauterization of the fretted liver.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When there is pain in the liver from coldness or from moisture or from gross fullness so that it has been driven out of its normal complexions by excessive egression, and it is cured with what we have said and does not confer with them, then let the patient lie on his back on a pillow, and feel with tenting three cauteries according to this form and quantity placed over the liver below the hypochondria, so that he lies in the bed of a man.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let there be space between each cautery according to the thickness of a finger, and let the cauteries be according to the length of the body straight.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not move your hand with the cautery.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the quantity of that which is burnt is to the quantity of the thickness of the larynx, and it is not pushed back; and if the patient stands on his feet, then let him sit down, for he has already extended his legs, and lift up his arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And you are able to cauterize these cauteries with a curved cautery, when you have subtlety and prudence in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And be careful that you do not overdo cauterization, and let the larynx be burnt throughout all its thickness so that it penetrates into the intestines, for the larynx here is subtle; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter .XXVIII.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	Of perforation of the liver with a cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When there is ulceration or abscess in the liver and you want to know whether that abscess is in the flesh of the liver or in its tunic, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the patient has increased weight and pain is sharpened.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	If it is in the tunic of the heart, then the pain is great and sharp, and often doctors tire themselves out trying to cure him.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore turn the patient over on his stomach and feel around for the boil, then ignite the cautery which is similar to a rag, the form of which is described in the other page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize with this cautery until all of the pustule is scorched, until it reaches the brain, until it draws out the pus.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	Then cure this one as well as the others after they have healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And don't use this type of cautery except when the study of medicine prolongs it and in the cases where you know from experience that many illnesses have been cured; but sometimes in some cases you should try this type of cautery, even though you may feel it is too hot for us, and it is better.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On cauterization of ulcers.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The ancients said to cauterize ulcers caused by cold humors according to this method: take an aristology root that is long and dry, about the thickness of a finger, and it will be found;
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then immerse it in oil and heat it up, and then cauterize with a cautery between the collarbone at the top of the chest; and with two small cauteries lean slightly towards the end that is below the beard, and with two cauteries lean towards the fifth rib and the armpit, leaning a little towards the back; and with another cautery in the middle of the foot; and another on the stomach, and with three cauteries on the back; and with one cautery between the two shoulders, and with two cauteries on either side of the hips, below the cautery that is between the two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And don't press your hand down on the cautery, but rather in the nature of the pustule in the way that it appears.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And the ancients also said that some men use an iron cautery like a ray, and they ignite it and put it in between the ribs so that it reaches the pustule and draws out pus, as we have said about the pustule of the heart.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	But when doing this piercing with a cautery, there is no fear because it will happen at once in the location of a fistula for which there is no cure.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	On cauterization of meles.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you cure the illness of a mele with what we have said about curing it in the division, and don't trust your treatment, then cauterize it according to three methods, all of which are correct; the first is that you make three or four cauteries that are parallel to the length of the mele according to the figure of the cauteries of the heart, the figure of which has preceded.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And between each cautery let there be the thickness of a finger or a little more, and the manner of the cautery should be as we have said about the cautery of the heart in the same way.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And don't press your hand down on the cautery, and let the patient lie on his back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And another way to cauterize is that you ignite the cautery while holding two windings, and this cause we have said in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle; and raise up the pustule which is in the bend of the mele where the patient's left hand lies.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And let your elevation by which you raise up the pustule be according to the length of the body, so that the cauteries are made according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then intertwine the two windings and ignite them while pushing into the pustule from the other side as well.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then pull out the cautery; and so there are four cauteries made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you want, cauterize with a cautery having three windings.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then you cure the cautery after it has stopped giving out pus for many days because only then are the other causes that precede in the cure effective.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On cauterization of hydrocephalus.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cautery should not be used in hydrocephalus but rather in the armpit properly.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you cure hydrocephalus with the methods of cure which we have said in the division and don't trust your cure, then let them be cauterized with four cauteries around the armpit and a cautery on the stomach, and another cautery on the heart, and another cautery on the mele, and two cauteries between the shoulder blades of the two sides, and a cautery in the right side of the foot, and another cautery on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be proportional to the thickness of the pustule.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then pull out the cautery after it has been in for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And don't evacuate the patient from the cure after the cautery so that two intentions are added to it and healing is accelerated for him by aid.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The form of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized should be key-shaped according to what is above it, and that with which the back is cauterized is olive-shaped according to what precedes it.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On cauterization of feet and thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are full of pus and water, then let them be cauterized on the bottom of the foot at the place that is between the auricular and annular fingers, and raise up your hand with the cautery and don't twist it; and then raise up your hand without turning it because the water will run out.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	It is cauterized in this form: and then make two cauteries on both thighs, and in each thigh there should be made a cautery with the end of the cautery cut into it.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And let the cautery be according to the length of the thigh: one above the knee and the other below it, and on each thigh two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And then let the wound be left open after its cure for a long time so that no water runs out of it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And then cure with those causes which we have said.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On cauterization of the body of the belly.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the body of the belly is weak and swollen due to cold humors infiltrating it and digesting it, then let them be treated with the methods of cure that we have said, and if they don't trust those methods, sometimes the patients suffer cautery from hot humors; therefore cauterize them with a large cautery on their stomach according to what has preceded in the cauterization of the stomach, and with a cautery in the shape of a circle, and with four cauteries around the armpit, and with a cautery like a key, and a cautery over the navel, or with two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if the moist humors are abundant and the patient tolerates it, then cauterize him over the navel and over the intestines, and put two cauteries tightly on the stomach close to the groin because this is a perfect cure for stimulating digestion of which there is no error.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 34.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On cauterization of old hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When they are in nature a long-standing hemorrhoids or of gross humors infiltrating or of moist and corrupt humors, and are cured with what we have said in the division and don't trust your cure, then cauterize them with three cauteries on the pus below the small shoulder blade and triangularly below it; and cautery above the navel, going through two dents.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	If you see that the patient's stomach is swollen and their food is not digested, and their face is swollen, then cauterize the area above the stomach with a large cautery as mentioned before; and with one cautery on the liver, and with another cautery on the gallbladder using a nail cautery, and leave the cautery in place for some time, and then heal the patient until they are cured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Here is the translation of the provided text:
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	Here is the translation:
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you are making an incision on the athayl, then you should ignite the cautery which is similar to a needle.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then insert that burning cautery into the athayl incision and hold your hand over it until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do this once or twice, for if they are several trops, then cauterize each of them according to what has been recounted, and then heal those with that which you apply to them within the area until they are cured.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery upon something, it is more beneficial for healing.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	Here is the translation:
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not comply with the method we have described in its place, and the patient is frightened by it, let him be healed by cauterization.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when one sees a fistula in the natural passage, and it is old, let him draw out the corruption and corrupted moisture from it, and then let what is most appropriate be to probe that with a thin needle, and thus know the quantity of its depth with the already mentioned probe.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then ignite the cautery which is similar to a needle.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And then insert that cautery into this fistula, and according to the quantity in which the probe entered.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat with the cautery on that until the corrupted matter is burnt, once or twice or three times, according to the quantity of your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And be careful of burning nerve and vein; or if the fistula goes towards the bladder or intestine, then be careful of all those places; and do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you are certain that it does not penetrate.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the place until it is cured.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the place is sealed and the matters are cut off from it and remain like that for a long time, then know that it is completely cured.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the matters are not eliminated from it, then know that they are penetrating into the flesh or causing corruption in its interior, or something of those causes will bring recollection to its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 37.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	Here is the translation:
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When in the warts there is pain from friction or from great wetness, and because of that the skin of the patient becomes inflamed, then let him cauterize that upon the warts with a cautery on each wart with a nail cautery, by which there will be recollection.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And let them cauterize it strongly with the second one a little lower down, so that there will be three linear cauteries, and then they will be more beneficial for healing.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	Here is the translation:
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When there is weakness and softening in the bladder due to friction and moisture, so that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize that in the most inferior part of the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic region begin, and cauterize with a cautery on the right side, and with another cautery on the left side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the amount of hair; and cauterize that with a cautery in the lowest part of the back, or with two cauteries if it is necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And let it be a nail cautery as it has been described.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Here is the translation:
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is friction and moisture in the membrane, and because of that it is prohibited in pregnancy, and the menstruation of the woman is corrupted and delayed, and there is pain due to the holding of them, then let the place be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a cautery on the lowest part of the back, or with two cauteries, and let it be a nail cautery.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	Here is the translation:
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moist mucous humours are poured out at the part of the elbow, and it is caused by the settling of its own place, and the sign of this is that the bone is prolonged beyond the others when compared among themselves.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the place of the dislocation is blocked in where it is bent.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Therefore, let the patient be cauterized on the part of the elbow by the patient with a circular cautery, after you have probed around the circuit of the part as it is turned, and because of that the part falls on the middle of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And let it be the cautery of which has been described in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if that cautery is not available to you, then cauterize it with three cauteries with a large olive-shaped cautery.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And let the cautery be done according to the amount of the thickness of all the tendons; and then heal that until it is cured.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	Here is the translation:
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When there is pain in the part of the elbow, and it is caused by friction and moisture, and the patient is cured by that which we have said and does not comply, and it is old, then let him draw out the patient from thick humours with putrid pills or artificial pills or similar; and then cauterize that.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the manner of the cautery in that is according to two manners: or cautery with medicines that burn, or cautery with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	Let it be done according to two known manners, of which is one that you cauterize that on the part of the shoulder with three triangular cauteries according to this form; and do it in those good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And let the space between each cautery be the quantity of the thickness of the finger, and if it is a large nail cautery or olive-shaped.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Let it sometimes be the cautery on the middle part on the head of the elbow so that there are four cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you want, cauterize with the circle of which is preceded by the form in the cauterization of the dislocation of the elbow, that it may be a containing circle and burn the thickness of all the tendons.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the manner of cautery in sciatica when pain is attached to the anus and not extended into the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	But if it is extended into the thigh, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the thigh over the place to which you direct the patient's attention that hurts; and with one cautery over the ankle for four days a little bit towards the wild side.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if you are using a knife cautery, then the depth of the cautery should be according to the thickness of the skin.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if you direct the patient' attention that the pain is extended into the place near the feet, then cauterize there where you direct with a cautery for three days or four or more if needed.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the patient directs your attention that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, then cauterize there with a knife cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And in every cautery beware that you do not go too far with the cautery to the point of burning nerve or major artery, and that because of this to you is the patient badly harmed or paralyzed.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have seen one and another of those who cauterized over the ankle and went too far in the cautery, and the bed fire got into the leg, and it was perforated and rotten all through the leg.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And then he died a terrible death of stomach ache, and then came his death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two places, then cauterize each one according to this manner.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise say in the cautery of anus cautery, of which this is the manner: make it like a ring of iron, of which the thickness should be half a palm; and its hole according to the thickness of a finger bone or less a bit.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And within that circle there be another third; and the space between them be the length of the nail of the thumb; and those circles be open on two sides; and the length of those rings be the length of one or two nails, and make on the edge of those rings decently bent apparatus in the form of circles; and this is the shape:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Then let it be heated in the fire until it reddens and shoots out sparks, and then let it be placed over the part of the anus where the patient lies on his side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And so cauterize that with three round cauteries in one go.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And let it lie there for three days; then let that be plastered with pitch and let the wound remain open for a few days; and then let that be healed with ointment until it is well.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Albucasis says: O children, we have used this type of cautery sparingly for fear of it, and because few have been found who know how to use it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	But those who are good at cauteries and understand them well will find the spot of him who suffers from them.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	But cautery with healing herbs is that you make two circles having a perforated armlet in which there will be the hook of the iron door; and the length of the parts in their naturalness are two nails or quarters those.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space between them is the thickness of the thickness of a finger; and they are open below and above, and they are such that they contain themselves among themselves according to this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And then place over the part of the anus where the patient lies on his side, and press your hand upon the part of the anus; then take a tail of water and pour it between the two circles, and let its quality be heated little by little with fire, and suffer the patient to feel the biting and squeezing of it — for he will feel biting as well as squeezing — until that biting ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then raise your hand with the instrument and wipe away the hot water from all around the anus with warm water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And let it lie there for three days and place pitch over that so that the blackness of the biting is softened, and let him lie that way for some days, and pus will flow from him; this is the last in healing.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that with ointment until it is well.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain is extended into the thigh or the leg, make him lie in such a way that water contains him just as it is done to the anus with ointment.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the manner of hot water tail, and I have already written that in the treatise on the refining of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Take of alkali and of unslaked lime of both half a part one, and pound them and place in a new pitcher of which the bottom is perforated with a small hole, according to the quantity that goes into him.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And place below the bottom of the pitcher another pitcher hollowed out, and pour over that alkali and quicklime with warm water in which you collect that with your hand by good compression, and let the pitcher that drips from him pour hot water into the lower pitcher.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then adjust all that water and pour it over the other quicklime and another alkali renewed, because that hour is a strong fire-damping, which is administered in many operations of medicine and in cautery of the other members, for that operation makes fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And with some medicines by which is cauterized widely, as well as theriac and honey of honey and soap that are mixed.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Gualia heard from one of the ancients the operation and the cure by which is cured pain of anus and sciatic nerve, and magnified much from that, and said that no other cure was needed, and that it was healed in a day so with a bath and eye-water, for he felt that very much from that.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And let it be taken from certary berry, and if not, fig juice; and let it be pounded with a little salt and let it be placed over the anus where there is pain, or in the thigh, or in the leg, and let it be bound.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And let it lie for the amount of three hours, or for the quantity that the patient feels biting of it.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then put him in a bath and when his body is heated, immerse him in the sun, for the pain ceases and he is healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that it does not hurt anyone to use cautery with these medicines except that the body be evacuated.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	But Ja Escorides said that when the sciatic vein is cauterized, he should be given a bath; and let the cautery be done to him according to this manner: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the big toe and the toenail.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then take dry goat horn and inflame that with fire; and then place it over the wool and let it lie until it is softened.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And then repeat that, and do not cease doing that until the biting of the pain came into the anus and ceased.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this manner of cautery is called cow cautery.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	Of cautery for pain in two places.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Some pains are in the back from many causes, like from constipacion or piercing or from excessive evacuation, and for such causes resembling, from infusion of warm and moist material.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cautery does not help except in this one kind which is made by infusion of warm material.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, let him, then evacuation of the patient with pills that are made and resemble them, that they are made over the back in the place where there is pain, three lines according to the width of it, for you have a tent in each line, cauterize or perhaps, according to the amount that he sees of the tolerance of the patient and of its strength.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And a cauterization should be performed with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauteries in the shape of a nail:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	Of cauterization at the beginning of gangrene.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	This disease often occurs in young children, and the sign of its beginning is that constriction occurs on them in the armpit, and elevation and movement in the groin.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And you will find it in the last vertebra of the spine and the bones of the neck that is already starting to stick out above the other vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And when you see this and wish to prevent it, then cauterize that with a circular cautery in the following shape:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	that takes up the entire width of the vertebra evenly.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, cauterize around the edge of the vertebra with a pointed cautery in two or three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And let the points be close to each other.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Then heal the area inside with what we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	However, be careful that the cautery is not administered to gangrene that was caused by a spasm of a nerve.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	Of cauterization for gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And therefore when gout from a cause of friction is healed with the manner of healing and the pains are not removed, then it should be cauterized.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And you cauterize that in order to create an evacuation around the edge of the joint of the foot with many cauteries.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let the cautery be olive oil, and this is its shape:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains are pushing into the veins or the other joints, and this happens many times, then cauterize that over each vein with three or four cauteries of the entire width using this olive oil cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if many cauteries of these cauteries are necessary for you, then cauterize that and do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery beforehand, but merely touch the surface of the skin lightly.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains are pushing into the vein and the spine, then administer the cautery which we have said in its chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains are only in the hands and it is called sciatica, then point with the cautery around the edges of the joints where they are as they rotate, point in those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pains remain in the fingers, then point around the edges of the joints over each knuckle and over the palm.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains are pushing up the fingers or the muscles, then cauterize all of the edges of the joints.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not evacuate the patient of good food and medicine, for if good food and medicine are taken and gangrene is evacuated with this cautery, then it will heal, God willing.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	Of cauterization for broken bones.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When you see a break in the angles and tears inside the intestines in front of the chest, and this is how it starts, then order the patient to stop eating for one day and to use laxatives so that the split ends from his belly.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	Then follow the patient between your hands over his spine, and command him to have his belly inside that is split or for the intestines or hernia to appear.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	Then return that with your fingers and show the break on the bone of the arm by indicating the end which is similar to the upper half of the circles of the parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then heat the cautery of which this is its shape:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	until it becomes red and blistered.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Then pause the cautery over that indicated with your hand with a straight cautery, and hold it there until you see the bone of the arm inside the hollow of the elbow; and repeat this another time if you have not achieved anything in the first attempt at the bone.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And carefully observe the effect of the hernia during the time of your cauterization, that you do not burn the hernia so that over the patient it does not come to death or another great malady.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And know that when you with the cautery do not touch the bone, your operation will not succeed.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And let the cautery of children be subtle according to their age and size.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	Then heal the spot of the cautery for three days with wine until the scar of the burn is healed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then heal that with the other remedies until it is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And let the patient lie on his back for 40 days until the spot is sealed and healed over.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And let him stop eating according to the length of time of his healing, which is how the belly splits, and that the hernia does not come out again from the effort of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And then when he wants to get up after 40 days, then administer a decently made bandage and have that for another 40 days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And let him abstain from work and from eating and drinking violently, for when he uses this healing remedy entirely it will heal.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I will direct the healing of the breaks in the other parts of the belly, and so at the beginning, and let it not be tight, then cauterize that break with a red-hot cautery according to its quantity, and heal that with what we have said, and do not press it.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And now I will say the first one that is to be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this shape, for it is indicated with the touch:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And there is stopped a line that goes through the length of the split above the hernia, and another line below it; and when you pause your hand with an iron cautery, however, the first cautery is milder and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Of cauterization for torpor.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When you see in any members swelling or pain and the pain persists for a long time and there is no improvement with remedies, then let it be cauterized with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And let the cautery of each member be according to its magnitude and smallness, its paleness and darkness, the location of torpor and pain in it.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Then if it is healed by the first cautery, let it be; and if not, then repeat the cautery on it; for usually from those pains there are punctured in a member that member is healed by the cautery.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	Of cauterization for leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Let the lepers be cauterized in some places with a cautery for great healing, and maggot if the leprosy is caused by putrefaction of pus and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And when you wish to cauterize the patient, consider if the leprosy is dry and has that cured with what we have said in the division, and do not let them, nor this, and fear over the patient that the corruption does not understand all his body and all his complexions, then cauterize him on the head with five cauteries: with one in the middle of the head, and with the second below it, from the forehead to the end of the hair; and both on two horns; and with one behind, on the nape or neck.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finish your hand with the cauteries a little inside where it imprints on the bone, and of it are displaced the skins, so that the expiration of thick vapors is relieved from it; and cauterize over the wound as it has been preceded.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy is already spread over the patient and appears manifestly, then you should cauterize him with those cauteries which we have said on the head; and with a cautery on the extremity of the nose, and with two cauteries on both knees, and with two cauteries on two spine of the neck, and with six cauteries on the spines of the back, and one large one on the spines near the tail, and one on the tailbone, and with two on the hips, and one on each hip, and with two on the ankles, and one on each ankle, and with two on the elbows, and two on the muscles, and cauterize him on all the joints of the fingers of the hands and feet, and on every talon of his feet, and on the sockets of his hands.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And beware of the nerves which are above the talus that you do not burn those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And sometimes one cautery is applied on the bone of the penis and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the anus.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that as you apply more cauteries, it is more beneficial and more conducive; and know that the patient does not have pain in the cautery, just as the eggs do, because his body is already stupefied.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And know that the cauteries should be large or small according to the members and joints, as it is preceded by the specifications of the tools.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the cautery with flour of ground oats with honey and with the other treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Of cauterization for stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a member is paralyzed or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils and plasters, and does not heal, then you should cauterize the paralyzed member with cauteries according to the size of the member or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let your cautery enter the thickness of the tendon a little.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then cure it with ointment until it is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes a stupor is cauterized which extends to the hands and feet, and to the spines of the back, and sees the movement of the nerves which move that member, and the stupor is restored.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	Do not presume about this unless you are knowledgeable in the anatomy of the members and the exit of the nerves which move all over the body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	Of cauterization for albaras that is morphea.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When albaras is old and does not respond to any of the ointments of medicine, then you should cauterize it with a cautery, a little according to the thickness of the tendon, so that the whiteness and color of it are restored, and the color of it changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And then cure it with flour of oats and lentils with rose oil and leaves of alder, and with pigeon's blood or thrush's blood; let each be a portion and all mixed together, and then let it be bound up in a cloth and placed over the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	Chapter 50
De cauterizacio de cranc.	Of cauterization for cranc.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When a ulcer is formed and you want it to fester, then cauterize it with a cautery of circle in its circumference as it is rolled over.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle place; but for me this has not been seen, because I fear that it will be ulcerated, and I have seen it some times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is more appropriate that it should be cauterized in its circumference with a circle as we have said, or with pointed cauteries.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 51
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	Of cauterization for adubilati.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When some adubilati is delayed in maturation, and also because of the superfluousness they make that, or due to the condition of the patient, for he is old in decrepitude, of little blood, or because of the time, and you want to hasten in the maturation of adubilati; then cauterize it in its circumference with small pointed cauteries; and then let it be bound up that it will hasten in maturation.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	But if you want the piercing of it with cautery, then you ignite the cautery of which this is the form of it: and apply that to the middle place of adubilati so that it may penetrate the tendon.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery in that place which is lower, so that the body of the arm is relieved; and then cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	Of cauterization for corrodent.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrodent is a corrupting ulcer walking in the member, which corrodes that as fire eats dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore if you see that corrodent in the place which suffers cautery with fire, then you ignite small and large cauteries according to what is appropriate in that place where corrodent is.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then cauterize it all over so that you eradicate all of the corrosion and not leave any cause of it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And then let that be bound up for three days, and apply over the cauterized places a poultice of mixed oil so that the scars are all eradicated and all corruption.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then cure it with generative ointments.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if after three days the flesh does not grow and is healthy where there is no corruption, well; but if not, then repeat the cautery over that which is rotten in the places of corruption.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And corrodent is treated sometimes with sharp medicine because it is a middle place for cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	But still cautery with fire is the most efficacious remedy.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already said the cure of it with sharp medicine in the division, and therefore take that when you see it has a tendency to fester.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 53
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	Of cauterization of claws and of the others similar.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Many times it extends to the parts below the foot of the patient who is called claw, and it is a great cause, penetrating, which pierces the foot; and cauterize in those is according to two manners, therefore cauterize with fire and cauterize with water mixed with tail.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	But cauterize with fire is that you ignite the cautery bent similar to a pen of vulture, which is made of iron according to the amount which contains the claw all over, and let it be of subtle edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then apply that ignited over the claw, and then revolve your hand with the cautery in the circumference of the claw so that the cautery extends to the depth of the claw.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And let that be bound up for three days until it begins to emit arm.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Then apply a plaster made of wild mallows bruised with salt, and let the plaster remain on him for one night, for that will draw out from its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the wound with generative ointment until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not turn, and you see many times a swelling on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, then you must administer cautery with water through a cannula made of reed or iron or vulture's feather, and place that over the nail; and drop a little water into the cannula, and hold your hand there, and you revolve it all with compression of your hand, and press the edge of the cannula to the root of the nail, and draw out the water through the root of the nail; and let the patient bear the biting of the water for an hour, and then pull that away, for the nail with its roots will be drawn out.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And thus you do with all those who come to you, no matter where they are in their bodies.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then heal the pus that the roots of the nails are drawn out with ointments that generate flesh.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter 4
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Of the cautery for trembling.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When you have a tremor caused by friction on the nerve, or from fever caused by friction, or for other similar causes, then you must cauterize that with four cauteries or with five over the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra with one cautery; and cauterize in the feet of him, and on his stomach with olive oil.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the trembling of him will cease and hasten the health from the disease of friction.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 50
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Of the cautery of white spots on the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When in the body white spots appear and pustules are broken which are made from thick corrupt matter; therefore at the beginning when it appears, let that be cauterized on every head of the fistula with a subtle cautery with a branch of myrtle, the extremity of which is spread with fire; or with long-leafed nettle; or with a lenticular cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes it is cauterized at the beginning of their emission according to this manner; and they are not believed, and the superfluity is broken by doing those, and healed from those.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	But let that be done rather with evacuation by phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter 60
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Of the cautery of a flow of blood caused accidentally by incision of an artery.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Sometimes there is a flow of an artery which is cut under the skin, or under the incision of abscesses or cautery of the limb, and others like it, and that is difficult to stop.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore when it happens to anyone, then you tie it with your hand at the orifice of the artery, and place on that your index finger, which narrows that a little within so that the flow of blood is stopped under your finger, and does not come out.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then place on it olive oil cauteries few and large, by many numbers, and exhale over them so that there are many sparks.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take one small or large according to the site and the place in which the artery is broken, over that vein hasten the pus that you have stopped with your finger, and cauterize it so that that blood is bound and restricted.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you release your finger and loosen the cautery, then take another cautery tightly bound on the cauteries which are prepared in the fire, and therefore do not cease doing that again and again until the blood is restricted.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful not to burn the nerve which is there, and that another malady come on the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from an artery, then it is not possible to restrict the blood in those except by one of four ways: or by cautery as I said, or by extraction when it is not extracted, for when it is extracted, its extremities are burnt and the blood is restricted; or that it be bound with a ligature or with a band by strong compression, or that there be laid on him medicines whose virtue is to restrict the blood; and they are compressed with a compress by decent constriction.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	But he who administers decent restriction to him with bandages and compression with garments or by position of burning causes and of others like it does not confer but tar.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	But if that happens to anyone and the physician is not present or medicine, then open with your index finger over the orifice of that vein as I have said, and understand at great constriction on him until the blood is stopped from the supreme part of the artery; and on the artery let your finger not be bitten; and from over the artery let it be sprinkled with water rubbed by much rubbing so that the blood becomes congealed and engrossed; and cease doing that only when he needs cautery or medicine.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incision and piercing and opening and of phlebotomy and of sores and their likes.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter of all diseases in which cautery with fire is convenient and medicine burning, and their occasions and causes, and the instruments in which they are necessary, and we have ordered the chapters from the superficiality of the head to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And I will proceed in this chapter by that medical way so that it is alleviated for the patient, then on him who has demanded it.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before I begin that, let us understand that in this chapter is for terror that which is in the first chapter of cautery.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And for that which is in him great caution, for in the operation which is in this chapter many times there is evacuation which is by blood from which life is removed, or by sprinkling of the vein or incision on an abscess or opening of an ulcer or piercing of stone or like things.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And all those are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in their legs death comes.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I admonish you that it does not fall on you in which there is excrementation, for some times by habits of men many diseases happen.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And from them there are who go away by their disease and death comes to him, and so by the vehemence of that which finds him of his disease, and by length of his disease, and by disease it is fear which means death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And from them is he who gives to you his word and promise, you waiting for that health, and his disease is harmful.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore do not consent to him who comes to you in this manner; and your caution be greater than confidence and your rashness; and assume no cause on that unless certain science verifies it for you, and to which follows laudable success.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the cure of all your diseases of prediction and indication of him to whom is converted health, for in him is your help in acquisition of fame and memory, of praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh children, may God guide your understanding and not hide from you direction and protection, for that is in his hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And you have ordered this chapter distinguishing by chapters according to that which preceded in the chapter of cauteries, of the cure of the head into the feet, so that it may be to you lightened what you demanded of that and of which you have necessity.
Capitol primier.	Chapter first:
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Of the cure of water which is contained in the head of infants.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this sickness many times is due to the nursing and when the nurse squeezes the infant's head it becomes relieved.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes because of a hidden cause which isn't cleansed.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	But I have not seen this sickness except in infants; and to all those whom I saw it befell death, and for this reason is to me left working on them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen an infant whose head which was filled with water, and his head always swollen as much that he could not move himself because of the great size of his head, and more than the moisture increased as much that deadly fire.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this humidity either is aggregated between the skin and bone, or is aggregated below the bone over the brain.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	Because the operation on him if the humidity is between the skin and bone and the pustule is small, then you must make an incision in the middle of the head with a fissure in its breadth, and let the length of the fissure be about two inches so that the humidity may flow, and this is the form of the spatula:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And therefore if the humidity is more increased and the pustule is larger, then there are two fissures according to this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the humidity is below the bone, sign of it is that you see the comissures of the head opened and the water is squeezed when you compress it with your hand to those openings, and it isn't hidden from you.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	So that you make in the middle of the head with three fissures according to this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	and then extract all the humidity from it; and then close the fissures with bandages and plasters; and then anoint over it with wine and oil on the fifth day, and then loosen the ligature and cure the wound with tentwires and ointments, and bind up the head with equability; and feed the patient with dry food of little humidity until the member is comforted and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And is another manner of incision which consider the appearance of the size of the pustule and the collection of water, for sometimes it is more in the occipital, or in the front part, or in the right, or in the left; and therefore attend to the incision where the pustule appears and the gathering of water, and do this according to what is best possible for you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you not cut the artery and it would bring forth blood streams and kill the patient through that blood flow with evacuation of humidity.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter ii.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Of incision of the arteries which are near the ears, called hilasseysse.
Capitol segon.	Chapter second.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When due to some catarrh or phlegm to the ears or feet, and it is old, and does not confer in that the cure of the medicines, then the last cure for this is incision of those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And therefore when you want to cut those which the patient's head passes through it, and then rub the place with rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and then bind up the neck of the patient with some cloth; and then consider where pulses the vein, and the places of each upon the places which are near the ears depressed, and as much are hidden except in some men.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then mark upon the artery with a tentwire, and then cut each with the spatula of each part cut through to the bone, and let it be for the breadth of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want, insert the spatula below the artery and pierce that to the parts beneath them.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And let the length of the incision be about two inches and a half, for when some vein is cut the blood flows out with pulsating emission, which leaps forth by frequent leaps.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	But if the artery does not appear to the feel, then let you measure from the ear the quantity of the space of three inches and a half, and then mark with tentwire, and do this through to the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And that which should come out of blood is quantity of wine ounce., and strongly it comes out from him more or less, and all this is according to the quantity which appears of the strength of the patient and of the gathering of the artery from him.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then consider the wound, and therefore if remains on the bone some cause of the brain, then cut it so that it does not bring forth pustule cautery.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then bind up the wound with plasters and with ligatures of cloth, and then cure it with ointments until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter iii.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	Of extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When due to some happens emigration ancient or catarrh gotten because of humidities phlegmy and for quality in the lacerts from the temples, or gout ancient violent and similar to those, and is medicated with the manners of cure of medicine and that does not confer, then we have shown in these sicknesses extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cautery of them as we thus show.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the manner of the operation and extraction of them is that the patient passes through the temples; and understand to the artery apparent in the temple because it is shown to you by its pulse, and is hidden except in few men by violence of rubbing.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden to you, then the neck of the patient be bound up with some cloth, and then rub the place with rough cloth or evaporate the place with hot water until you appear to you the artery evidently.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then you take the spatula of which this is the form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you scorch the skin with it with facility until you come to the artery; and then you go on it gently and extract it from the parts uppermost as you have extracted it from the skin and discovered those of the tunics which are below that, all over the part.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is slender, then wrap that with the extremity of the needle, and then cut from it one part according to the quantity for which are drawn out the extremities of him and are contracted, and no blood will flow, for if not are cut they would not drive away the blood at all.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then evacuate the blood with wine ounce. in three.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is great, then let you ligature that in two places with strong thread of linen or with cords long, and do not cut him putrefaction before the solidification of the wound and bring forth flow of blood.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then cut the superfluity which is between two ligatures, and do this in that hour or another hour.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you want, cautery it with cautery within the bone with cautery knife so that they are cut through to the extremities of him, and be in place of that wound done.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And is better work unless the patient has fever or is of heated complexional for cautery is of those causes which aid to the phlegmy humours, and therefore is better in youth.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And here is the first sentence of your text to translate: "E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e apropri sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat."
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while you are working you see bleeding from the artery, then you should try to restrict that bleeding, either with a cautery, or by plugging the wound and tightening your hand around it until the bleeding stops.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if you don't have any of those available to you, then place your finger on the site of the bleeding and hold it there until the blood congeals. Then use a piece of cold water to stop the pain and tighten the wound up tightly with a bandage.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And when you are removing an artery it is best to cauterize the vein with this two-pointed cautery; after you have probed both ends and found that they are not connected, light them both until they are red hot so that as they cool down they will shrink around their edges and close off the part in between.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	This is how the cautery should be made:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And it should have two equal points.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However if it is sharper than two points, that is better, because when you press the two points into something they will close off the flesh more quickly.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	So if there is any thickness in them, it is necessary for the fire to spread into those parts and cut off the flesh more quickly.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this action is better in all actions and the most gentle.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And it should be the distance between the two points, equal to the thickness of your finger.
Capitol quart.	Chapter four:
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Of the treatment for acute and acidic wounds in the bowels.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When they are acute and acidic wounds, and it is the cause of those veins which appear on the forehead of the head, and there is no use in applying any medical treatment to them, and you see the patient's face turning red and feeling as if it was crawling with ants, and his eyelids become swollen, and his eyes damaged by the intensity of the tears, then the old treatment for these is to apply a poultice.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And you should command the patient to shave his head, and then cut three gashes in his forehead evenly spaced according to the length of his forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of one finger is two fingers: the first cut should be evenly spaced according to the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the tear ducts, and the third from the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And be careful to avoid cutting into any arteries that are on either side, and stretch your hand out along the continuation of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space between each cut is three fingers length apart.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a sponge or dry rags that you can use to soak up the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	Then insert the sponge between the two acute ends like so, and this is how you should make the cut:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	from the temple towards the second cut.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Scrape away the flesh between the two cuts with a chisel, and then push down on the cut from the middle towards the second cut.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	Then press it down and insert another tool called a scalpel, sharp on one side and blunt on the other, into the first cut again.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And hold the sharp side against the flesh attached to the bone, and the blunt side against the bone, and push it down so that it reaches the middle cut, and sever with it all the vessels that descend from the head to the bowels.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	But make sure the cut is continued past the bone, and then do the same in the middle cut towards the other cut.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And when the blood has stopped flowing as much, press out the places where the blood is congealed.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then insert some old bone into each cut, and put on a poultice made of ground up eggs in wine and oil, so that it does not develop an abscess.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	On the third day loosen the bandages and give a strong poultice of water or tea, and then treat it with basil oil and other remedies so that the wounds heal.
Capitol .v.	Chapter Five:
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	Of the treatment for wounds with a cautery and to the bowels that descend from the sides of the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When the cauteries are applied and continue, you see the patient's eyelids become swollen, and their eyes weak and painful, and an intense throbbing pain in the head, then understand from these signs that the matter and cauteries are coming from some small veins that descend from the sides of the head.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best treatment for these is to command the patient to have his forehead shaved, and then cut a single gash in the middle of his forehead, starting from the left temple and ending at the right temple, so that it reaches the bone, and stretch your hand out along the tear ducts which are swollen because of the chewing.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Soak up all the blood with a sponge or dry rags, and then pack the wound between the two lips of the cut with old bone or lint.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then press it down with a poultice made of ground up eggs in wine and oil, so that it does not develop an abscess.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you have removed that and see that the abscess has diminished, then scrape away the bone so that it starts to produce new flesh, and then treat it with an astringent remedy which causes the flesh to shrink, as if you were taking flour from wheat and gum arabic, mixing them together in equal parts, and applying this poultice on the wounds of new flesh.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter Six:
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	Of the treatment for what is cauterized in the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	All cauteries to the ears are one of four types; some are made of stone, like iron or vitriol, others from plants like celery or peas, and some are caused by something combustible, like water and wine, and they resemble each other.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And so when a stone cautery is applied to the ear or some other cause that does not form in the ear, and you see the cautery, then hold the ear to the sun, and if it seems hot, then distill something into it made of oil of violets or myrrh, and then apply the extract on it, and make the patient sneeze a few times.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	Then put on the edge of the ear some lint or wool, and stretch out the ear to either side, because many times it is torn by these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it has not been torn, then apply an extract to the cautery with a tool called a very fine curved needle; this is how it should be made:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it has been torn with a needle, then it is; and if not, then apply the extract to it with a very fine hooked needle.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if it has not been torn by that, then make a tube of wire and insert the end of the tube into the hole of the ear, and close up the opening of the tube with wax and warm oil so that there is no discharge except through the tube.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then pull out your breath with strong suction as you have seen with us.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	But if it is not removed in this manner, then take a little bit of lit charcoal or a burning brand and place it at the end of the bone and then wrap a bandage decently over that spot.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	Then insert it into the hole in the ear with ease, and dry the ear of its moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And if it is not removed with all the causes that we have recounted, then you must cut it before it becomes an abscess or ulcer.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the way to cut it is that you first numb the patient's ear with wine and then draw out the blood according to his condition, and then fold the ear between your fingers and turn it upwards, and make a small hole at the root of the ear above its gray part in the spot that has been well pinched.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And the hole should be moon-shaped so that it reaches the stone; and when you have found the stone, remove it if you can with appropriate instruments; and then close the hole quickly, and heal it until it is well.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause of the ear is one of the fats that have grown and become inflamed, then administer treatment and remove it; but if it does not obey your treatment, then take a thin spatulum according to this shape:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and use it to perform the incision of that fat which has grown in the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not do this when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and place it in a little bit, and then pull it out with pincers or with a thin instrument, or with an incision as we have said, for it is easier to remove it.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But in the water that has entered the ear if the patient uses a sneeze at the beginning, and fills his ear with an old cloth, and then spits over the ear where the water is, and if it is removed by this, it is good; but if not, then take some thin stones according to the length of your finger, heat them in the fire for a little, and let the patient insert one of these into the hole of his ear and suck with another stone over the stone that is inside the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	So do not stop this until all the water is removed.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And when the water is completely gone, take some paper or a piece of cloth, and insert one end of it into the ear and extend the other end with fire until its middle is burned.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	Then insert another piece of cloth and do this as many times as necessary until all the water is removed; and then use the straw as we have said with the stone extractor.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	But in the extraction of a bee that has entered the ear, if it is small like a fly and similar to it, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is a large thing whose cause appears in the membrane of the ear, then administer its removal with instruments and pincers, and the cause of it is usually pus from all the other causes that affect the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	But in the extraction of a worm that has grown in the ear, when you treat it as we have said in the division and in the treatment of distillation, and your treatment does not succeed, then see that you examine the ear in the sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And so if you see there any cause of the worms, then pull it out with instruments or with fine pincers; but if you see no cause, then take a straw which is narrow below and broad above, and whose shape is as follows:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the narrow end into the ear according to the amount that the patient can endure; and then suck it out with a strong suction, and do this many times until all the worms are removed.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if it does not obey your treatment, then stop up the hole around the straw with wax as we have said; then administer distillation as the ancients have practiced in the treatment of worms, and you will find this in the treatment of distillation.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your effusion with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear is done with this instrument of which the shape is as follows:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make it of silver or brass, narrow below and broad above, with a small hole in it, and flat on top.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And so be careful that it is in the cavity of the straw, where it will be necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the rod and wrap it decently at its end, and then pour oil into the cavity of the straw or suck in some herb, or whatever medicine from these into the straw — and that is in the ear —, and then insert the rod with a grip above and squeeze it with your hand until the oil is expelled into the cavity of the straw and the patient feels the oil within him.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And what has been poured into the ear has already been warmed by fire a little.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And be careful that the cause which you distill in the ear is not too hot, for ear medicines do not endure that.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	Of the treatment of pain in the ears.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Many times some children suck from their mothers' bellies and do not pierce them, and this happens in some men as well, with pain in the middle of the ear due to cold or due to a wound in that part; and this pain is sometimes caused by an obstacle in the hole of the ear, and sometimes it is in the outer parts.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which happens in the middle, which does not affect the membrane, is in the more difficult dispositions to heal.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And when you have achieved the membrane, see that you hold the ear towards the sun and examine it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And so if you see obvious swelling, open it with a thin spatula of which this is the shape:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If its end is narrow where the width is small, and one side is pointed and the other is not; and the spatula should be of two edges so that it does not injure the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the pain is due to a wound born in the ear or in its middle, then open it with fine pincers and cut it fiercely until it is entirely exposed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the pain is in the hole of the ear, then take a thin rod and heat it in the fire for a little, and then insert it into the middle of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And so if you have felt swelling with ease due to an obstruction, release the pressure of it with ease; and be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then place over the ear a bandage according to the amount of the width of the wound which you have wrapped around it; and do this for several days until you are certain of the healing of the wound; or take some cotton wool and soak it in vinegar and powder it with ground pepper and use it; and if you see that the ear is already swollen, then remove the cotton wool and replace it with another one which you have soaked in rose oil, until the ulcerated part has healed; and then treat it until it is well.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	If there is bleeding, then soak a sponge or cloth in water and place it on the wound, and use the other treatment which restricts the flow of blood, which is described in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	On the treatment of Athaizeel, which extends to the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Athaizeel, which affects the eyelids of some people with moisture, and others with dryness.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore, if you have them, take the am tenhalhas or am onci, and cut off their branches from the roots, and place it over the affected areas after crushing it.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	But if there is pain with bleeding, then you should cauterize it with a very thin anticular cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is to cut and pull them out from their roots, and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	On the treatment of grandeyssa that affects the eyelids of men.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	In many cases it occurs in the eyelids of men for some reason which is similar to grandissia in its strength and hardness, and because of this it is called grandeyssa.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an accumulation of thick humidity under and above the eyelid.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the treatment for them is that one should consider whether the grandissia is proceeding from something appearing on the eyelid and spread all over it; and the cause of this is leukemia.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore, cut a slit in it according to its width, and then dig out all of it with ease so that it comes out, and then suspend it with am onci and cut it off.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if the beginning of it is not apparent to you, but only pus that penetrates the eyelid a little at a time, then pay attention to this for any cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the wound is large, then you should sew it up; and treat it until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, you will not suffer from it because the eye restores it and the flesh grows back.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the grandissia is declining towards the inner parts of the eyelid, then cut off the surface within it, and then suspend the grandissia with am onci, another that you should dig out from its roots, and press it from all sides, and if the eyelid is cut open because of this, then it does not matter.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And after the incision, wash the eye with salted water; and treat the wound so that it heals.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	On the treatment of axcirnah above the eyelid.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Axcirnah is a disease which affects the membranes of the upper eyelid, and mostly affects children, harming those whose eyes it occurs in, causing them to close their eyes because of it.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And because of this, you will see them all the time on their faces, and they sleep with their eyes closed; and the eyelids below are wet, covered in inflammation, and an apparent protuberance is visible on their eyes; and when you press it with your fingers, you feel it inside.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And one way of treating it is for the patient to place his head in your lap, and then place a cloth on him and make him take a cold bath, and make a circle according to the amount which contains arthernach all around, and then place it over the affected area and press it with your fingers from all sides so that it becomes attached; and then cut out the middle of that humidity with a pointed instrument making an incision according to its width, and the incision should not be larger than the one made in flaubotomia.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	But in the case where you split the cord all the way so that it reaches the arcernach, for in most cases the arcernach comes about through an incision according to the shape of white grayness.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore, extract it with cloths which you have wrapped between your fingers on the outside and twisted between the right and left hand so that it is dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful not to push into the incision with the instrument so that you do not reach the eye and loosen it.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	But if you do not see arternach at the beginning of the incision, but you push into the incision with ease so that it occurs; and then extract it as we have said before; and then soak the cloths in water and wine and place them over the affected area and press them hard.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And so that it is crushed with salt and placed over the cavity of the incision so that what remains of that humidity is removed.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	But if an abscess occurs on the wound, then treat it with mild poultices until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	On ways of testing the eye.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When the eyelids of men are touched by being pressed down beneath their natural margin and worn out, then these affect the eye and cause ways of destruction of the eye which is called tactinir of the eye, and it is treated in four ways: either by cautery with fire; or by an acute medicine according to what is said before in the chapter on cautery; or tactinir is caused by incision and suturing; or through cannas as the eye doctor says.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And so that you place the patient's head in your lap; and then turn the eyelid of the eye to the left with your left hand, and if it is turned, it is good; but if not, insert a needle into the part where pus is below the eyelid, and let the needle pierce above it, and what is - near the margin of the eyelid in which the hairs are - near the hairs, and pull the fiel towards the upper parts of the eyelid, and turn that to the eye doctor.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then cut into the inner part of the eyelid below the hairs with a pointed instrument inserted through the tear gland into the smaller tear gland; and then extract the fiel and place small pieces of cotton or cloth under the eyelid, and then bandage it over the eyelid with a tent, and it should be as if there is a leaf of mirt.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	But however, it should be according to the amount of elevation of the eyelid, for that is different in men, for from those there occurs an incision of the eyelid a great quantity according to the amount by which the eyelid is softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then cut with the instrument over the two lines which you have drawn, and begin from the tear gland into the smaller tear gland.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your incision is near the natural hairs as it is the thickness of a hair.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then insert the needle in one of the two angles of the cord, and then dig it out completely, and then sew up with sutures the two lips with a thread or fine wool, and wipe away the blood, and make adhere what is superfluous of the hairs over two eyelids because of some viscous causes, if you want to do so; but if not, do not treat.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And then let the sewing of the hairs heal within three or four days, and then treat it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, let the wound heal after its sewing, and treat it with what dries it out and constricts it, for the eyelid is elevated because of the sealing of the wound and the accumulation of humors; but sewing is better. Therefore, know this as well as the antiques of taxanir.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	But nevertheless one should be concerned about the patient, and it is a good operation, and there is no fear in it.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	There is another way in the eye, and it is that you make on the eyelid a shape like a myrtle leaf, and then raise the eyelid with three separated and gathered hooks according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	But if it is not possible to do this with hooks, and it is not sutured, then take a needle with thread, insert the one end into the middle of the figure, and the other near the larger tear duct, and tie both threads together evenly, and then with these elevate your hand with an equal elevation, elevate all the lid over which it is shaped as we have recommended.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then tie the two lips of the wound together with a suture, and heal what is inside until it is well.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	But if there occurs an abscess on the incision or wound, dry out that abscess with cerotum and similar ointments, and with poultices.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And in some cases the eyelid where its skin is converted, then it is necessary for you to use that which we have said of incision; but suturing in each case is more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	To cauterize with a red hot iron is according to this form:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And it is that you convert the eyelid and split the figure within as I have recounted; and then through art make two thin cane or two astles whose length is according to the length of the eyelid and whose breadth is less than the breadth of a spatula.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already cut into the extremes of each part, where you have threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then tie each one with subtlety over where the superfluous eyelid skin is, and compress the cane of each part with a strong compression, and leave it for several days, for the lid will die through the compression and become blackened and rot inside until it falls off on its own.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	But if it is delayed, then break it with tweezers, and heal the wound inside until it is well.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Therefore when it is healed, the eyelid is elevated and the hair doesn’t poke out.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the form of two cane which you will make according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and have the quantity of length and breadth neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter .xii.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	Of the elevation of poking hairs in the eye with a needle when the hair is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When there are unnatural, hard, rough and poking hairs in the eye, then the operation in this case is that you take a thin needle and insert it into that delicate thread of cedar and lion, and then tie the extremes of it in a very subtle manner.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And let the length of the threads be the quantity of a palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then you tie another subtle thread underneath it briefly, and knot the extremes of that if you want to.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then place the patient’s head in your lap, and be near the window so that your work is revealed, for it is a subtle and minute operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle into the root of the hair which has the need for ingenuity, and make that penetrate the eyelid quickly while you extract that one above the natural hair.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the hair inside out and insert it into the eye, and let there be one or two or three hairs and not more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand with that one so that the hair is pulled out with the eye with the natural hair.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	But if it is pulled out inside-out and the hair is not extracted, you will pull out the inside-out one to the sides with the thread which you have tied around that one, so that it is extracted from the eyebrow above.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And you will wash that one with the vision of the eye, for then you will pull out the inside-out one and the thread, and let each one and close the eye, and leave the bandage for two or three days, so that the hair adheres to its place and grows on good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the hair is longer, then you tie a long one of the natural hairs, and it is elevated with that one, or let the one you have inserted be elevated in order to lengthen it, and then you elevate that one.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter .xiii.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	Of the cure of the ulcer which comes in the eyelid above.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When there is an ulcer in the eyelid, and it is contraction of the eyelid when it is contracted on one side or the other, from poor healing of the wound or from incision or cautery, and it is called leporina, and this ulceration or is natural or accidental, and it is done by healing of the wound or from incisions or cautery, or by similarity to them badly-cured.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The manner of the operation in this case is that you split that healing and separate its lips, and place it in what is between those one fold of linen thread, and tie those ones so they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And do not use curing of it from the causes which dry out and constrict; for if you do that, return to ulceration worse than never before.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use on that which softens as it is fenugreek, and moisten with the water in which are soaked fennel and aniseed, or anoint with oil of myrrh, and submerge that one in the bandage, and heal with that.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the chief point of your cure is that you pierce with all ingenuity which is not healed according to the form it was at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation which we have said is not but some rectification of ulceration that does not return the shape of the place according to what it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter .xiiii.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Of the cure of ulceration which is done in the eyelid below.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This ulceration which is done in the eyelid below, which is aptly named ulceration; and it is of one natural, another accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	But accidental is done by wound or by incision or cautery or by others similarly.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the way of the operation in this case is that you take a needle with which there are two threads, and insert it into the flesh, and make it pass from the tear duct on the left side to that on the right, so that the thread passes through both extremes of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	And then extend the flesh at the sides above with the needle and cut it with tweezers, and insert it with spatula wide.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And therefore if the shape of the eyelid returns as it should be, well and good; but if not, take the bandage and place that on the split figure, and with that convert the eyelid, and split the two incisions at the sides of the eyelid below.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And let the extremes of the two incisions be at two angles of the incision, which you have made so that they meet, and be an angle made by them when they come together.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is Greek letter: lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then stop the flesh that one by the quantity which is the width of the sharp eye below it, that one which bends the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then tie the separated parts and sew those with silk thread; and then heal those with what we have said of the soft medicines and of the poultices so that it is healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if ulceration comes by incision or suturing or cautery, then split with a flat incision over the hairs of the eyelid according as it was before.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	Then separate the clitoris between two lips as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the summary of the speech on the treatment of hernias when it is above or below, let the operation run in him according to how it is prepared in the form of hernias and that varies in many ways.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the wise artisans always prepare an engine in whatever way is possible for them to bring back the figure to its natural form, or close to it, and that patient according to what he needs of the operation and the instruments in the best dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter .xv.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Of the cure of hernias that is in the foot.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this adhesion happens to many men and it is solidified the eyelid up above with the white of the eye, and it is prohibited from the facility of movement and its natural works, therefore you must insert the end of a needle underneath the eyelid, and lift it up from there, or extend that with ointment.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	Then you insert the adhesion with thin spatula, which is not acute at its edges, having a small one that the patient is not disturbed because of the operation, and leave the spatula so it does not cut the eye with its acuteness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And your insertion should be gentle enough that it excises the adhesion with ease so that the eyelid is returned according to its natural form and all of the adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then you put in the eye salted water with which you wash it, or distill in it thyme dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a sponge, and put over the eye wool infused in white of egg, and then on the third day use binding causes so that it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter .xvi.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	Of the cure of hernias that is in the foot and it is due to cold humor.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that the nail is according to two ways, either it is nervous and it is similar to a thin hard cipack; or it is not-nervous, similar to white congelated humidity, which when iron touches it, either is cut from it or the iron is put in it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both species do not heal except from the major lacrymal gland as long as they gradually cover the sight and prohibit light and movement of the eye.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	But the way to do the incision in it is that the patient leans his head towards you, and then open the eye holes, and lift the eyelid with your hand, and then collect the nail with iron of few folds and extend that to the parts above.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and insert under the nail hair of horse or ox or cow, or similar, or strong gallbladder, or fold the end of the needle little by little and put that in the edge of the nail, and pierce that with the needle and bind it with gall the nail; and extend that to the parts above, and excise with the hair the side of the nail which covers the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And thus you follow that with the hair until its end.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then you insert the remainder in the root of the lacrymal gland with thin spatula or small tweezers, and cut the meat of the natural lacrymal gland so that by incision of it it does not receive continuous flow of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the nail with only iron extended as we have said and then it is excised with lion spatula of which this is its form:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And guard that with the lion spatula which is flat and long or with tweezers you extend the nail with spatula, with gall or with iron of few folds, by which you insert under the edge of the nail, and be careful that with the spatula it does not touch the tunica cornea and there will be in it rupture, and that the pupil is perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then the incision is put in the eye a little of salt pounded or of soda ash made of vinegar, and let it be in it until the next day, then cure that with water so that there will be healing.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot put the needle in it nor is it fixed in that then many times this specie of nail is cured with medicines and it is healed thus as eye and composed in division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to excise that then open the eye of the patient and take lion spatula of iron sharpened according to this form:
am subtilitat.	By spatula made of iron which is flat and long or with tweezers you extend the nail as we have said by thinness.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if you see that it is rarefied and withdrawn in which root there is inflammation, then distill from your mouth in the eye of soda ash made of vinegar or with white vinegar or salted water, and put a poultice on the eye until the next day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat the operation on it until everything that is of it is healed except that an ulcer is in the eye because then you will cut that and cure the ulcer at the beginning so that it is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat your operation on it until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The eminence of the meat of the lacrymal gland if it is known in the eye for great harm then let it be suspended with iron; and insert that from that one part, and do not finish the incision so that you do not incite flow of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then distill in the lacrymal white vinegar made of vinegar until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter .xvii.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	Of the cure of hernias that is in the foot and it is due to hot humor.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Sometimes in the eye of man there is born red meat and it is over-grown so that it covers the pupil, or it approaches or squeezes on the eyelids and strongly press the eyelids to the front and is assembled to bulge of marble.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	But the operation in it is that the patient leans his head towards you, and then open the eye holes of him and collect all that meat with convenient tongs for that, and grab it with a pair of forceps or with a basket; and then excise the meat at the beginning until everything is finished with the incision, and be careful of the eye that you do not cut that because of your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And let your incision be with which you insert those or with lion spatula which we have recommended in the incision of the nail or with small tweezers with which is collected ash according to that then this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Therefore when your incision is finished and all that meat is excised then fill the eye with salted water or distill in it red powder and similar to that of burning medicines, and put over the eye dry cloth wadded with white of egg so that there will be secured from ulceration.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if for some cause of nail-growing there is a wound cautery and you fear ulceration cautery then cut the eye and cure that ulcer with what it comes to the ulcer, then repeat on it operation until it is healed, and similarly make in the meat which happens in the eye of this specie.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	But nevertheless you should not move the whole treatment of that wound by natural or accidental means, using iron and not putting your hand into any of those operations until you see that member suffering that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Here is the translation for the next line:
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	Here is the translation for the next section:
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Here is the translation for that line:
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Here is the translation:
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And you shall command the patient to rest his head in your lap, and you shall suspend those veins with one or two fingers according to your judgement; and that finger should be of subtle composition according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	Or two fingers gently on a body according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And the veins should be bound with gentle forces, with gentleness, and the blood wiped away moment by moment, until you see those veins being sucked back into the wound and becoming relaxed.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be careful not to injure the wound with the spatula; and if your operation is in the afternoon facing the sun, and be steady in your operation so that you do not insert anything except those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have finished, then you shall distill in the wound head vinegar or wine so that with its sharp nature it may corrode what is sucked out of the pus.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	But if it is not possible for you to collect it all at that time, then you shall dress it with whatever alleviates his pain, and let him rest for a few days until his pain is alleviated and he is healed of the wound.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And repeat this according to how the matter requires until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of the forceps:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	Of the reduction of hernia in the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you cure hernia with cautery or sharp medicine according to how it is preceded in the narrative and it is not healed, then do not leave anything in him but split over the hernia after removing its maturity, and draw out all the moisture which is in him and the pus until the bone is exposed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And therefore when the bone is exposed and you see in it corruption or blackness, then you shall scrape it with an instrument of which this is the form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is named from a hard head, and let it be made of iron, and the head should be round like a needle which should be made pointed by filing or honed to a fine point (thus as it is in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place that on the corrupted spot of the bone, and you shall turn it between your fingers, and press your hand gently bit by bit until you know that the corruption is removed.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And this should be done several times, and then restore the place with drying and astringent causes.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Therefore if the place is consolidated and there is good flesh grown in it and the body has withdrawn from the sania and healed after 40 days, and it is not renewed and there is no hernia and no accident happens to it, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	But if not, then there should be nothing left in it except to reduce the fissure to the form of the nose, and according to this manner: and that you scrape according to bone with iron or sharp medicine, and when the bone is exposed, then you take trible according to this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	Let its outer edge be triangular, and its shank be pressed inward toward the outer edge thus.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And then place that on the bone, and let it be near the tear duct; and lengthen your hand a little from the wound, and then turn your hand with the forceps so that it penetrates all the bone, and he feels the patient through pressure as he tries to stop the wind coming out through him.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore then restore the place with astringent and drying medicines thus as it is described.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Therefore when the flesh and the place are hardened, then the matter which poured out to the sides of the foramen returns into the nose; therefore it is pus that lies heavier on the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	Of the reduction of the eminence of a wound.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the wound protrudes in its entirety and no harm or diminution happens in the bleeding, then you should lax the patient, and then you should hold him by the neck and suck out with good suction; and then place ventouse on the neck with scarification and sucking with strong suction; and then place liniment which is made of copper scale and aloe and myrrh, and then tighten the dressing over the wound with fine powders.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the manner of the powders is that you take rags of linen clothes, and each cloth be folded in four folds; and make those into powder.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then place those one over the other according to the quantity of which the wound has need.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then tighten over that with a hard cloth with strong compression; and repeat the ventouses with suction without scarification; and then stop the ventouses and let the wound rest day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if in between the ligament is softened, then you should be made to be tight.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And then stop the ligament then day and night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if you see the wound already reduced, well and good, and if not, then repeat the dressing with the powders and the compression and the ventouses until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	Of the incision of the eminence of the tunica uvorea.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is disruption in the tunica uvrea, and it is eminent and protruding out of the eyelids thus with a grain of sand, and its form is like that of a man, and you want to incision that, then the operation on it is thus as we have recommended, that you insert the needle into the root of the uvrea from the lower part toward the upper part, and then insert the other needle in which there is a double thread of the tear duct, and make that penetrate and let the first needle follow its disposition; and then incision the location of the double vein and lift with that the part of the uvrea in the circuit of the needle, and tighten that gently.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then pull out the needle and place over the wound wool infused in white vinegar and let it rest until the thread falls down with the uvrea.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then cure the wound with that which comforts that as long as the wound is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And several times gather from all sides with a circle of cloth over the wound tight incision great, and then let it be pierced by the spatula subtly so that it comes to the membrane of the wound, and let the white moisture run, and let the wound descend inside.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then tighten until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio de alconati.	Of the cure of a hernia.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This illness which is called alconati is not anything but a wound which is situated in the wound like water descending and is not that.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	But the manner of working on it is that you make the patient lean forward over the hard bench and straight, and then take his head in your hands from two parts and hold him thus so that you see the wound coming to the upper parts, and then let it be dried and not descend, and let there be light, and the patient sees the causes thus as he looks.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not go down below, know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	But if the descending is not prepared to the sanity with what we have said, then do the patient sit between their own hands and take a thin spatula and put it over the skin covering a little bit of the conjunctive membrane into the area (enter the place you want), where the sanity is spilled out.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Then when it is spilled out, then you distill in the hole water tail in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And let it be cured with other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter .XXII.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	Of the cure of water descending from the hole.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already said the species of water in the division and which it is convenient to pierce with language declaring according to health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then you should make the patient sit between their own hands on a chair and open their hole wide, then tie it shut tightly.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	Then place your left hand close to the eyelid of their eye, if the eye in which the water is the left eye; or with your right hand, if it's the right eye.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And then with your right hand take alum if the eye is left; or with your left hand if the eye is right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then place the end of alum close to the edge of the eye by the thickness of the tear in the white of the eye towards the smaller tear duct, and push alum with force and rotate your hand around it.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then penetrate into the white of the eye and you feel that alum has already reached to the cause of vision.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And so that the measure of the path of alum is of the distance from the pupil to the end of the darkness, and it is the edge of the eye; because you see with it the pupil with the vision of the eye for the clarity of the conjunctive membrane.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And then place alum in the location where the water is, and then you drag it downward another time, and therefore if the water descends at once, then you see the patient on which eye he breaks his sight at once, and alum in their eye.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then rest for a while; therefore if the water has descended, then you open that other channel before alum is pushed out again.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And then when it is dried and doesn' t descend, then you pull alum out with ease, and rotate your hand little by little around it, and then dissolve in the water a little of clear salt of gemma, and with that wash the eye inside; and then stop the eye outside with cotton or a stop made of lamb's wool infused in rose water and albumen of egg white.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	But us, who are from our time, put it on that combed with albumen of egg white.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it doesn't obey you with alum to the instrument of the eye because of its hardness — because some men have an eye which is very hard —, then take the spatula which is named albarida, of which this is the form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And then pierce with it that conjunction, and don' t push your hand into the hole too hard, and it is enough if you make a way to alum in a subtle place.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then put alum in as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And after you have completed your work, the patient should be prepared for a sleeping descent, in which he sleeps on his back in a dark room, and all movements are prohibited.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And place in nature for him so that his nature is made smooth, and don't turn his head to the right or left at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And then let him rest according to his disposition on the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then release him from that dark room and wash his eyes with warm water, and let him see some things, and then return to rest on the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And don't do this in the hour of the cure or at once the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	Before you take him away for so that the water can leave freely and gently with a little precaution.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	But if pus occurs in the eye, then open the eye on the seventh day and correct it with water that reduces the pus.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then you wash his eyes and place over his face orally so that the heat of his face rules his eye for a few days, him existing in the dark room.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And then let him walk gradually and talk with people.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in surgery not all pupils are excused from vision some channels, and then you should be careful about the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And it is already known to us from some of those who are in the Artach , and some say that made fire in Ayrac when the magdaam was perforated with which water is sucked out.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	But however I have not seen it done in our land, nor has it been read in some of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of magdaam for that which is above those who ignore them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are made of ram or of iron properly, and the extreme parts of them with this subtlety triangular, the acute extreme so is the form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter .XXIV.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	Of the cure of swollen nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose are grown diverse meats united of which is some cause which is attached to scorpion of mots feet, or to polyps, and this illness is called polypus because it resembles that foot represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And from it is swollen meat, scaly, of dusky color; and from it is that there is lion meat not of dusky color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Then in that which is in these meats not fraudulent or cankerous, you should make the patient sit between their own hands and placed in the sun, and open his nose, and push your finger in those meats.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then pull it out to the broken holes, and then you burn that which you have understood with a subtle instrument of one hole in which know all meat is removed; if from it any cause of which the incision is possible, then you do it with the ease of one of the subtle instruments.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	But if it bleeds with pus or occurs in the eye, then you place on it that which you have; or is of malignant apostemas, then cut and cauterize that in which it is cut pus and are healed the holes altogether.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then let it be drained from the nose also after the incision with wine or water or vinegar.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	But if the nose is open and from it proceeds humidity into the palate, then know that it is healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	But if the humidity does not penetrate according to that which is covered, then you know that inside it is swollen meat in the bones of the nose from which no incision has been made.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Then you see if in the one which there is any thickness, and nipple on it with fingers, and place between each nail the quantity of the finger or less, and push into the nose and enter an extremity of the needle in the nose for the ray or another cause by which it is possible to it.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And after that is done, let him breathe in so that it goes into the channels of the nose, and he breathes out over his throat, for troops look like this action do children in schools, and is a distant cause to that which wants to be done.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	Then tie the two ends of the gallbladder, one end coming out over the nose and the other going into the nose, and administer a cauterization of flesh with the nails that are in the gallbladder, and do this until you know that the flesh is cauterized at the nails of the gallbladder.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	Then extract the gallbladder and in the nose apply an abstraction of blood with a cautery, and do this for three days or more until the cautery has corroded all that is rotten in the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And at the end of the cause, insert a lead cane into the nose for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	But if you have a more effective cure, use that instead.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument for an emetic that draws oils and medicines into the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And do this with silver or brass, which should be similar to a small lamp, also with a small cavity and the spout similarly.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you want, make a closed tube like a cane, and the spout of the emetic instrument should be flat and uncovered; it should have a handle at its rear end, with which you can draw oils or waters that you want from suckable fluids and causes.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these emetics are precious: take from beaver testicles, white balsam, ginger, long pepper, scammony, asafetida, spikenard in powder a drachm each. Take them with juice of dandelions and cabbage, and let the pills be made, and one pill be tempered with aqua tegeminosa, and let it be dropped into the nose of the patient lying on his back.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	Of wounds in the ends of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Many times a wound occurs in the ends of the nose, and it increases and swells for several days until something is put on it to heal it.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And by that time you should have applied the beginning of its appearance, and you should have removed all of that.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Then apply over the site a cautery or burning medicine which is in the location of the wound.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	But if its beginning is delayed until it has become magnified, then consider whether it is suppurating, hard, of dusky color and of little feeling, then do not touch that with iron, for this suppuration often brings great harm to the person upon whom you are doing it.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the suppuration is of a painful nature and not of dusky color, and its beginning is possible in everything, then evacuate the patient and do it without fear, and treat the site with something that dries and constricts until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	Of the sewing of the nose and of the lips and of the ear when the continuity is dissolved by pus or by similar things.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when a solution of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, few confer about this operation except in some men.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when for some cause of those you consider that it is fresh pus with its blood, then join the two lips of the pus with a suture, and then cure that until it is healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of the solution of continuity are already separated and each one is made healthy, then cut each party of the visible tendon within which the blood flows.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then join the two lips with a suture and strengthen those, and over them pulverize dragon's blood and pounded vinegar, and place over the powder a pad of diaphoretic plaster, or one of the other plasters of consolida tion, and let that lie for two or three days, and then remove that plaster and change that plaster, and let it lie until the wounds by themselves are healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	But the manner of the suture is that you add the solution of continuity or with needles as we have mentioned in the suture of the belly, or add the solution of continuity with gallbladder as we have made known to you.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	Of the extraction of those causes that come in the two lips in the divided parts within.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Many times in many men in the divided parts of their lips there are some suppurations hard and resembling grass, and some of them are minor and some are major.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore you should convert the lips and cut each one of those hardnesses throughout its whole part, and then fill up the incision with powdered sage within so that the blood is constricted, and then wash it with vinegar and cure the site with something that is astringent until it is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	Of incision of the flesh joined in the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Many times there is upon the gum joined flesh which the ancients called albus, therefore you should suspend that with an ointment or have that with forceps and cut that after its root, and let the pus run or the blood.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	Then apply over the site powdered sage or other styptic or astringent powders.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then cut it secondarily, and cauterize it, for by cauterizing it will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Of extraction of teeth with iron.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When upon the surface of the teeth in the divided parts within and between the gums are joined rough, sharp, and some times black escorsions and the teeth are made green or yellow, and within the gum is seen corruption and the teeth are made black.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	Therefore you should make the patient open his mouth between his hands and push down his head toward his chest, and cut the teeth in which those escorsions appear and the causes seem like sand so that no cause remains within, and do this of the blackness and of the yellowing and of the others until they are cleansed.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Therefore if that which is in the beginning of the root is rotten, well then; but if not, then you should repeat the incision over those another day and the second and the third until it comes to its final state in whatever you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that teeth have need of many different knives with diverse shapes and figures according to the preparation for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And therefore the knife with which the tooth is cut from the divided part within is another than the knife with which it is cut between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of knives should be prepared by you as follows:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Of uprooting teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Let the tooth be cured from its pain by all means and delayed in every uprooting of it, for there is no cause that supplants its existence when it has been uprooted, for it is a sublime substance within which is an excuse in its uprooting.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	But when the patient is forced to have that tooth uprooted, you should certifiably know which is the painful tooth, for many times the pain deceives the patient and seems to be in a healthy tooth and you uproot it and then the pain does not cease until the painful and sick tooth is uprooted, for we have seen this through operation of the barbits.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore when you are certified which is the painful tooth and know it well, then cut in the circuit of the tooth with a spatula in which there is some verticity, so that it is dissolved from the gum throughout its whole division, and then maul it with your fingers or with slender forceps little by little within until you have reached it.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then pull out the teeth with force using a strong plier or instrument, and place the patient's head between your thighs so that he does not bite you, and then treat the tooth according to its position so that you do not break it or cause the patient greater pain.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And if it is not dislocated, then take one of those instruments and put it under the tooth from all sides with ease and force its removal so that it is done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is broken or worn down, then you must cover that break with a piece of cloth and grip it tightly at its base with tweezers so that it does not break when you are tightening it with pliers.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And you must open it carefully with an incision all around the gum and be very careful not to break it or tear it apart, and return to the patient so that he suffers less pain than before.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And be sure not to do what some ignorant barber-surgeons do in their foolhardiness and audacity during tooth extractions; for they do not administer what we have recommended, and many times they bring on great diseases in men which are more difficult to cure than before, and the roots of their teeth remain whole or partly intact, or they extract them with some bones of the jaw as we have often witnessed.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And then after the extraction let the mouth be washed with warm wine or vinegar and salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if it bleeds profusely as it often does, then mix some powder of alum and sprinkle it on the wound; and if that alum does not stop the bleeding, cauterize it.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the pliers and tweezers with which you pull out the tooth at first should have a long shank, a short handle, and be thick so that they do not bend when you use them to work.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And let their shanks be as short as possible so that when you grip with them they do not bend; let their shanks be short.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And let them be made of Indian iron with straight shanks and let the shanks have teeth that mesh together and grip tightly; some of their shanks are shaped like a stork's beak, which is hooked, and they grip very tightly.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the extraction of teeth and the breaking of the jaw bones.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you must extract a tooth that is broken, then you should put on the site a poultice for one or two days until the site is softened; and then insert a forceps or pliers whose ends are shaped like a stork's beak or hooked, the shape of the pliers:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	Their ends should be serrated like a file or chisel.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you do not obey my instructions with these forceps or pliers, then you should cut into the gum and expose all the flesh, and insert the instrument called an awl, which is a small lever whose shape is like this:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And let it be short with a thick shank, and not bent so that it does not break.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Then if by doing this the root is exposed, well and good; but if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the shapes: the shape of the first instrument is triangular at its shank end in which there should be some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The shape of the second instrument is that it should have a triangular and more slender end.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And now help yourself with this instrument which has two ramps whose shape is as follows:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and with other instruments which are used in tooth extractions; for the aid is made with this instrument which is shaped like a large needle, and this is its shape:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	The triangular end should be curved or cut short and have some thickness; let it not be bent so that it does not break.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And another variation on the instruments for teeth is to make them similarly to the others.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	But the clever and skilled practitioner in this art finds for himself methods according to what his experience and diverse illnesses teach him; for there are illnesses to which the ancients did not attribute or assign proper instruments because of their various shapes.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the jaw bone or any other bone is broken, or if there is pus, then let it be treated at that site with what is appropriate from the instruments and pliers we have mentioned in the extraction of tooth roots; and help yourself with an instrument whose shape is like this:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And let there be some thickness added to it little by little, and let it be bound or held in place by the mouth so that it does not slip or leak until the bone is healed; and then dress the wound with appropriate remedies for that.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a small ulcer in the bone, then scrape away that ulcer and its blackness, and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the treatment of prominent teeth above the others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth are prominent not according to their natural form because of their shape, and especially when this occurs in women, and especially in old women, then consider: if the tooth is attached to another tooth, and there is no space or room for it, then pull it out; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then you cut it down with that instrument whose shape is like this; and it is similar to a pig's tusk, and it should be made of Indian iron with a very sharp end.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And make your incision in it which you will use to cut into it in several places because of the hardness of the tooth, and that it does not affect any other teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the prominent tooth is expanded with file, then file it with an Indian iron file whose shape is like this:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And let it be all of Indian iron and very sharp; and let it have many small points like a file with which the tooth is filed little by little in several places with ease, so that no other tooth is affected and it does not break.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then line that up in its width, and cut that away with some razors.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if that tooth whose part is broken and touches the tongue, then let you file it down until the sharp edge of that fracture is filed down and smoothed, and let it be flattened so that the tongue is not cut or speech impaired.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On the restoration of broken teeth with gold or silver wire.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When the teeth have received a concussion and removal due to impact or biting, and the patient cannot chew on it, and you have treated that with astringent remedies, and your treatment has not worked, then so that they do not become loose as they are bound with gold wire and not with silver wire, for silver becomes blackened but gold does not; and let them be bound, and after several days, but gold will not darken.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And let the wire be of such thickness and coarseness according to the amount that can fit between the teeth; and the shape of the twist is that you take the wire and wind it twice around two healthy teeth, and then let it grow with two twists of the wire between two broken teeth, or if one or more, in such a way that the thread comes to the healthy tooth from the other broken tooth.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then repeat the massage in the area where you started, strengthening your hand with skill and wisdom so that there is no discomfort.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And tighten the string with which you draw the teeth roots so that it does not leak.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	Then cut the ends of the superfluous thread with forceps or tweezers, and place them in each spot with gestures, and turn them and hide them between the healthy tooth and the damaged tooth so that it does not cause harm to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	Then let that remain tight like a Roman bow.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	But if it is loose or torn, strengthen it or them with another thread in the same way at all times.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the direction of two healthy teeth and two damaged ones, thus with their threads tied:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when one or two teeth are pushed back into their sockets and have grown back as we have described, and they hurt again:
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And it does not happen unless by a skilled and wise artist.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And sometimes it is necessary to use a bone from a cow, and it is shaped like a tooth, and placed in the place where the tooth is lacking, and strengthened as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter .xxxiv.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	Of the beginning of the swelling that comes in the tongue, and prohibits speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament which comes below the tongue sometimes happens naturally or accidentally as a result of a plague which is already consolidated.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation in it is that you open the mouth of the patient, his head being in your lap; and raise his tongue, and then cut that nervous ligament according to the width by which the tongue is released from its bondage.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	But if there is any hardness or knotting in it, and it has become so because of the consolidation of plague, then you apply an unguent and cut it where you cut the ligament and the knot is dissolved.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And beware that there be no fissure in the membrane of the flesh, and that you cut through here with an incision and blood flows out.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	Then wash the trace of the incision with wine vinegar or with pure wine, or with water mixed with vinegar; and then place a cotton swab under the tongue, or a bandage which the patient keeps under his tongue every night so that nothing else is consolidated there.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	But if blood flows out, place a mixture of vitriol over the spot; but if pus flows out, then cauterize the spot with a red-hot cautery which is appropriate for that.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then let it be cured by the other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter .xxxv.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	Of the extraction of a ranula under the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes it happens under the tongue an abscess resembling a small lump, which prohibits the tongue from performing its natural functions, and when it is enlarged it fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation in this case is that you open the mouth of the patient facing the sun and examine the abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it dark or black in color, hard to which the patient does not respond with feeling, then do not touch that because it is rotten.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it is inclined towards whiteness, and there is moisture in which there is humidity, then you put an unguent on it, and cut it with a sharp blade, and cut it throughout its entire length; and if blood flows out during your operation, then you place over it a mixture of vitriol so that the blood is restrained.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then return to your work until you have finished it, after which wash it with wine vinegar and salt, and let it be cured by the other cure for that until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter .xxxvi.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	Of the extraction of an abscess from two ears and of that which is found in the gullet, and of the other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When you find in the gullet a swelling which is like glands which are similar to cotton, and they are discharged from the outside and are called two ears, and when you cure them with what we have said in the division and it is not healed, then consider if the abscess is hard, of dark color, of little feeling, then do not touch that with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of a red color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron for the flow of blood; before you remove it let that mature, and then either you will draw out that or it will burst by itself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of a white color, soft, and the root of it is fine, then that is what should be cut.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation in this case is that you consider before your operation whether the abscess has rested after being cauterized completely or if it has diminished by any lessening; and then cause the patient to sit facing the sun, and his head be in your lap, and open his mouth, and the assistant holding with his hand press down the tongue of the patient from above with a noble instrument, of which this is the form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And let it be made of silver or of copper, and let it be fine like a needle.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Then when you press down with that the tongue and it is shown to you the abscess, and put over that your iron weight, then take unguent and smear that on the root of it, and draw out that to the outer parts as much as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another thing which you draw some cause from the membranes, and then cut that with an instrument of which this is the form:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	It is like forceps except the ends of it are curved so that the orifice of each of them is in the direction of the other, being sharp, let that be made of iron hardened in vinegar.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	But if that instrument is not at hand, then cut that with a blade of which this is the form: And let it be sharp on one side, blunt on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And after you have cut one wound, cut the other according to this way of cutting, and then wash the wound of the patient with water mixed with vinegar.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if blood flows out, then wash it with water of a decoction of bark of a pomegranate or of bayberry leaves and like that of the causes of stipting within so that the flow of blood is restrained, and then let it be cured by that until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And sometimes it happens in the gullet other abscesses, and those two ears as well; and cut those according to what we have said in the cutting of two wounds equally.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And there was a woman who had an abscess which was found in the gullet of her, that abscess tended towards a dark color, with little feeling, and it had closed the gullet of her, and the woman breathed with difficulty, and already prohibited from eating and drinking water, and she was already nearing death if she did not last for one day or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had swollen so that it had formed two bumps within which poured out through two holes.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Then she cut it with a sharp blade and inserted one of the tips into that abscess, and drew out that, and tied up is from her mouth a great portion, and then she cut the other wound as we have said before, and then she closed his mouth, and pressed down his tongue, and then she smeared the unguent on that abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then she cut a great portion from it, and there flowed out from it only a little blood.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Then the bleeding of that woman stopped, and she immediately began to drink water and eat food; therefore I did not cease cutting out that boil several times over a long time, and then the boil appeared in another place where it was cut out, as it was growing.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Then I bandaged and cauterized his boil, therefore on the next day; and then I walked around and did not know what God had done to him.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 37.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On cutting out a boil when it is suppurating.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When pus comes out of the boil and it is suppurating and long, then it is called a furuncle; and if it is at the top thick and round, then it is called a bubo.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	But if it is healed with the water that we have mentioned in the previous chapter and does not respond to your treatment, and you see that suppuration continues, then be careful about cutting it, for there is danger to the patient when suppuration continues.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see it according to what I have said about its whiteness and length, then make the patient fast and press his tongue with an instrument of which process has been mentioned in the incision of two teeth, and stick it into the gum and cut that with one of the two instruments of which are spoken in the incision of two teeth.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And you must not cut it unless it is above its natural limit; for if you cut more, you will hurt his jaw.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And after the incision, use what we have recommended in the incision of two teeth, and heal it until it is cured.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the patient is afraid of having his jaw cut, then use the cauterization without fear, and the manner of the cauterization in it is only with acute water; and you must place the head of the patient in your lap, and press his tongue with the instrument we have mentioned, and take the water we have spoken of in the chapter on cauterization, and do this with a live coal, and pour that not thick nor subtle into the cavity of the instrument of which this is the form:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Let the end of it be hollow like a spoon, in which the medicine is put as in a spoon; and place the instrument with the medicine on the boil, and let the patient lean over on his side so that saliva or mucous from the mouth does not fall back into the wound.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And with your hand hold the medicine and press it onto the uvula through the space of about a half-hour until you see it blackened and subdued by the biting of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you want, take a piece of cloth and wrap it around the end of the jaw, and submerge the cloth in the medicine, and insert the jaw with the cloth into a tube as far as the jaw adheres to that tube, and do this several times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the uvula; then let it be for three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you find that the medicine needs to be repeated, then repeat it; and after the cauterization, cleanse around the uvula with a cloth dipped in water, and cleanse what is inside the mouth of the medicine, and let it be washed with soapwater, and let it be healed outside with ointment, and inside with gargles until it is cured.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this kind of cure is more safe than incision, and less painful from fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Sometimes the uvula is healed in a way that is more subtle than cauterization and incision: take gallnuts, hyssop, oregano, ruda, scilla, arabic alkanet, camomile, bromine and other herbs like them, and mix all those ingredients, or some of them, into a cake; and let the cake be cooked in a decent pot, and let there be a hole in the middle of the cake, on which is placed an instrument made of silver or iron.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And let the end be inserted into the mouth of the patient so that the steam reaches the uvula over the glottis, until the uvula becomes very foggy.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And after that repeat on it several times until it is dried up; and beware of doing this cure during the day when there is a suppuration of boils, for then it would be too much on the boil; so you must not do this.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	But if you do not have this instrument, then take a reed and tie on the end of it a cloth of hemp, so that the mouth of the patient is burned, for the cloth of hemp prohibits the steam from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this cure is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On the extraction of thorns and of what adheres in the throat and from other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Sometimes there is adhesion in the throat, or thorn of a stone or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then you must extract what is evident from those, on which the eye falls, when you press the tongue with an instrument in front of the sun, so that it is revealed to you what is in the throat.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And what is not apparent and hidden in the throat, then you must make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, for it is certain that the cause of the throat is brought up by vomiting; or that the patient licks a piece of soapwort or a leaf of lettuce, or a piece of dry bread; or that he takes a piece of dried sea sponge and chews it hard with his teeth, and then makes him vomit so that what is in the throat is extracted.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And if he takes a piece of eel and chews it, and then vomits it out, or takes an onion and chews it and vomits it out, then it is extracted.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	But if it is not extracted with the causes we have mentioned, then use an instrument made of lead in this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	Let it be thicker than a little finger, and let the end of it be hollow which you insert into his throat with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And let him raise his head up, and beware of the touching of his bones in the throat, so that it does not push it into his throat, or that he touch with his hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	But let him insert that end gently into his throat with his knowledge of the location of the cause and push it inwards, and pull out his hand with the instrument upwards, as far as it is prepared to be extracted.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	On the extraction of blood-spitting annexed to the throat.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When blood-spitting is cured with what we have mentioned in the division of the cure with medicines and does not respond, then consider after that in the throat of the patient towards the sun, for you will see that his tongue is swollen with the instrument which I have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Then if you see the blood-spitting, extract it with a small needle or with decently subtle instruments.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if you are not able to extract it with that, then take a hollow tube and insert it into the throat of the patient, and after that place in the cavity of the tube an iron needle which has been heated, and do this several times (until the blood-spitting is stopped and comes out of the throat) and let the patient abstain from water for all the day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a washcloth soaked in warm water, open their mouth with it, and wash their mouth with it; and do not give them anything to drink for one hour or so with your hand, for the blood will flow immediately when they feel the water.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	But if it is not cured with what we have recommended, then smoke the patient with camphor or assafetida using the instrument which we have recommended for smoking the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, depending on how far gone they are.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And there is another way of operating on this: that you take a vessel in which are burning coals and the vessel be covered with a covering in the middle of which there is a hole; and the end of the instrument be placed in that hole; and then let the smoking take place; and let the patient place their mouth at the end of the tube, and close their mouth so that the smoking is not wasted until you know that the smoking has reached the blood, for then the blood will flow immediately.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not work, then repeat the smoking several times, and keep the patient from drinking, and let him eat salty foods and lard, and do not give them water, and thus it is necessary that this regimen be followed.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument with which blood is drawn from the gullet when it is seen; and it is like tweezers, except that there is some curvature in it.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	And it is placed at the gullet, and its end is similar to a stork's beak, which is gloved, in which there is tightened with a thread, so that when we press any spot, it does not leak.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the sum of the discussion on ulcers and their treatment.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Ulcers are of many kinds, according to what is remembered of them in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are diverse in their penetration and section by two methods: one is by the kind of ulcer within themselves; and the other is according to what we know of their moisture.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method is according to the locations in the body where they occur, for the ulcer that occurs on the head is different from the one that occurs on the tail; and the ulcer on the fleshy location is different from the one that occurs at a joint; and each of them has its own treatment by operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And there are some ulcers which do not penetrate but rather mature the pus within them, or else they are fulfilled in themselves.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	And there are other ulcers which are not cut open unless their pus matures within them and they are fulfilled: these are the ulcers near the joints; for when an ulcer comes near a joint, its nature is prolonged through that which it affects of its parts, and corrupts the tendons or nerves of that joint, so that it causes contraction in that member, or else it affects the main member, and if you delay piercing it, it matures in the main member; or it is near the tail, therefore do not pierce it unless it is matured, lest it corrupt the parts within the tail, or unless it is made in the end of it so that it does not corrupt the parts within the tail and is prolonged to the parts within the tail, and a fistula be formed, or that it be made in its term so that it may not be healed.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	But know the time of piercing the ulcer, and then it is when it has matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And know that it has matured when there is a decrease in pain and fever, and also the lessening of heat and pulse, and the sharpening of the tip of the ulcer, and the other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And know that piercing occurs at the bottom of the pus-filled location of the ulcer and from the pus coming out of the eminence of its cure.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And piercing should always be according to the length of the flesh or body, if the ulcers are on the ends of the hands or feet, and in the places of the tendons, of the strings of the nerves, of the bowstrings; and finally, in all similar locations in which there is no reflection: for in those where there is a reflection, use piercing according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	But when the ulcer is in a fleshy location, it is better to delay piercing it until its digestion is confirmed according to its fulfillment, as we have said; for if you pierce it before that, the body of the pus within it will be prolonged and there will be much corruption, and often its lips are hardened and its depth increased.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	But some ulcers are pierced according to the breadth of the flesh or body, or according to which member is in need.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And you should administer small piercing in small ulcers, and in large ulcers great piercing and wide or many piercings according to the difference in the size of the ulcers.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And there are those in which the vein is hollowed out and has been cut, when it is done so that bread is made, and it is made in a term so that it may not be healed, just as that which occurs in pustules and blisters.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And there are those in which it is cut with three angles; and there is that in which it is cut like the leaf of the myrrh tree, just as in the ulcers of the armpits.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And there are those in which round section and moon-like section are administered to them, and they are similar to each other.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	But that one to which there is no head as in superficial ulcers, you should pierce it with superficial piercing or flat piercing only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the ulcer is large and has collected much pus, pierce it and do not be afraid to draw out all the pus in that hour; take some from it at one time, and then close up the ulcer for another day, and then take more at a greater time, and do this repeatedly until it is healed.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And especially if the patient is of a cold nature, or a woman in labor, or a small child, or an old person in decline, for the animal spirit is often resolved by the discharge of pus, and often the patient dies, and you should operate on them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Keep this chapter with great caution, and then with your piercing by which you pierce these ulcers, wash the sloughs and consider therefore whether the slough of the ulcer is small or it is a flat section, then administer the oils of lard or of rose; and if the ulcer is large and its fissures are many, then pause the nail in each crack so that they may be filled.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the ulcer a part of the vein is cut or it is hollowed out within its circuit, then you should complete it with lard fat or cloth made from linen, just as when you have drawn out pus or roots, without moisture; and strengthen that within the third day; and then process it and heal it with what you will, according to its signs.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	But if there is blood flow in the hour of your operation, then administer warm water and wine mixed with a cloth made from linen, and place that on the location of the blood flow many times.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	But if the blood flow persists, then you should administer regimen and cure, and apply powders which I have recommended in many places of this our book and in division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	But if it is in the winter time, and the location of the ulcer is the location of many nerves, then you should pour powders into wine and oil and place those on the locations.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is summer, and the areas are fleshy, then you should apply powdered herbs mixed with water and oil or wine and oil, and let this mixture rest on the affected area for three days as we have said, and then you should open the blister and clean it and apply what is suitable for its healing.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary to know about the treatment of blisters in general, but according to the method of distinction, I have already said about each type of blister and how to treat them specifically.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of the incision of blisters which come on the nape of the neck.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	On the nape of the neck, there are small blisters, and they are made up of layers of membranes which are formed; and the layers are very thin.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And from them are bumps, and from those come blisters containing humidity similar to lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And from them are those that contain humidity resembling powder, and resembling them; and from those are the ones that are stony, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the incision of all of them, and in the extraction of these there is no fear, as the extraction of these does not cause a pulse.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in the incision of these is that you should press them with an instrument, the form of which is shown below, while knowing what they contain.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	For if what it contains is humidity, then you should split it with an incision according to its length and a superficial cut according to this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And you should start the incision along the line from B to G. Then, when the humidity is discharged, you should scrape away the membrane that contains the humidity, and do not leave any cause of it behind, as returning troops will come back if anything is left behind.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	Then you should immerse the wound in Egyptian ointment if available, and if not, in water and salt; and fill it with that, and leave it for another day, as it will eat away at everything that is left of that membrane.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	Then you should apply Egyptian ointment to the wound again and again if it needs it, until you are sure that there is no cause for the membrane left; then heal the wound with ointment until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if the blister contains a fatty nodule, then you should incise it according to this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	by making an incision in the shape of a cross, and cut between the two lips of the incision and pierce it all the way through, and exert your strength in pulling out the membrane that contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	But if your pulse feels disturbed, then do what I told you at first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly, do the same with the stony blister in terms of incision and treatment as we have said; and an incision on a stony blister is lighter, as it contains less blood and humidity.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And sometimes some of these blisters occur on the nape of the neck in some people, and they do not contain humidity; the cause is that one struck an old woman on the nape of her neck and found the blister there hard, rough, white, and unable to be pierced, and if someone struck it, it bled.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But in other types of blisters on the nape of the neck, this is not the case as in the blisters that occur on children's heads due to the roots of the ears, but the incision of all of them should be a superficial cut.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And make the incision of those from the lowest part of them so that the body is separated from the lowest parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	Then heal those with what is suitable for their healing.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Of the incision of scrofula which occurs on the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	These blisters often occur on the neck, armpits, and angles of the joints; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur on the neck are often generated among them, and all scrofula of these is within its own membrane, and similarly with nodes and blisters on the head as we have described.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the nature of these scrofula is variable, as some are stony, and some contain humidity, and some are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, if you see good disposition in the touch, and the color of what is manifest is close to the color of the neck, and is spread out to all parts, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, or the veins, or the pulse, and is not deep, then you should incise it with a superficial cut from above to below from the line from G to B, and pierce it completely, and cut off all its lips as we have said in blisters on the head, and extract it little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And be more careful so that no vein or nerve is incised.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And be careful not to cut with the scalpel so that it does not touch your hand with the incision, or the patient, and do not incise what is not necessary to be incised; for if you incise a vein or pulse and prohibited from your operation, then apply powdered vitriol or other powders which stop blood flow, and tighten the wound, and leave it until the sharpness of the blister is relieved and the wound becomes soft and starts to discharge.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood has been stopped.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Then return to your operation until you have finished.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then inquire with your finger if there is any cause for the other small scrofula, so incise them and clean them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is in the root of the large scrofula vein, then you should not incise that scrofula from its roots.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	First, fold a piece of cloth tightly and place it over the blister so that you see it falling down by itself without causing harm.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	Then fill the wound with old oil which you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then heal it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you have incised that scrofula completely, then you should tie the two lips of the wound and cut off as much pus as possible so that no surplus remains.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that surplus has remained due to the size of the scrofula, then understand that you must incise its root, and pierce it and administer cauterization and what is said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And those of the scrofula that contain humidity, pierce it with a superficial incision where you see the location of its maturation, and stop the piercing from what is the lowest part of the body as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	Then administer cauterization, oil, and similarly to those, so that it eats away what is left of the cautery.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And then when you see the wound already cleaned, then heal it with generative ointment so that it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Of the incision of the pimple of the blister which occurs within the neck.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	They have tried this incision on the pimple, and we have not seen anyone in our land who it did.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of its name.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	But in men who have a fever, then the extraction of the pimple should be avoided, as long as all the veins and the major nerves of the neck are not cut off.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	But in those who have sores in the mouth or throat or two ears, when the disease is not in the brain, one must use the section of epilhot to avoid the loss that is made by piercing.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when we want to do this, we must cut the epiglottis below the three circles of the epiglottis, or four with a small section according to the width in that which is between two circles in terms of quantity; the section should be in the soft tissue, not in the cartilage, and this place is suitable for sectioning, because it is deprived of flesh and its blood vessels are light.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is fearful, one must sometimes extend the string of the larynx with an instrument, and then split the string so that it reaches the larynx, but avoid the blood vessels if for any reason you see them.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then cut the palate according to what we have recounted; and it is significant about the section of the larynx by the flame which is from that exit, having been split apart and through the absence of the voice.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And let the wound remain open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Therefore, when the time is past in which piercing is feared, sew together the two lips of the wound of the palate, and sew only to the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow within so that it may be healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Albucasis says that the sum of our speech, which we have recounted, is an explanation; that some of these sores have oppressed the larynx of the patient, and the patient has come inside to death, and his throat is choked, and someone goes to cut the epiglottis so that the patient may breathe through the wound's location by any respiration, and be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for this, I command that the wound remain open until the malice of the disease is consumed; and its malice lasts for three days; and therefore, then I command to sew up the wound, and cure that within which it may be healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen by my servants is that a servant pressed a hot iron to his throat and cut into it a part of the stalk of the lung, and I was called to his cure, and found the mucous membrane as if it were that of a corpse, and discovered the wound and found the blood which had been oozing from the wound.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore, I was confessed that she had not cut a vein nor an artery, and the wind came out of the wound, and I cured that within which the fire healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And I did not accuse the servant unless he had spoken with his voice, and then after some days he returned to the improvement of his dispositions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that in the sectioning of the epiglottis there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Of sectioning upon a sore which occurs in the exterior throat, and is called a hernia of the throat.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This apostema named hernia of the throat is a great sore according to the color of the body, and occurs in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it occurs in two ways; for it is either natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And the natural one has no means of being cured.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental one is according to two ways; of which the first is similar to fatty nodes, and the other way is similar to a sore which is made by knotting of an artery, and in that there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And let him not make presumption upon it with iron unless it is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you probe it and investigate it with the finger, and if you find it to be similar to a fatty node, and not suspended by any of the veins, then you cut it as well as the nodes, and extract that with what contains it of the membrane and bursa; and if not, then it is probed throughout its being, and the place is cured with what means of cure within so that it may be healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Of sectioning of the species of nodes.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	The nodes occur with many species, and I have already spoken of all their species in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And let him who doubts the difference between a node and an exit wound.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore I say that with an exit wound there is heat and fever and violent pains within so that the ebullition of superfluity is allayed; and it is fulfilled putrefaction when the fever, pain and heat cease.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But with a node there is no heat or fever or pain, and it contains that leon which is in the proper sac.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it is according to the color of the body, and its commencement is with a cough and it occurs thus with phlegm, whether major or minor, and they are according to two species; for some are fatty and contain humidity, and the colors of humidity are many, according to what I have spoken in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you come to the cure of a node, let him probe it and investigate it as to its commencement with an instrument which is called an intromis, according to what its form will come in the chapter which is next.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And it is the manner of investigation of sores and of all nodes; and it is that you take this instrument and insert it in the most humid place which you find in the sore, and you rotate your fingers with it little by little within so that you know that the instrument has penetrated the membrane.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And then close your hand according to the measure of the size of the sore, and extract the intromis and consider what has been oozed in its trail.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the oozing humidity has ceased, whatever its color is, then you cut it with superficial section according to what I have said in the other sores.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if from the trail of the intromis there is no oozing humidity, then know that it is fatty.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry over it with section having the form of crosses according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	in this way as you have taught him, and suspend that with hooks, and cut the membrane of all parts with facility, and guard the membrane or sac, if you can, over it, and extract that pus with the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is broken in the operation, it is not possible to extract that pus, and many times it will happen thus, and then you extract it at intervals within so that from it no rupture any cause.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	For if from it any cause does not cease completely, a little or much, the node returns according to the most.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that from it any part has ceased a little, then complete the wound of some corrosive powders and strengthen the wound, and pause over that which seat the sore cauterize, and cure that by another cure within so that it may be healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is a great node, then you cut the two lips of it and cure that with what encases.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	But if the vein is pulsating contrary to it, or not pulsating, then you cut and plug the site of the wound which is vetriol and let it be for two or three days within so that the swelling of the wound ceases and the ebullient of the blood; and then return to sectioning where it is broken from the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the forms of the instruments necessary in sectioning and piercing.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those are the forms of the intromises, and they are of three species; of which one is large, and from them is medium, and from them small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large intromiss is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The method of introducing the needle is as follows:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The method of introducing the needle is as follows:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	They are made of iron, copper, or curved extremities, decently heated so that the instrument is quickly inserted into the abscesses.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of experienced healers, and they are named Albered, and one of them is called Berid.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And they come in three varieties: large, medium, and small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the large experienced one is as follows:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the medium experienced one is as follows:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the small experienced one is as follows:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It should be used for abscesses and exit wounds and fistulas and bumps caused by bones and other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And they are made round, thick, and pointed, like large needles with which the sutures are sewn; they are made of ram's horn, or iron, or silver. And the best ones are when they are made from ram's horn.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And the experienced ones make them of black feathers, which they use to open up fistulas in the cavity where they are reflected, by their levity reflecting on those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And they come in three varieties: some are long, others medium, and others short, depending on the size of the fistula and its narrowness.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Form of the large experienced one of lead:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Form of the medium experienced one of lead:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Form of the small experienced one of lead:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the probe are of several types: some are simple, with only one curve, and they come in three varieties: large, small, and medium.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And they have hooked bodies, and they come in three varieties.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And some of them are hooked with two curves, and they come in three varieties.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And some of them have three curves, and they come in three varieties.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all of these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Form of simple hooked large:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Form of simple hooked medium:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Form of simple hooked small:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Form of hooked body large:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Form of hooked body medium:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Form of hooked body small:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Form of large hooked with two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Form of medium hooked with two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Form of small hooked with two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Form of large hooked with three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Form of medium hooked with three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Form of small hooked with three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the scalpels with which they cut and scrape the nodules and abscesses; and they come in three varieties: large, medium, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Form of large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Form of medium scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Form of small scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The extremities of those with which the incision is made are sharp, and the others are not sharp, and they are not placed in such a way that it would be made in the incision of a vein or nerve, and by these, the patient and at rest are tranquil, a little by the burning which, in turn, causes the excoriation of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of plasters, and they come in three varieties: large, medium, and small, like glasses.
La forma de magda gran:	Form of large plaster:
Forma de magda migier:	Form of medium plaster:
Forma de magda pauc:	Form of small plaster:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are made of horn and are similar to a comb with which it is made alcafol.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is in the side of the punctured tip with a hidden spatula and on that of the parts inside and outside, when you want, like combs.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spatulas, which are hidden between the fingers due to the puncturing of abscesses and do not bother the patients; and they come in three varieties: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are their forms:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of syringes with which the flow of blood is stopped, and they come in three varieties: large, medium, and small; their forms:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are made of citron wood, round with no length, and are thin.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And if these species of syringes are great, medium, and small, then they stop the flow of blood with speed in necessity, and when not at first medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use them to stop the flow of blood in any part of the body; but only in fleshy parts, like those in the limbs, and in the armpits, and in the groin, and in the breasts, and in the belly and in the groins, and like those similar to the fleshy parts.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And some of these instruments are made small like the tips of knives according to this shape; through which blood is stopped when it is done by phlebotomy, or due to incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And some are made round according to this shape:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Of the cure of women's breasts, which are like those of females.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some men's breasts are swollen due to the complement of sleep when they begin to be hairy; and then their breasts are swollen, and their breasts are like those of women, and are Roman-like, lean.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when you pierce those according to this, from the line of B. to the line of G., and then cut out the whole pouch, and fill the wound with medicine, and then close the two lips of the wound with a stitch, and heal it.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the breast sags to the sides and is softened by its weight like that of women, then it is split into two sides, with two cuts resembling a lunar figure, of which each contains the other according to the shape from line B. to line G. And then cut out the pouch, and close up the two lips of the wound with a stitch, and heal it.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision of that which you intend to pierce due to the restlessness of the patient, and due to the flow of blood, then fill the wound with a cut submerged in corrosive ointment and let it rot away, and heal that which corroded is like that of the ulcer.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	Of piercing abscesses that come from below the tip of the needle.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	Abscesses that come from below the tip of the needle are of the species of scrofula, hard, which contain a membrane that is thin.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And some contain moisture; and some that are punctured according to this lunar section: from line G. to line B. And when the pus is completely evacuated from the abscess of the gland, then you fill it with a cut short and let it rot away into the other day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And then the cut is closed and healed with convenient ointment into that, when it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess of the species of the joints is, and of scrofula, then you split it on that like that we have said in the section above scrofula with a split.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	And if the plague has spread so that it causes necrosis, then administer cauterization to him as we have already said before.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Of incisions on ulcers that occur through an artery or a vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	And if an artery is broken and the vein above it is hardened, then pustules occur; and by these signs you know that inflammation and pustule are caused by an artery or a vein: for when the pustule is caused by an artery, it is found in the lower part of the body; and when you press the pustule with your fingers, you feel that there is a pulsing in it.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is caused by a vein is roundish and raised on the surface of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And an incision on this pustule is harmful, and especially in that which is below the elbow, and in the armpits, and in the neck, and in many places of the body; and it is very large, so one should avoid its cure by cautery, and that which is in the extremities, or the head, should be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	But in that which is above caused by inflammation of the orifice of the artery, make an incision in the vein in the long direction; and then open the incision with nails, and discover the artery and the veins underneath it.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And then put an awl over it and make it penetrate to the other side, and ligature the artery with a double thread in two places — which causes that you are in great pain in the extraction of two arteries which are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And then stab the place between the two bones with a spatular instrument until the blood flows out of it, and dissolve the pustule.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then administer a cure in which pus is engendered, until the bones fall away from each other; and then cure that with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it is a pustule caused by an incision of a vein, then you must hold with your hand what you can of the pustule over the vein, and then thrust in the awl below the place which you have held with your hand, and make it penetrate; and let there be a thread doubled in two places so that you extract that from the other side, and then ligature the pustule with a good ligament according to what I have said to you about the ligament of the grape in two parts with two extremities.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	But if you fear that the thread will be extracted, then thrust in the needle below all the pustule after the incision of the first needle, and ligature your threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then dry up the pustule in its middle place so that when it is dried up what is in it will come out; and then you cut off the superfluity of the vein, and leave what is attached to it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then put dust over it which you have dipped in wine and oil, and then administer the cure which is made with hot water and ointment until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter 50 of the pustule which occurs by twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Just as pustules occur in arteries and veins, so pustules similarly occur in nerves when they occur from a blow or occur from excess work, and likewise.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is done in the places of the assistants or of the foot, or in any place in which the joints are bruised.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a serious pustule, and it resembles the color of the rest of the body, and in its major parts it has no pulse, and when it is pressed with force, the patient feels a stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not a pustule aggregated in the lower part of the body, and because of that it is below the vein, and it is bruised all over, and it does not go to the parts in front or behind.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, that which is in the joints should not be cauterized with iron, for it would certainly produce contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	But that which is on the head or forehead, open the vein with a spatular instrument.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	But if it is a small pustule, then grab it with forceps and cut it out by its roots.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then suspend it with a hook and cut it out; and then stab that, and close up the wound with a suture, and cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 51.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Of incisions on pustules which occur on the jaw, and also occur in the belly.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	It happens to some men that they have many pustules on their bellies and other parts of their bodies which are called ulcers because they resemble fungi; the roots of these are fine but the heads are large; and already their lips are wasted away, and they are found in small and also large people.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I myself have seen one, and on his belly were two pustules which were like fungi, and there was no difference between them but that they were white and fine-rooted.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And already the lips of these were turned inside out and were split, and moisture ran from them all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore, I opened those and found in one 18 inches of pus. And the other six inches.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation at its incision is that you consider whether the patient is cold and his color white, cold, of fine roots; then you open it with a spatular instrument on the side, and let there be cauterization in the fire, for much blood is expelled through the incision; and if wind comes out of the wound, cauterize it.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the patient is frightened and fearful, beware of cauterization with iron; but take a recently-made thread of lead, and ligature that pustule, the manner of which we have said before; and let it be for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And then tighten the lead thread; therefore, do not cease to tighten the large thread on the pustule until it is cut off and falls away because of its work.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	But if the pustule is of coarse roots, then in its incision there is some cause for fear and horror, and especially in that which is in the belly.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	But it is possible that you open the matrix of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then cure it until the wound is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And beware that you do not presume to open a pustule which is of dusky color, with little feeling, of light touch, for such a one is full of cancer.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And you will know by memory of scrofula.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Of cure of the eminence of the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	Eminence of the navel is caused by many causes: or by fissures of the hip which is on the belly, and its membrane or intestine according to that it goes into other ruptures; or from blood which flows out of a vein or artery as has been said before, or from constriction constricted in it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	But if it is from fissure of the hip and constriction of the membrane, then the color of the pustule is like the color of the body; and there is little pain in it, and likewise appears in various situations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is from egress of the intestine, then its situation according to that we have recounted, of more violent diversity, and when you press it with your fingers it is concealed, and then returns; and it is very strong in it, and it is magnified a lot because of the taking of a bath and vehement work.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	But if it is due to humidity, then it is a lion and will not be hidden when you touch it with your hand, nor constrained, nor crushed.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is due to blood, then these signs will appear as an ulceration turning black in color.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	But if it is due to a wound, then it is a heavy, thick and hard ulceration, and its size depends on the amount of damage.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	But if it is due to windiness, then its touch is sharp like a lion's.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation on it is that you consider whether the protrusion of the navel is due to arterial blood, or venous blood, or windiness; then you must abstain from treating it, for in that place there is fear and danger as I have taught you in the chapter where I spoke of ulcers from arteries and veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the protrusion of the navel is due to the intestine or hernia, then you must command the patient to hold his breath and be standing extended; then you touch all around the circumference of the navel, and you command him to breathe in while you press your hands against his chest, and then you encircle with a wide sponge the circumference of the navel over the area which you have marked with your touch; then extend half of the ulcer up towards its roots with a large swab; and bind it around with strong linen or ceda and the manner of binding decently.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And then open the middle of the extended ulcer towards the navel and put your finger in that opening and feel for the intestine; and if you have caught it or held it with the ligature, then you extract gently and push the intestine back into the interior of the abdomen.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have caught the hernia, then take it with a swab; and cut off the excesses of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then encircle that part, and then return to your operation; and take two needles and put in those two strong threads, and insert the two needles in the circumference which you have made around the ulcer in the shape of a cross, letting them penetrate; then tighten the ulcer in four places on the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, remove the needles and let the extended flesh fall back into place and heal by itself; or cut off what is superfluous and let it drop, then treat that with a poultice so that it may heal.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the protrusion of the navel is due to a wound in it or due to humidity, then you must hollow out the ulcer as we have said and draw out the blood or humidity which you find in it, then treat that with water so that it may be healed and consolidated.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 53.
De curacio de cranc.	On the treatment of hernia.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already said, in the division, of the species of hernia and in what manner there is a way to its cure with medicines, and that it is distinguished in it the cure with iron so that it not be ulcerated; and we have said that hernia is engendered in the mother and cautery of its cure.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients said that sometimes hernia is in a place where its eradication is possible, as of the kind which is in the breasts or in the groin and to their like parts assigned to be extracted entirely, and especially when it begins small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is old and large, you must not expect from it any better, for I have not seen any of those heal nor come to that.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation on it is, when it is assigned as we have said, that you precede and leave the patient and purge him of black bile sometimes, then you bleed him, if there is found a manifest fullness.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient with preparation in which he may be placed for operation, and then pierce through the tract claws which are suited to it; then hollow out all around with a good sharp saw without breaking any of its roots.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the blood flow, and do not extract it too gently, then squeeze out the places, and wipe away the clotted blood all over with your hand or an instrument with which it is possible to you of instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if it opposes you with clotted blood from an artery or vein, then cauterize that so that the flow of blood may cease, and then treat that with another cure so that it may be healed.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter 54.
De curacio de ydropici.	On the treatment of dropsy.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already recommended, in the division, of the species of dropsy from water, and the signs of each species, of its cure with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured with iron is nothing but the species of althitas alone, and it is not approached by iron to the species of tympany or to the species of iposarca, for that is deadly.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have treated that species of dropsy timpany with medicines and it does not confer your medicine, then consider, for if the patient already has acquired debility, or is to another malady another dropsy, as it is in him hoarseness or abdominal pain and like to those, then beware that you do not treat it with iron, for fear is over that.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	But if you see the patient in robust health, and in him is no other malady but dropsy alone, neither infant nor old, then the manner of its operation is that you lift the patient between your hands, and then press his abdomen with your hand, filling the water to the lower part of the perineum, and then take a spiny swab according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	It is of two pointed parts long, of acute extremity just as the swab; but indeed it be in him some brevity little by little, so that in the operation with that you do not pass into the intestine, and that you lead that.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider if the engendering of dropsy is from parts of the intestines, for then you must with section lengthen the navel by the quantity of three digits to the lower parts, in the right of it over the perineum.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	But if the engendering of dropsy is from malady of the liver, then your section be left of the navel by three digits.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if its engendering is from the spleen, then your section be in the right.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And beware that your section be over the side upon which the patient wants to lie so that the superfluities do not run to that place.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then pierce with the instrument all around, and insert into that section, and lift your hand with the swab between the navel and the pubis, and you squeeze that; and if it is the quantity of a fingernail or inch.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then pierce the pubis so that the swab may reach the place desired, and it is a place of water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then extract that and insert an instrument of which this is the form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	And it is like a cannula of subtle silver; it is made of silver or of brass or of lead lion, to which in the lower part of it there is a small hole, and in the sides of it there are three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and its extremity is split according to the manner of a feather, as you see:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And in the extremity of it above is an armilla, for when the instrument reaches the water, then that immediately goes up on the instrument, therefore evacuates from the water in the moment quantity, for if you evacuate from that more than you should not in the moment, the patient dies by resolution of his animal spirit, or attacks him fainting which is drawing near death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	May you evacuate that according to the quantity of his strength and according to what are to you the dispositions of the patient of the strength of his pulse and of his goodness.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	Then extract the instrument and retain the water which causes it as soon as it is retained by the cord which retains the trauma that is on the head of which and it is recommended to you that you pierce it according to that manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And repeat the instrument on another day if the patient can tolerate it, and extract a small amount of water and do that for a few days out of caution, and beware of making a mistake until the water does not break but a little.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	But if you fear for the patient and release a great quantity of water, then cure that with an incision in the sand, move it in a bath, and wait in the sun for a long time; and cure that with drying medicines until it is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize on the stomach and the liver and the gallbladder after the extraction of the water according to what I have recounted in that which is preceded.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 55:
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Of the cure of children who are born with their genitals not perforated.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Sometimes a child is born from the belly of its mother and the head of his mixture is not perforated (or it is tightly drawn or not in its place)
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, treat him with a puncture of him as soon as he is born with a very subtle spatula according to this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	Then insert into the trauma a subtle lead pin and ligature that, and hold it for three days or for four three.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when he wants to urinate, he is retained and urinates; and then return that.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not pause the lead, it is possible that the urine which goes over the location does not harm that closure.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	But he of whom the trauma is tight must be medicated with a pin of lead as we have said for many days until it is amplified.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	But those in whom the trauma is not in its place, are swollen, which cause is because of those, he who is born and the trauma is at the end of the head of the penis so that it cannot urinate to the parts within, while elevating the penis with his hand to the parts above; and there is no generation to him, because the sperm cannot arrive to the mother according to rectitude, and there is a great illness.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the manner of the operation in him is that the patient be laid on his back, and then extend the head of the penis with your left hand with vehement extraction, and insert the head of the head of the penis of the location of the foreskin with a sharp spatula as if it were an incision of a feather, or you do not cut any part so that the glans of him come to resemble the head of the penis and that the trauma falls in the middle place according to what you desire.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And beware in your operation of bleeding, for many times that happens to you; and treat him with what you stop the bleeding, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter 56:
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of whitlow which happens in the foreskin of the head of the penis and of callus and blackness and adhesion of the foreskin of the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Many times that whitlow happens in the penis and is an eminence of meat there.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And one is malignant and the other is not malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Not malignant: suspend that with a subtle hook and cut off all of it until that one is entirely removed; then place on that site immersed in Egyptian ointment; and then that, cure it with fine ointment day by day until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the whitlow is malignant of a dark colour, then you must administer cauterization after the incision of it and its reason.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	But if the whitlow is in the foreskin of the head of the penis not circumcised, and one part of the whitlow is within the foreskin and the other part is outside, then you must draw out that whitlow which is within at its beginning until it is consolidated; then you cure that defect, because when you cure both the foreskin, there is not assurance that it will not be drawn.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And it has already happened in the genitals and in the foreskin blackness and callus, then you must excavate all that which is already blackened and which wants to become rotten or which is rotten; then you line over that with wax, which is ground with bran of pomegranate peel and of nuts pounded and sifted.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	Then cure it with the other cure until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	But if bleeding ensues, then administer lunar cauterization according to this form:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	because lunar cautery is at two dispositions together, it is with bleeding and the wound when it is rotten.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the penis is eaten away and is destroyed all at once, then you must insert into the foreskin a lead cannula so that the patient urinates through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the foreskin with the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not happen but in him from whom the foreskin is uncircumcised; and when it happens by plague or by blister) you must excise it with a blunt spatula until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the penis is freed from all sides.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to separate them thoroughly, then you must excise with a spatula some part of the head of the penis and of the foreskin, and that is because the foreskin when it is subtle is easily pierced through its thinness.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	Then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a very thin ligature, which is already moistened in water rubbed so that they do not adhere to another part.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	Then let it be cured with white vitriol until it is consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter 57:
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Of the purification of children and of the cure of that which happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a cure of continence but like the other plagues; however, when it is of our operation and our will, and when its cause is properly in children, it is necessary that we assign to that a better operation and a way that loses more life than the others.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore we say that the ancients did not use circumcision on some of their free ones, because they do not use it in their laws, and it is not except that we have acquired by experience, which cause is that I have overcome the greatest part of the artisans and the midwives to use circumcision and purification with a knife and with torches; and they use for ligature wax and for incision the nail.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have already proved all these manners and not overcome a better mondification with tweezers, with wax ligature that in mondification with the nail, because many times the string escapes above it, because the string of the foreskin is at two tunics, and the tunica pulls from below, and it is very easy to another incision and secure pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And in mondification which is done by aphetaty and it is digital, of which the scissors are used, the incision of the extremity of the virile member is not secure, because very easily it goes into the trauma of it.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	But in operation with a nail, very often you break iron and corrupt your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the string of the child is short by nature, and many times it happens in such a way that there has not been necessity for mondification, and I have seen that.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	From the purification that is done with forceps and ligaments with gall, the goodness, experiment discovered to me, because the forceps are of proportional incision, therefore the acuity that is above is like the acuity that is below; and then as you press your hand so proportioned two acuities, and incise according to a comparison in one time; and compression of the gall is made with a figure containing the chain of the whip of all cut, with which there is no error at all.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the manner of the first operation is that you cause the infant to be mostly if it is of those who understand a little, that you do not make but that you tie the gall in its whip only so much, and that you leave it within another day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then cause him to be cheerful in all that manner that is possible for you of that which receives his intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then cause him to be between your hands established in preparation, and let there be no noise; and hide the forceps in your hand or under your foot, that the infant does not see those nor any of the other instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then introduce your hand to the whip of it and breathe into the chain, and draw that within that is exited the head of the whip, and then purify that of what is aggregated in it of dirtiness.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then tie the marked place with gall doubled, and then tie below that a little the second ligament, and then have your fingers and press the place of the ligament below with good retention, and incise between two ligaments.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then raise the chain slightly and separate the head of the whip; and then let the blood run little by little, for it is better; and place powder above and over the powder place cloth in which is spread mule's milk cooked in rosewater with recent oil roasted gently; and leave that within until another day; and cure that with ointment until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The form of the forceps to purification, this is their form:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	Let the one ends be blunt and the others be sharp, so that the nail of the claw is not exited, and let the length of the two acuities be like the length of two handles equally.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	But the error in purification is that the intrinsic chain exited out completely or was parted from it at the incision.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, whenever you extend that of your finger before the apposition of the place and incise that according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then pull out that with tweezers and incise that.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	But if they have passed three days, and the thing that is inflated below the whip remains, then you leave that within until the aposteme is cauterized, and cut that with ease, and incise that according to what is prepared for you.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And guard yourself from the head of the whip, for it will not hurt him.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And then cure that with what the plague is consolidated by the powders which we have recounted in the treatise of powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is incised above measure, and the parts above, that does not matter to him.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And cure that with what we have said within until it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter 58.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	Of the cure of urine retained in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is made by oppression made by stone or by blood clot, or by hernia or by tumor, and resembles those of whom we have said of the manners of cure in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved, and you see retention of him being by stone which is already in the neck of the bladder, then let the patient be bent forward over his knees.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Then press the feet of him on his back and extend his belly from the part above his back, and let the patient strain himself as much as is possible for him.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Then the neck of the bladder is constricted and there is expulsion of the stone to the parts behind, by which the urine is evacuated.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved with what we have said and the cause is made vehement upon him, then let the instrument called syringe be administered, of which this is the form: Let it be of silver and let the tube be slender, also with reed of bird's feather with slender tip in similitude of a long needle in similarity of one palm and a half, to which let the tube be slender in the head of it.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the manner of the issue of urine by that is that you take the gall doubled and tie in the extremity of it wool or linen with good ligature; and introduce the extremities of the gall into the part below the syringe, and incise with forceps if any superfluous cause of the wool, but insert it into the tube with vehemence. And then fill the syringe with oil of rose.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And cause him to sweat over the fire, and moisten the bladder of him with warm oils, and olive oil and rosewater.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then insert the syringe with ease until it reaches the root of the whip; and then fold the whip above at the part of the embelic; and then press the syringe into that; and then press that within until it reaches the bladder, and let him be bent in the position he was before, and there is not made pain according to this order, but the passing into the bend.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then extend the gall with the wool little by little, for the urine will suck the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	And then pull out that and do by cure urine, and use syringe, not cease doing that until the bladder is evacuated and the patient has ease.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter 59.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Of quality of catheterization of the bladder with pepper and with similar instruments which are in agreement to that.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When there happens in the bladder ulceration or aposteme, or blood clot in it, or is constricted herniated, and you want in that to distill waters and medicines, then let it be made with instrument which is called clampcedra, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	Unless that in the extremity of him is deafened, it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that so are three holes: two of one part, thus with respect.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the commencement is a hollow place, in which is that which is inpillied, and let it be according to quantity that oppilies him, its addition, within that when some cause is by him pulled of the humidities, is pulled, and when it is expelled, with that is pulled, and when it is expelled long, according as does clampcedra with which naphtha is in the battles of sea.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, when you want to push humidities in the bladder, insert the extremity of clampcedra in the humidity and pull with that which pushes on the parts above, for the humidity is pulled in the hollows of clampcedra.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	Then insert the extremity of clampcedra in the whip according to what we have recounted in the syringe; and then press the humidity with that which presses, for that humidity goes immediately to the bladder, and let the patient be bent over that.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	Form of the subtle catheter by which the bladder is catheterized, and it is this form:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And let it be made of silver or brass, of which the head also is like small feather, and below it tube within ligament.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And take a bladder of the animal you want to use, and place inside it the moisture you want to crystallize in the bladder, and tie that between two strong pieces of string with a double knot, and heat that moisture over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then insert the end of the crystallizer into the bladder.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	Then squeeze your hand over the bladder with the moisture, until it is completely within the patient's body, and you feel that the moisture has reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	But if you do not have a bladder available, take a piece of parchment and make a circle out of it; and pierce that all around its rim; and insert a strong needle into those holes, so that it rotates freely; and attach the circle as you would attach a tourniquet, pushing in whatever moisture, oils and waters you want.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then tie that in the instrument, and do with it as you did with the bladder, squeezing with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter 60.
De extraccio de peyra.	On the removal of stones.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already described the different kinds of stones, their treatment with medicines, and the difference between stones formed in the kidneys and those formed in the bladder, as well as their signs.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	We have also described the kind of stone that requires an operation with the hand, and cutting.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	Stones formed in the bladder itself are those which are lodged in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And these we will now describe briefly and openly.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore I say that stones formed in the bladder most often affect children; and their signs are that the urine which exits the bladder is like water in thinness, and sand appears in it; and the patient rubs his penis, and goes many times to urinate, and then is relieved; and through this they form a hole in those.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it is easier to cure in children who have reached the age of 12; and it is difficult to cure in the old.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	But in the young it is easier because of what is among them.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And if the stone is larger and its cure is more difficult, then the contrary is true.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, when we come to the cure of this, first of all let us cleanse the patient with a crystallizer which extracts everything from the slit which is in his intestines; for that slit sometimes blocks the expulsion of the stone after its examination.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then let the patient be held by his feet and shaken and beaten on his back so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, or it jumps out in some way.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then let him lie between your hands with his legs hanging down and his chest raised up, so that the bladder is completely turned upside-down.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then push it out completely.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Therefore if you feel the stone in the space, then cut him immediately.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you cannot get it out with your fingers at all, then anoint your left index finger with oil, and insert that into the patient's anus if he is a child, or the little finger if he is a fully grown young man, and push it in.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And push out the stone as it lies below your finger.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And gradually pull it into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And press on that with your finger, and expel it out through the hole where you cut him.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And order the assistant to press on the bladder with his hand; and order another assistant that with his right hand extend the testicles up above, and with his other hand push down the scrotum, in the area where you are cutting.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert a pointed piece of steel which is shaped like this: [illegible]
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	and split what is between the anus and the testicles, not in the middle place, towards the left side of the scrotum; and let the cut be made on the stone and your finger be in the anus, and let the cut be made crosswise so that the opening out is wide and the inside narrow according to how much room there is for the insertion of the stone, and not larger, for if you strongly press your finger which is in the anus towards the stone after the cut has been made, it will be driven out from its place.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that some stones have angles and edges, making their emission difficult because of this.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And some are like a lion's tooth, and are round, and their insertion is easier.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore if it is one with angles and edges, push it into the fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not driven out, then let you push on that, or press on it decently with instruments, the end of which is curved and thin, so that you push on the stone, and it does not escape from him; or insert below it a thin instrument with a curved end.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	But if you cannot push on it, then let you enlarge the cut a little, and if you see any flow of blood, bind up that firmly with a thread soaked in vinegar.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if the stone is larger, then at the beginning push your hand towards the mouth of the bladder, and then insert it in there; and then push in a little bit more there; and do likewise if they are more than two.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	But if the stone is very large, then it is ignorantly done that you insert it with a great cut, for two reasons occur to the patient: either he lingers or he receives continuous distillation of urine, because the place is not completely consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	But the assistant must expel it as soon as it has been driven out, or push on it in the fracture with forceps so that he pulls it out in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Therefore when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with cotton wool soaked in aloe and dragon' blood, and bind that firmly.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place over it a cloth steeped in oil and wine, or in rose-oil and water, so that the wound may heal quickly.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And then support the patient on his back, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when that has been loosened, wash the wound with water and oil, and then cure it with a ointment of diaphenicon and an ointment of diabazilicon until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	But if in the wound occurs an ulcerated boil and corrosion, and from that it seems as though the blood is frozen in the bladder and because of that the urine is prohibited (and that is called for the flow of blood with urine), then insert your finger in the wound and push out that blood, for if it provokes a convulsion of the bladder and putrefaction, and rot in there.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then wash the wound with wine, water and salt, and with everything that suits it for its cure until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And then in the hours of all the cure, let you apply both the thighs and adjust the medicines which are placed over the wound.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and lodged in the meat of the penis, and emission of urine is prohibited, then cure it with what you see before making the cut, for forces are applied to it through this cure; and it has already been tried and proven, and that you take a punch of iron-ore, of which this is its shape:  [illegible figure]
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	from triangular end, sharp, placed in wood.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	Then take gall, and apply it to the stone below the bladder so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	Then insert the iron into the stone, piercing it with ease until the piercing tool reaches the stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And rotate the piercing tool with your hand in the stone little by little, and you will pierce it from both sides; for the urine is immediately released.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	Then press your hand over that part of the stone which is broken and split by the urine; for it is bound up and is opened up by the urine, and the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	But if for some reason this cure is not prepared for you, then apply gall below the stone and gall above it.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	Then press upon the stone in that opening between two ligatures.
E aprop extratz aquela.	Then extract it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then untie the ligature and cleanse the clotted blood which is made in the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to have a ligature of gall below the stone except that it should not return to the bladder; and the other ligature above except that when the gall is untied the stone returns to its place and heals the wound.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for that reason when you tie the gall above it is necessary for you to lift the scrotum upwards to the upper parts or that it return backwards and heals the wound as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter 61.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	Of extraction of a stone from women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	A stone in women is seldom generated.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	But if one sees a stone in any of them then the cure for it is difficult and prohibited by many things.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is that the woman is very thin.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you do not find a woman who will undress to show her genitals if she is chaste or if she is a married woman.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that you do not find a woman who knows this art well, especially the operation with the hand.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the site of the incision on a stone in women is distant from the location of the stone so it requires a long incision and in that there is fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	But if necessity compels you to do so then know that you must take a female doctor who is well-skilled and few are found.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	But if you are deprived of that then seek a doctor who is curious and subtle or present a midwife well-versed in the diseases of women or a woman who has experience in this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	So do that and command her to do everything you order her to do from the examination of the stone at the beginning; for it is necessary that she check whether the woman is a virgin then know that she inserts her finger into the anus of her and feels the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	So if she finds it then prevent it from going below her finger and then command it to be inserted into that.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if she is not a virgin then command the midwife to insert her finger into the vagina of the patient and feel around for the stone while placing her left hand over the bladder and compressing it with good pressure.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	So if she finds it then know that she gradually pushes that down from the opening of the bladder to the parts below with the palm of her hand facing upwards so that it comes to the root of the scrotum.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	Then insert into that the tip of the thumb of the hand facing upwards over the root of the scrotum from whatever part it is stopped at and hold the stone in that part; and the finger must not be pushed back by the stone but must restrain it.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the incision should be small at first; then insert the nail over that incision and if she feels the stone then increase the incision according to the amount which she knows the stone is pushed down from there.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And know that the forms of stones are many; for they are small and large and round and long and they have bumps.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	So you know how many species there are from what you wish to indicate about what you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you see blood flowing then apply vinegar to the wound and keep it there for an hour until the blood is stopped; then return to your operation until the stone is expelled.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And prepare from yourself the instruments which are used in the extraction of stones in men so that you may be aided by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you see blood flowing and know that the discharge of blood is from the artery which is cut then you place powder over the wound and tighten it with threads and do not interfere with that; let the stone go and do not extract it for the woman will surely die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	Then heal the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	So when the keenness of the blood has ceased then after a few days when the wound is healed you return to your operation until the stone is expelled.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter 62.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Of incision on a hernia that is acrid.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	An acrid hernia is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white veil which is below the scrotum and is named veil.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And in some cases it is in the upper layer of the veil which nature prepares in the part of the scrotum so that it is split that there is another veil; and it is the veil of the testis between the white veil which we have said and it is not anything but fat.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is by weakness which occurs in the testes for the matter is poured into them and in some cases it occurs by a blow made on the testes.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture has many colours for the colour of it inclines to yellow or is blood-red or red or is black and fetid and it is what is most common.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which this accumulation of moisture is known are these: for if it is in the white veil which we have said then the lump is round declining a little to length as the shape of the testis and appears through the testis for the moisture contains it on all sides.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is in the upper veil then the lump is round at the part of the scrotum and for that reason one estimates that there is another testis.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the veil of the testes and the white veil then it falls below the sensation.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And if you wish to know the colour of the moisture then you test the colour of the moisture in the lump by testing the tip of the probe whose shape is preceded; and according to what it comes out in the trace of the probe judge what is contained within it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	So when we come to the cure of it with iron then know that we command the patient to be bath-soaked if that is possible for you and see the body of him stretched out.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	Then let it be re-dampened over the back for some cause a little more and place below it some soft cloths.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	Then stand over the left side of him and command the minister to follow on the right of him so that he extends his scrotum to one side of two leagues at the root of the testes and to the opening of the navel.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	Then take a flat lance and cut the veil of the testes from the middle part for the length within prop to the testis.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And the incision should be made according to the rules, evenly spaced from the line that separates the hair of the pubic region, so as to reach the white flesh underneath.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	Examine the wound and be careful not to cut yourself; then, with the tool you are using to examine the wound, gently scrape away at it so that you can see into its depth.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	Then pierce through the flesh full of pus with a broad incision and draw out all the pus.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate the two lips of the wound with your fingers and stretch out the flesh above them; do not touch the cord that connects the testicles, and cut through the flesh in whatever way you can manage to do so.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And cut through it in its entirety or in sections, and especially the lower part, for if you do not examine the wound carefully, there is no guarantee that the pus will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if the cord from which the pus issued is still outside its cavity at the time of your operation, then when you have finished cutting through the flesh, return it inside and sew up the two lips of the wound around the testicles, and treat it as you would any other wound, until it heals.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find that the cord is corrupted by some other disease, then cut away the vessels which are causing it to be sore, and extract the cord, and treat it as we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if the pus is concentrated in two places at once, then know that there are two hernias; therefore cut through that part according to how you cut through the other one; and if you see that it is a single operation, then perform it as such.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then you should wipe away the blood and apply wool which has been soaked in oil or rosewater into the wounds; and place another piece of wool, which has been soaked in wine and oil, over the testicles and the navel; and put on top of that folded cloths and powdered herbs, and tie it all up using a bandage formed like this:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	and there should be two pieces of cloth, which are stuffed with wool dyed red according to this shape; and the ends should be pressed together with a thread or with wet wool, and attached tightly around the waist of the undergarments, and one end should go between the buttocks from behind, and the second end should go towards the front part of the scrotum, and two ends over the patient's thighs, and the other two ends over the armpits; and all the attachments should be tightened around the waist of the undergarments.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with cauterisation instead of an incision with a knife; and you should take a thin cutting cautery and cut through the cord around the testicles, and ignite it according to our instructions so that the white flesh containing the pus is revealed, and then you should apply the cautery in the following way:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and it should resemble the Greek letter alpha.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then pierce through that flesh and ignite it until all the moisture has been driven out.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then stretch out the flesh with your fingers and scrape it with a thin cautery that is being ignited; and cut through it in whatever way you can manage to do so, until you have removed everything; and be careful that the fire does not touch the cord.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is more safe and distant from the flow of blood than an operation with an incision.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if, in the hour of the incision or in the hour of the cautery, an abscess forms, or there is a flow of blood, then treat whatever contradiction occurs to you with that cure which is fitting for it according to what has been said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the patient is afraid and does not hope for a second operation due to its horror, then administer an incision according as you have been instructed by what we have said about the signs; and it is when you are certain through these that the hernia is aqueous.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then have the patient lie on his back on any raised surface; and pierce the abscess in its lowest part with a spatula that is as long as the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And the aperture should be wide enough for all the pus to come out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And then put a bandage on it and leave it there so that the rest of the pus can run out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then treat it until the wound is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if a contradiction occurs in the flow of the pus at that moment when you pierce it: and this is not done except because the white membrane in the opening of the wound causes a contradiction and prevents the flow of the pus, then put into the wound a needle or instrument by which means the pus can be extracted from the water-pockets; or place on top of the pressure of the wound a small.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And know that the pus will return, and it will be so for several months or around a year; and when it is accumulated, then it should be pierced according to the method described above, for the patient will suffer in this way for days.
Capitol .lxiii.	CHAPTER 63.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	OF AN OPERATION ON A CARNIOUS HERNIA AND ITS TREATMENT.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in the operation on this hernia there is usually great fear due to its terrible appearance; and therefore I have seen its dismissal and its being saved by this better method.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And you should remember the operation in that and the properties of abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, I say that abscesses are born in the parts where the testicles are joined and they are caused by several reasons: or due to acute acute superfluity which is poured into the testicles, or due to a blow.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And it is according to the colour of the body, and there is no pain in it, and it is a serious abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And if it is very old, its colour will be dark, and there is no heat in it.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes it is caused by a knotting of the vessels, and due to inflammation of those parts from which the testicles have already been affected, or due to inflammation of the veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	But what is caused by inflammation of the vessels is understood by the dispersion of the abscess when you compress it with your fingers; and it should not be touched.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	But what is caused by inflammation of a vein will not be dispersed for any reason due to compression with the fingers.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is also possible that on this type an incision can be made and on the other meats; and you should cut through the cord around the testicles, and then stretch out the water-pockets above them, and extract the pus from the white flesh, and tie up the vessels, and cut through the suspension of the water-pockets in all their parts.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore if the water has already become solid, then have it extracted and cut through that.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesion for some reason in the flesh, or between what is between the vessels, then have all that adhesion removed and cut through it with a circular incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if there is flesh growing in the place of the adhesion which is behind, then cut through all that is there and extract the water as we have said above.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore when your operation is complete, then fill the wound with wool soaked in rosewater and wine; and then treat it with the other treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter LXIV.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	On the treatment of hernias that are internal.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	A hernia is an abscess wrapped in some wrapping similar to a blister with softening of the testicles, and it makes difficult movement, exercise, and ambulation for the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this illness, fear is appropriate for what precedes it.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, let us focus on the first one they mention.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And I say that you should lift the patient onto a raised platform; and then tighten the suspensory of the testicles to the lower parts; and then tie the cords of the scrotum with your fingers around the veins that are proven to be in the scrotum; and hold those other ministers that you have, and extend those with violent extension.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then insert an acute, broad lance through a transverse incision in the right side of the vessels where they are discovered.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then excise any part as we have said in the extraction of archery, which is in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then insert a needle into those in which there is internal hernia, and tie one end at the beginning of the places where there is internal hernia, and tie the other end further back in them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then insert them in the middle place through a transverse incision according to the length of the body, and extract what is accumulated from the fetid and corrupted humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then cure the ulcer with treatment of the other ulcers in which you want pus to be generated so that the vessels fall away from one of the testicles, for this is not bad.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if internal hernia occurs in all the vessels, then the testicles should be extracted or that the testicles by themselves are tied to the vessels so that they are deprived of all nourishment through the incision of the vessels, and that they wither away, or that they die by themselves.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter LXV.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	On the cure of intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is through an incision that extends inward on the abdomen from the armpits of the navel, so that loosening the intestines from that rupture enters one of the intestines.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the abdomen or from an incision in it, and these two types occur for various reasons: from a blow, or from falling, or from crying, or from lifting something heavy, or from similar causes.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of this, when it is from an extension of the abdomen, is that it occurs little by little over a long time, and does not occur suddenly, and it is an abscess swollen inside the vein because the abdomen compresses the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of this is when it is from an incision in the abdomen, because at the beginning it causes violent pain suddenly; and there is visible inflammation below the navel, and this is due to the hernia of the intestine, and the body of it at the edges outside of the abdomen.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And sometimes the intestine slips out with the membrane, and this hernia is called intestinal hernia of the scrotum.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And sometimes it is made with swelling, and sometimes there is a tear in the intestine, and here it is retained, and it is great harm to the patient, and sometimes it causes bad pain and especially when it is pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of these species of this illness, there is fear, because one must avoid the occurrence of that.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the manner of the operation of this is that you command the patient to reduce the intestine with his hand at the parts within his cavity if he obeys his returnment, and then he should be placed on his back between your hands, and lift his legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then squeeze the vein that connects the vein of the testicles at the parts above, and insert the vein of the testicles all the way through the incision; and then pierce two lips of the incision with hooks according to how you demand them to open the incision with those.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the incision according to the amount that is possible for you, then let the hernia be slipped out from that.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	Then cut away the skin around the scrotum, so that the tough white membrane of each part is exposed.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then you insert your finger into the opening around the testicle, where there is a tough white membrane between the scrotum and the testicle, and you cut away the membrane that attaches the second part to the back of the testicle.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	Then pull the skin of the scrotum away from the testicles and towards the parts in front, and hold the tough white membrane up with your left hand, and lift the testicle up by the membrane to the part where it is cut; and tell your assistant to hold the testicle up, while you cut away the membrane behind it with a complete solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And make sure that there is no cause for the intestine to be wrapped around the tough white membrane.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you find any cause in him, then you return it to his belly below.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then take a needle that has a large thread made of six threads, and insert it through the membrane behind the scrotum, which is the part that is cut; and then you pierce the extremities that protrude from the gallbladder, so that there are four threads, and then tie some of them into a cross shape on your hand; and stitch up the membrane we mentioned that is below the scrotum with strong sutures in two parts.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then wrap the ends of the threads and tie those up with strong sutures, so that none of the vessels that surround them can pass through any cause from which an abscess might develop later on.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And place the second sutures three fingers away from the first sutures; and these two sutures will leave room in the membrane below the scrotum for the testicle to swollen to the size of a finger, and you pierce the rest around according to its shape, and hold the testicle up.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then pierce the part below the scrotum where blood and pus will run out, just as we have described in what we have said before.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then apply wool soaked in oil and place it on the wound; and apply the sutures we have recommended (and sometimes the tough white membrane is cauterized where we have said to cut it, for fear of a flow of blood, which happens several times), and let the sutures fall so that they can heal by themselves.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	But if its healing is delayed, then let it be soaked in hot water and place it so that it falls down according to what we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the wound with the other treatment of wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter .lxxxvi.
De hernia ventosa.	Of a swollen hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia I have not seen anyone who has been cured by the treatment with iron.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first say that it is done just as we have recommended in the hernia that is caused by wine; which is that you sew up the vessels around the cut with ease, and then dry up the abscess in the middle of it by opening it up so that the vessels are closed off.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And heal the wound according to what we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter .lxxxvii.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Of the rupture that occurs in the intestines.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes a rupture occurs in the intestines as we have said, and the location protrudes.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And do not give the patient any cause for the intestines to become wrapped around each other; and if they do, it is very little; and return them to their original position within a few hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if time passes by with this, there is a tear in the membrane where the intestine descends into the membrane; and it happens because of the extension of the membrane which is in the intestines as we have said, which causes it to be stretched and softened, and then the location becomes abscessed and protrudes.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And its cure is by cauterization just as we have described in the narrative of it.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And sometimes it is cured by iron in this way: and the patient lies on his back between your hands, and then you dry up the location of the rupture of the abscesses that protrude with a cut according to its width, about three fingers wide.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then strengthen the tough white membrane below the scrotum so that it is exposed.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take a stick and place it on the protruding location of the membrane, and press it against the bone of the belly.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then cut the two protruding locations on the end of the membrane with a stick, and adjust them by sewing up one of those to the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then pull out the end of the stick, and do not cut into the membrane at all, nor extend the swelling, nor any other cause that you may know in the cure of intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then heal it with the cure of wounds, and when you have sewn up the threads, cleanse it and restore the wound until it is consolidated; for the membrane is contracted and the protrusion of the rupture is not adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cauterization is better in this location, for it is closer to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter .lxxviii.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	Of the softening of the scrotum.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Many times the scrotum in some men becomes softened because of the softness of the flesh that is between it, and they fail to guard against it.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore it is necessary that he who is treated in this way makes the patient lie on his back and raises his scrotum up according to its shape, and then cut off all of the softened skin on top of the natural membrane; and then sew together the two lips.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you want, cut off the excess of the softened membrane at the beginning with three or four incisions and with a firm suturing.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then sew up between the sutures; and then heal by the cure of the other wounds until it is healed and the threads fall out.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter .lxxxix.
De castracio.	Of emasculation.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that emasculation in our law is prohibited, but I have been asked to remember it in this book; and it is not necessary for me to remember it except in two ways, of which one is so that it may be in the knowledge of the doctor when he is questioned about it, who knows its cure when it occurs; and the other way is that we sometimes have a need for emasculation of other animals for our own sake, as with horses, and cows, and pigs, and similar to beasts.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore I say that emasculation is done in two ways: either by piercing, or by cutting at the incision.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	But in that which is done by piercing, the way of the operation is that we make the beast lie in water so that its testicles are softened and hang down, and that they are pierced.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take them with your hand so that they are resolute and do not protrude below the touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	But in emasculation done by cutting and incision, see that you have the beast and press the scrotum of its testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And then tie up the suspensory ligament, and cut over each orifice so that two orifices are cut through.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then sew up those which you have just now cut.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not let any cause fall upon those of the membrane, except the thin membrane which is over the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration is better, which is done by constriction, for strong constriction will leave no cause in the testicles that the animal should desire to copulate.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	Then treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter 70:
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	Of the cure for hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in men occurs in two ways: the first is when a growth appears in the space between the testicles, a kind of female glandular tissue.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And sometimes urine flows from it, from the area between the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	But in women, there is only one type: the clitoris on the vagina is like two testicles of a man, a little smaller at the entrance, and like the foreskin of a man, and two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the cure is in three ways: two from men and one from women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is necessary to cut out the tight flesh so that the moisture of that flows out, and then cure that with the cure for other wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second type of men from which urine flows and is located in the space between the testicles, there is neither cure nor operation for it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 71:
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	Of an abnormal growth and突出flesh from causes in women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	A mole is a growth on natural causes that is tightly bound and is caused by constriction, and in some women it spreads like it does in men and affects coitus.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Therefore, if you have an excess of moles, cut them with your hand or with a pair of scissors.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not cut all the way through, especially at the root of the hair, lest it cause bleeding.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	Then cure that with the cure for wounds until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	But a growth is flesh that grows in the womb of the mother and fills it up, and often appears at the entrance like a tail; therefore, if we cut it as we would a mole, then we should cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter 72:
De curacio de alratica.	Of the cure for hernia.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	A hernia is when the clitoris of a woman is not perforated or has a small hole in it.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it can be natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is due to an injury that preceded it, and it is caused by tightly bound flesh or a thin membrane or membrane.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it occurs in the area of the womb or on the ribs or the upper abdomen or lower abdomen, and it is prohibited from coitus and pregnancy and menstruation, and often prohibits urination.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the diagnosis of it is made by examination of the midwife if the swelling is obvious, or if not obvious then you should touch it with your fingers or the palm of your hand.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if the swelling is due to a thin membrane and is close to both labia, then you should cut and tear it apart.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And you shall pause over both labia with your fingers, and then pause the tips of your fingers against the flesh on both sides.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And let the woman be on her back with her legs extended and spread the two labia with force so that the thin membrane is torn and the swelling is opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take wool and soak it in oil and place it over the wound, and bind it with a bandage every day so that the wound does not close up again.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	But if the membrane is thick and strong, then you should cut it with a sharp knife or with the blade of a myrtle twig.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	But if the swelling is due to flesh, then suspend it with a pair of scissors and cut it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And you shall have the medicines that stop bleeding without biting, like astringents and dragon's blood and honey, bound with egg white.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a wide leaden bandage so that the wound does not heal quickly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And let her keep it for several days and administer warm water.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	Then it will be healed with the other cure of consolidation until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes they occur in the womb due to the birth of other flesh, and then you should cut it according to this manner.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	But if it is due to scrofula and the scrofula is not caused by any contrary condition, then do not use iron in any way.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter 73:
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Of the cure for hemorrhoids and of a tail and of red bouton that occur in the clitoris of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are an appearance of the openings of many veins from which they flow continuously, and with age hemorrhoids grow larger.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already written in the division of those and their signs, and said thus those that received cure and those who did not receive cure.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and theyls when they are in the area of the womb and do not appear to be caused by feeling, then in those there should not be cure with iron.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those which are in the openings of the womb over which there is sensation, they are to be cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And let the woman be in a sitting position and then extend it with the fingers or with rough cloth, and cut it at the roots.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then sprinkle over it some of the powdered iron without biting, like cassia and similar to those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then let her walk for an hour, and then place that in tepid water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the bleeding continues, then let her drink a decoction of sumac and myrobalan and pomegranate rinds and similar things.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take wheat flour and cook that with honey and bitter wine and make a plaster of it and place it over her abdomen.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the bleeding is scanty, let it be; but if not, let two leeches adhere to her breasts and to the nipples their incision.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take wool and soak it in the juice of henbane or in the juice of henna or in the juice of walnut and in bitter wine, and let the wound be bound with it until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	But if the tail is of rough texture, then you should cut it as I have said in the previous part.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And cure that until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter 74:
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Of accidental piercing of the clitoris.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Many types of scrofula occur in the womb, like a hard scrofula and scrofula with teeth and an ulcerous one and suppurating and with scabs and abscesses and hemorrhoids and others.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already written about these illnesses and their signs and their cures in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And let you listen in this treatise of scrofula caut which appears in the womb when the scrofula is caused by cold humors, and if you want to know in what manner its operation is done with iron.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Therefore consider whether the pain of the scrofula in its beginning is acute with percussion and phlegm and fever, and if it has a burning sensation and if you feel that over it, then do not pierce it, and cure it with what helps in preventing the acuteness of the accidents.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And then you must make the woman lie down on a bed that has two pillows; recline on her back and straighten her feet to the lower part of her belly, let her thighs be spread apart, place her arms below her ears, and tie each limb to what is convenient.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Then the midwife should stand on the right side and administer the instrument with which the opening of the uterus is dilated, the shape of which will depend on the individual case.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And when you want to administer this instrument, place your thumb on the uterus of the woman, and what enters the uterus from the instrument should not be larger than the uterus itself and lead the patient.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	But if the instrument is larger than the opening of the uterus, then you should apply powder to the tissue of the opening of the uterus so that the insertion of any instrument into the uterus is prohibited.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And you should apply the grease that runs along the instrument from above, and the person administering the instrument should turn the grease within as the opening of the uterus is dilated.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the fetus appears, and is touched by hand and becomes soft, then you should dry its head with a sponge on one side.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the placenta is delivered, then you should place a sponge soaked in rose oil or oil with some styptic in the wound and place the calcium in the incision in the uterus.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And after delivering the placenta, place clean wool soaked in water over the uterus, and in which are crushed mallows.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then it should be healed after two days with ointment that is suitable for this purpose until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And sometimes the uterus and wound are washed with water and honey, and then with water in which is crushed rhubarb or long pepper, and then return to the ointment.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is deep in the uterus, then you should be prohibited from curing it with iron, but treat that as we have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter .lxxv.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives how to treat unborn babies when they are born according to an unnatural shape.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	It is necessary that the midwife know at the beginning the shape of natural childbirth by its signs, and it is that when you see the woman express herself from the lower parts and desire to breathe the air, and over that is what is above her, and hastens the ejection of the baby, then you know that this birth is according to a natural shape, and the ejection of it is over his head, and the second one with that or suspended or hanging from the umbilical cord.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore when you see these signs, then the belly of her should be compressed so that the embryo descends gently, when it descends over his head, then the second one comes after him, and is cleaned from those superfluities with good cleaning.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	But that which is different from this birth is unnatural and blameworthy, for when the baby exits over its feet and the body of her exits before her head and her feet, and her hand, or at her leg. or the head of her exits and her hand, or at her belly, and strongly it is turned on his neck, and similar to the shapes of her blameworthy.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	It is necessary that the midwife be wise and subtle in all those causes, and that she guard against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And you should show all the figures of these, and what skill is in these so that it be signified by that and be established on that.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the baby exits over his head by natural effort, and he is violent on the woman and the delivery for her is difficult, then you should make him cease, or that the women hold him, and evaporate the heat from him with fenugreek powder and with moist oils.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	Then the midwife should insert her finger with a small sponge and split it with that the second one, or dry her with her fingernail within so that it removes what is in her of moisture.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And compress the belly of the woman so that the fetus exits.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	But if it does not exit, then you should smear the woman with a poultice of pith and a poultice of fenugreek with chamelee.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And then command him, the one who is compressing, that she be pressed and make her sneeze with some medicine; and take his mouth and nose for an hour, for the fetus will exit immediately.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if both hands of the fetus are exited at the beginning, then you should reduce those with little ease little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	But if it does not obey the insertion, then place the woman on a bed and lift her feet up, and then shake the bed gently so that she doesn't fall because of the shaking.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the hands are not bent back and the fetus is dead, then insert those and pull the limbs of the fetus or tie the body to his hand with a cloth and pull that equally, for he will exit immediately.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	Of the ejection of the embryo over its feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the fetus exits over his feet, then you should push those up on him, and then turn the fetus gently, and then grab one of his feet and pull those gently little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	But when he exits into the thighs, then you command him to expel, and make her sneeze with medicine, for he will exit if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not exited with what we have recommended, then you should return the fetus little by little to how you place that according to a natural shape, for he will exit immediately with gentle ejection.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is prohibited by all that we have recommended, then take a poultice of mallows and dissolved gum, and beat them all in the mortar with good beating, and apply it to what the heat of the woman is, at the bottom of her belly.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	Then make her sweat in warm water so that she attains the hippocratic crisis.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when you see that his lower parts are loosened, then you should give him a fumigation of myrrh and place that below him.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when she has been given the fumigation for an hour, then make her cease on a bed, and then make her sneeze and open her mouth, and lift that, and compress the lower part of her belly gently, for the fetus will exit immediately.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Ejection of the fetus over his ears and his hands.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the fetus exits according to this shape, then you should insert his hands little by little; and then the woman will be bent over on her chest, and his feet dangling down, and those will rest on the ground, and complete his hands.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	Then compress the belly of him gently little by little, and then pull what is below his feet from the armpits so that it is prepared in the part lower down.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the fetus is not exited, then take his feet and move those violently, and then compress what is above the hips little by little so that the fetus can reach the parts above.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	Then insert his hands and turn the fetus gently little by little, and command the woman to expel so that the fetus is exited.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	The feet hang down latitude-wise from one of his hands.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Let him try to pull it back with his hand; but if he cannot, then let the woman stand up and walk around.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if she cannot walk then let her lie down on the bed and hit her thighs with a violent blow, and administer poultices which have been moistened with mucilage.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the child has been delivered then let her sit up and work on pulling back the hand; and straighten out the feet according to their natural shape; make the woman sneeze and order him to press himself in until he is completely expelled.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	The child is hanging over her mother's shoulder, with his hands and the surface of his body spread out.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	That the midwife should have the hand of the child and gradually turn him over little by little; and that this is made easier.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is and how much it is wrapped up, then place over the navel of the child that which we have recommended of oil and mucilage.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And then command him to suckle little by little and when you have done that let her lie down on one side and command him to be pressed in; and make the woman sneeze with some medicine.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The preparation of the exit of the fetus is over the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When they are going to be horrified by the mother according to this method, consider and then insert your finger inside so that it is evacuated of moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the child is suspended over the face and neck, then insert your finger into the navel so that he is not retained and delayed.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And then press the child towards the parts inside as you pause that according to what the midwife wants; and order the woman to press herself in several times and he will be expelled easily with the exit hanging down, God willing.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The exit of twins or many fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that twins are often born, and sometimes three or four, but that is strange and difficult; but they are caused by nature and do not live.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And count those, now that they are multiplied, one second, and they are separated by the placenta; distinguish between them in the umbilical cord of each of them. And sometimes they are expelled thus with an easy natural exit, and sometimes with an exit not to be laughed at as we have recommended.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if they are difficult to deliver and arrive at that to which we have said about the non-natural figures, then you cure them thus as we have recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is subtle and does what she does with facility and subtlety, and with tardiness, and it is worked on according to all the figure as it is prepared for him by bringing about health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remembrance of that which is formed in the womb from embryos and abortions.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Sometimes they are formed in the womb as one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even ten, and I have indeed seen that a woman who aborts may have six, and another ten of them, the cause of which was discovered by the glorious wise ones through measurement.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all that being said that it should be in the science of the midwife how strong they are at that small thing and then pause at that with which she does that.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter .lxxvi.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On the extraction of the child when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you treat the dead child with what we have said in the division of medicine and it is not expelled out, and you must use incision with the hand; then consider if the woman is of healthy nature and has none of the accidents by which she is thought to be in danger of loss.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then let the woman lie on her back on her side with her head inclined down and her thighs raised up.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the minister should hold that in two parts or be tied in the bed so that the body of the child does not extend due to the extraction of the child.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then you moisten the mouth of the mother with oiled and moistened mucilage of altaea, and of fenugreek, and of linseed.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And then the midwife applies her hand with those oils and mucilages, and then inserts her hand with facility in the mother, and then encloses her hand around the place where the nails are in the child.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And convenient places for that: then consider if the child is prepared to descend over his head; and then you place the nails in his hollows or in the neck, or in the mouth, or on the palate, or under the beard, or in the furcula, or in places near the ribs, or under the armpits.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	But if the descent is over his feet then in the sole of the foot, or in the middle of the back.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And have the nail with the right hand and pause the curve of it in that place which is between the fingers of the left hand, and insert the hand with facility and place the nail in some of those places which we have said, so that he comes to the desired cause.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then pause and place in the opposition of him another nail, or the third if it is necessary, so that there is an attraction alike, and not an extension according to its uprightness only.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And the hand is stretched out to all parts so that the exit of him is drawn away just as it is done in teeth extraction.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And let the extension be made smooth in that which is between them so that what is retained is released; and if any part of him is retained, then let the midwife moisten his fingers with oil and insert that medicine and turn him around so that he who is retained is released.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Then if the exit of the child is drawn out, then the nails are transferred to another place where there is an opening; and do that so that all the child is expelled.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if the hand is drawn out in front of the other and it is not possible to reduce that by the contraction of him, then let the cloth be wrapped around that; and then extract that so that all is expelled, and insert that or in the joint of the hand or in the armpit.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And thus you do in the other hand and in both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	But if the head of the child is large, or there happens to him contraction in the exit, or it is in his head tightly bound, then let the midwife insert between his fingers aspidium spinosum and split the head and extract the water, or gouge that with an instrument which is named “alundat”, the form of which will come from the forms of other instruments in the chapter which is next.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And do likewise if the child is of a large head by nature: and then let that be inserted with an instrument, or that be taken up with an alundum just as we have said; and then extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is drawn out and is bound because of the furcula, then it is split so that the moisture which is in the feet is poured out.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	But if he is not complicated nor obstinate against exit, then you insert the head just as you can.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the insides of the abdomen are pustular or are edematous, then you must pierce that which allows the moisture inside to flow out.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	But if the pain is in their feet, then the attraction is slight and the direction towards the mouth of the mother is also slight.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	But if it is constricted from the abdomen to the feet, then you must extract that with a cloth which you have wrapped around your hand, and split the abdomen and the feet so that what is inside flows out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	But if the other members are cut off and the head is turned, then the midwife should insert her left hand; but if the mouth of the mother is open, then she should insert her hand into the anus, surround that with her hand, and draw that towards the mouth of the mother, and then insert a finger or two inside it and draw it out with those.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the mother is constricted by pustular heat which comes from within, then you must not put anything in there; instead, administer infusions of moist, fatty causes.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And give ointments; and follow the patient with waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if it is in their side, then if possible, it should be sutured; and what we said about the living fetus should also be administered.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, then it should be incised with a sharp object and extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And make sure to leave no cause inside the womb.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And once you have completed all of your operations, then administer what we said about the treatment in the pustular heat which comes from within the mother.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if bleeding occurs, then use astringent waters and administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I once saw a woman whose belly contained a dead fetus, and inside that was another fetus alive, and the other was a dead fire.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	A long time afterwards, an abscess appeared in her womb; and something inside became swollen so that the heat opened up and began to vomit fire.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called to heal it, and I treated her for a long time, yet the wound did not heal.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I applied to it some strong-attracting ointments, and extracted an os from it, and then after a few days, another; and I was very astonished, for there are no bones in the belly.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And so I thought that they were bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then I opened the wound and extracted from her many bones; the woman remained in the same disposition, and she lived like this for a long time, vomiting fire occasionally.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I did not consider this strange, for there is knowledge and aid in this so that the doctor with his hands can administer a cure.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of instruments which are necessary to extract the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of the incision by which the mother is opened:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of the string which holds the lips together, to this joining there are two virtues at both ends of two strings.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	But this virtue must be more subtle than the string, and it should be made either from gut or from wood-pulp.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And each wood should be as thick as two fingers and the width of both ends of the strings is one finger; and the length of each is half a palm, and in the middle of the strings there are two joints of that wood, which are already tied together, the length of each is about a palm and a little more, and the width of each is about two fingers or a little more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additions should be inserted into the mother's mouth so that she is opened by them when you turn the two prescribed virtues.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Other similar form, but more subtle and lighter:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	It should be made of gut or wood-pulp according to the appearance of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	But at the end of it there should be two additions like pliers, and the length of each addition is about a palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the mother with them, then you should make her lie on her back, opening what is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then open your hand with the instrument like you do with forceps, according to the amount that you want of the opening of the mother' mouth so that the midwife can do what she wants.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of the incision which the ancients described:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of the impulsion by which the fetus is pushed:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Form of the incision by which the large head is cut
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is like forceps whose teeth are in the end, like this, and sometimes an incision is made long like this with forceps, like this, whose teeth are like the teeth of a saw with which it is cut and incised.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of the small incision:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of a nail having one spike:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of a nail having two spikes:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps whose teeth close to cut the head of the fetus:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Form of a spatula having two ends by which the head is cut:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two wide spatulas:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments are exercised, and when they are more numerous and prepared by the artisans, it is easier for them to operate and better for men because of their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And you must have those instruments, for the necessity of them is inexcusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	Of extraction of the placenta:
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the placenta is retained after childbirth, then you must command the midwife to hold her heel, and then make her sneeze with a handkerchief, and press your hand over her mouth and nose, and if it comes out through that, good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then take a jar and pierce a hole in its lid, and place herbs which burn the mouth of the mother, like calamus and rue and anise and camomile and aromatic myrrh and cassia wood and santal wood.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All of these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the jar, and place that over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then place a tube of reed in the mother's mouth, and hold it there so that the vapor goes into the cavity of the mother.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then make her sneeze as we said before, and let the placenta come out with velocity.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	But if this treatment is applied and it has not worked, then command the midwife to submerge her left hand in sesame oil or in myrrh milk, and then insert that into the vagina and press with it the placenta, and when she has found the placenta, extract it little by little according to how the mother does not suffer a violent attraction.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	After that let it be turned to the right and left side with facility.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then let it be adjusted in the amount of attraction, for she will obey and contract from adhesion.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mother' mouth is constricted, we have recommended the cure with snuffing and with medicine from the jar with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	But if it is not eliminated with all the causes we have mentioned, then beware of over-exerting yourself in an attempt to draw it out, but rather ensure that what comes out of the mouth and into the mother's breast goes to the woman's thigh; then anoint the area with ointment and tetrachemical remedy. For this will cause it to rot in a few days, become dissolved, and be eliminated.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	But when it rots, a bad odor rises to the head and stomach, and that hurts the patient; so make sure to administer sub-fomentation and suitable remedies for this.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	But some of the Ancients have already experimented with sub-fomentation using nasea and dry figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Here is a way to use the instrument by which the woman is sub-fomentated because of the retention of menses and the secondina:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It should be made of glass or copper.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And the narrow end should be placed in the vagina and the wider end over the fire; then the sub-fomentation should be placed over the embers of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And let that which is within be consumed by the sub-fomentation and repeat another [dosage].
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	For the treatment of the anus of a non-perforated infant:
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Most newborn infants and their anuses are not perforated; they have thin and elastic skin.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Therefore, the midwife should use her finger to perforate that thin skin; and if not, perforate it with a sharp spatula, and beware of touching the clitoris.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	Then place wool soaked in wine and oil over that; and cure that with ointment until it is healed.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	But if you are afraid it is closed, then insert a cannula for a few days and remove it when the infant wants to defecate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And sometimes the anus is closed by a coagulation of plasma or of pus; therefore that coagulation should be incised and then cured with what we have said about the cure and the plug.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	For the cure of the fistulas which go inside:
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that go inside at the beginning of the anus discharge pus; they have a node and are thick, and they can be found near the anus or in the space of one side.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a fistula or many.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that node becomes old and discharges thin white or rotten fluid, then some of these fistulas penetrate in some places.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those which penetrate are known by what comes out of them through the orifices and through windiness; and sometimes the patient vomits it, and often it comes out of them with worms.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And sometimes these fistulas penetrate into the bladder and into the vagina; and some of them penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the hip socket.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And that in which the penetrating fistula is known to have entered the anus but not exited is when you insert your finger into the anus and press a thin rod of copper or iron into the fistula when it is swollen.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if it is swollen, then insert a thin rod of lead or horse hair into it until you feel the rod or the hair in your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you don't feel it at all or if there is no sign of excretion or worms or windiness, then know that it is not penetrating; then return to the cure.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the vagina, then its sign is the excretion of urine from it and the prohibition of that by applying medicine to it until the place is healed.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	But if it penetrates into the joint of the thigh or into the hip socket and there is pain in the circle around it, then its sign is that the rod goes inside there if there is no swelling in the bone, and pain in the circle around the affected area; and when there is pus, heat, and when medicine does not help it or heal it.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all penetrating fistulas there is no cure for sure; and the cure of those is work and skill of doctors over which we have written.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But in that which is not penetrating and does not become old, healing is expected with iron according to what you have written and that which has already been tried.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And let the patient lie on his side over your knee and raise his legs up onto you, with his thighs slanted towards his belly; then insert a rod of lead or iron into the fistula until you know where the rod goes in.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if he feels pain around his neck, then let you insert your finger into his neck.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel the rod already inserted discovered to penetrate, or if you feel the node or flesh between your finger and it, then know certainly that it is penetrating; therefore do not worry about it, for there is no cure for it as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But some say it heals in some people with a fever.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And the medicine by which it is hoped to heal quickly in him is that you burn a pointed cautery according to the size of the fistula, as has been said; then insert that burnt cautery into the fistula until it reaches around the neck; then repeat this two or three times until you know that all those flesh-like joints which are like a feather are closed.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	Then cure that with poultices wrapped in wool until all those joints are closed; then cure that with remedies which generate and consolidate flesh, and if it is healed, well; and if not, then it will not be healed in any time by any other cure.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the rod enters but does not penetrate into your finger which is in the anus, and between that and the rod there is a node or swelling, then cut the skin of the fistula where it touches the surface of the anus; then cut it with the rod until the section reaches the place where the rod goes in, and when the node is freed by the rod, pull out the rod.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	Then cleanse those flesh-like joints which are like a quill of goose feather and from which nothing comes out.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if blood flows from it when you press those joints, then the milk that comes out is to cauterize with fire or with sharp medicine, for the cautery with fire tightens those joints, and the drying of moisture; the cautery with fire also cuts off the flow of moisture.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	Then cure that with poultices wrapped in wool or in boiled flax until the place is dry; then afterwards cure the wound with hard ointment which generates and consolidates flesh.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And these are medicines in which there is constriction and drying; when that is restored, it is already healed and you should not fear recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the fistula has already penetrated into the perineum of the anus and is long in the superficial part of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and feel it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And if you feel the rod and between you and it there is node or flesh, and it is close to penetration, then it is not an operation on him but according to way of hope and expectation.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	This cause is to treat it in three ways: to cauterize it as we have said; or to dry that up so that you can find the cavity of it so that it is possible for you to insert the poultices and the cure near it; and not to process anything because the opening of it does not close, and the fistula opens wide in the anus, and goes out with a bad odor through the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula is ended according to this manner: when you insert the tent into the fistula, and around the buttocks on the surface of the body with the cord, and at the margin of the anus, then take hold of the punctured end of the tent, which is like a needle used to pierce hearts in this way
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and enter that vein wrapped in a piece of wool, or around those; and then insert the tent with a piece of wool into the fistula until it reaches its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if it penetrates at the margin of the anus inside, then you take out the piece of wool as you insert your finger into the anus; and pull out the end of the piece of wool and join together its two ends, and tie it, and leave it for a day or two, and when you have inserted the piece of wool into the flesh far enough that these flesh pieces are joined between the two ends of the piece of wool, tie it tightly.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	Then heal the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	But if the opening of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate in any way that you are prepared for, unless it moves in the wound, because it is not up to you to do this so as not to insert the needle; and then do it when it has healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the spatulate needle with which the fistula is split: its curvature is very acute and the other part is not acute, so that it does not pierce what is not necessary, as with a needle.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	On stitching up hemorrhoids in which blood flows in their incision.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids come in two ways, because they are either between the anus looking like warts, or they are like the grease of hair.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And they are small and large, and the blood flows from them constantly, and they are located, and on the edges of the anus.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	But those that are outside the anus are according to the months of little humidity, from which flows a yellow water or a little blood with continuous flesh, and they are according to the color of the flesh.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the treatment for that which is inside the anus is that you order the patient to sit and squeeze so that the anus dries and the hemorrhoids appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you cut and grab with your nails or whatever you have those with your fingernail, and then you pierce them at their roots.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	But if the nails are not in them due to their moisture and softness, then take them with a rough cloth or with a stick or with a piece of wool, and pull them out with your teeth, and then insert them and spread over them some powders mixed together at the incision, so that they are as cautery; or cauterize them according to what is preceded in the chapter on cauterizing.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then heal them with the other treatment until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the anus does not obey the exit, then you crucify the patient with a small cross made of wood, and wash him with the water that is in his anus and which causes the exit more quickly when he squeezes himself.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then the cause of them is leanness, and it is that you grab them with your fingernail, or grab them with your nail, and insert them, and then heal them with what we have said until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And the one who has an incision, be careful to administer a stitch of them in this manner: take a piece of wool wrapped around and insert it into a needle and then pull out the hemorrhoids at their upper parts, and make the needle penetrate with the other part of the piece of wool into the root of the opposite side, and wrap both ends of the piece of wool in the part lowest down from the needle, and tie it tightly; and then squeeze the hemorrhoid with a strong grip, and pull out the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this to all of them, and leave one not sewn up, so that the excess blood flows out from it.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And then place over the anus a cloth dipped in rose oil or in cerot; and place it on the anus and order the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then leave it until it heals; and when it is healed, heal them with ointments or with other treatment so that they are healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	On the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Many times they happen due to dryness of the split or due to constriction by nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And if they are old and not helped by that medicine, then you cut them with the point of a spatulate needle or with your fingernail until they are moist and host an abscess above them, which prevents them from consolidating; and then heal them until they are consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then you obstinate them with a more violent scraping than the first one so that they move blood and are excoriated; and then heal them until they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	On the treatment of ulseration, it is necessary to have a key.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that ulceration, so is a key, and it is not unless there are red dots according to the color of the body resembling the head of a nail, and it is made in all parts of the body and especially in the lower parts of the feet and the toes, and from there you have pain.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then let it be incised what is in the circuit of the key, and let it be held with tweezers or with nails, and let it be pulled out from its root; and then heal that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you want, cauterize the second one as it is preceded in its own chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	But a wart is a small rough round fistula on the surface of the body, and many times it comes in the hands of children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And its treatment is that you stretch and insert it, or squeeze it with a needle or thread until it comes out.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you want, cauterize it as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And then they are eradicated in both ways with the instrument that I will tell you about.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	But a mole is a small hairy or hairy fistula on the surface of the body that appears in the armpits, and when it is rubbed it is similar to an insect bite, and it is made around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And its treatment is that you take a hollow reed of goose feather or hawk feather, and let it be strong, and place it over the mole so that it contains the circle of the reed from the edges of it; and then rotate your hand with the reed so that you insert what is in the circuit of the mole, and leave it at the bottom of the flesh, and pull out the mole from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, do it with a reed of ram or of iron according to this shape:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Let the part above the reed be drawn to a thinness, dull (so it is not pierced), wrapped so that over the finger the sensation of it be wiped and the revolution of it.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you want to cauterize the mole as it is said before in the cauterization of warts in the chapter on cauterization.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	On the shape of the instruments that are administered to give crucifixes.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Sometimes it is made of silver or brass or melted brass or malachite; and sometimes it is made of those instruments small and large according to those which are administered, for that which is administered in the treatment of small children is small; and of those whose anuses are dry or painful, the crucifixes of these are small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of great and small stones
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The top of the catheter in which is attached the bag should be wide according to this manner; and there should be a distinction at where the bag is attached, thus with times.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the end of it further below, which is inserted into the anus, should be closed (so that it is not open) most fiercely, excepting with subtlety; and on one side of it there are two slits, and in the other side a slit, and let the width of the slits be according to the thicknesses of the rays and larger one small.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And let the bag in which are placed the medicines of animal bladder or wool be tied, and its length be one palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And let it be perforated with many slits thus as it is rolled; and if the space between the slits, the thickness of a finger.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And let it be inserted into these slits strong vinegar of strong bile which is of ten bilis, or around those; and adjust with that the bag; and when it is placed in him the bag, let it be tight at the head of the stone between two distinctions with strong constriction, and let it gout with that each slit: But the quality of gouting with that is that you fill the bag with medicine, which is warmed according to the amount of the tolerance of the patient; and beware that it is not too hot nor too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And let the patient be reclined on his back, and elevate his legs upward and place beneath him a board on which there are men or a bed; and let the end of the cautery be anointed with oil or with white of egg or with mucilage of fenugreek or the like; and let it be inserted into the anus with ease, and let the minister hold the bag and express that with two hands and press with mightiness while it is evacuated into the bowel all that which is in the stone; and let the stone and the patient be lifted up the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces that to go out, let him have as much as he can; and if he sleeps with that for all a night, it is more useful in healing.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	But if you gout that in illnesses of relaxation of belly and its going out is cut, then do the cautery again until he is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if in the anus are hemorrhoids or painful tumors, let the stone be very small and fierce, of the stones with which children are stoned.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Of care of the sores:
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	You have already said in the division of the care of sores what was proper for the book, and I say thus is the care of those with hand and medicines according to the complement.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore I say that sores are various according to what is caused by the sores and according to the place on which occurred the sores.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes why many times sores are caused are thus as hitting of stone, or piercing with spear or with knife, or hitting with lance or with club, or with arrow, or the like to those causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	But the sores which are in the parts of the body are thus as sore that fell upon the head, or neck, or feet, or belly, or thigh, and the like to those of the members.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I am recounting the care of some sores so that you understand that reasoning and rule about the other sores.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will begin of the sores of head simple, for the memory of the compounded will come to the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore I say that when it happens in the head simple sore and there is no fracture, then consider: if it is by hitting of stone or the like, and the tendon has been broken only and there is great sore and you fear about that patient a tumor, then you cool it and take phlebotomy of the cephalic vein at once, and do not delay that; and draw off blood from that according to the amount of its strength if no other cause prohibits phlebotomy, mostly if the blood which has come out of the sore is little.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And let the phlebotomy be on the contrary side from the sore party; and beware of the patient's replection and of wine and heavy food.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if because of the minor any cause prohibits that, then it is diminished from food and do not approach meat or wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And place upon the sore, if there happens to it tumor cautery, cut cotton steeped in rose oil or wine in which is steeped;
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	But if it is secure from tumor cautery, then place upon the sore, if it is recent with its blood and the air has not changed that powder which I recounted earlier, then apply it small;
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed that, then place upon some ointment until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	But if the sore is large or it is by piercing with knife and the like, and its lips are not sewed together by threads, then sew those together according to how I recounted of their sewing.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	But if the sore is uncovered of bone and nerve, and there is not retention of it except a small suspension, then insert that and let the sore be cared by medicines and restore the meat after in place of tendon, and command the patient that he abstains from food in which is coarseness: heads and forms of meat and the like to them, until it is composite.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find in the tendon putrefaction and it does not adhere to bone, then insert all that putrid and throw that, and let it be cared.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	But if in these sores is artery or vein from which flows blood and it has not been cut off by medicines, then you press upon the artery, and if you find that uncut, then you insert that with spatula, or ligature that; and if necessity prompts you to do that which I have recounted, then cauterize until the blood is abscised.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these sores are simple and small, then the cause of them is dryness; thus that you powder upon those this powder, for when the air changes that before which.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the manner of the powder is this: take oil of eggs yolk one, of blood of dragon two parts, of milk not-extinguished three parts; let it be all dry and sifted, and of that be the sore filled, and let it be bound by good constriction until it lies over that healing, and let the blood coagulate.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And let it be tightened above that with powders and let her lie thus until it is healed, for there is not inherited of it the medicine until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And at times do that alone cautery when you have not at hand eggs and blood of dragon;
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And do this meteyssa operation in great sores when it seems that it should be placed upon them and be tight, and so sores recent with its blood, which the air has not altered;
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is in summer time, then it is not intent to the position of this powder, but afterwards cure those with that which I have recounted, thus that you place upon those some ointments digested, or that you place upon those poultices of flour of barley with water and honey until they are cooked; and let them be cared by the other care until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if it happens with the sore fracture of bone, and is small, then you draw that out with tweezers.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	I will describe the treatment for fractures of the head in what follows.
De las plaguas del col.	Of wounds of the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	But if the wound occurs in the neck there is no difference in treatment between it and a simple wound of the head.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the nerve of the neck is cut or an artery, then if it is a nerve, there should be no harm done to it except to apply something that causes strong contraction, as well as cinchona and zeki which are like vitriol and similar to them because they do harm to nerves and contract that.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And don't place on the wound any cause of all heat, because the substance of nerves is heat and the continuation of it goes to the brain, which is the most important part of all the members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it is healed with medicine that are light, such as washing with warm water, or by using a poultice of rosewater or not-rosewater, and then when the wound is washed with warm water and the other stones according to this way, and then anointed with oil.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the wound is large, then administer stitches or sew up the lips of it and then cure that with powder inside until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	But if the wound has depth or an infection in it to the lower part of pus-filled swelling, then pierce that in the lowest place.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	But if in the wound an artery is cut and there is flow of blood, then separate or stop that, or ligature it, or cauterize it if necessity requires you to do so.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the vertebrae of the neck or all of them are broken and the veins of the neck are preserved, then sew up the lips of the wound over the cane of the neck and don't touch it; elevate that and reduce it to its natural shape and then strengthen it with decent tightness, and let it heal for several days; and then cure that with ointments in which there is contraction and excitation until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	But if the wound has been made on the bone with force, then probe it and if there are pieces of bones in it, extract all that you can; and that which to you does not appear clear, let that be inside until the wound becomes pus-filled and separate and the discharge of it be alleviated.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is recent then powder on it the powder by which you are advised.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	But if a fistula is made in the wound then cure that with something of which the remembrance will come later in its chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of wounds of the neck or of a similar nature when made between the shoulders and it is made by a spear or a lance or a similar weapon.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a strike by a lance or a spear and you see the depth of it then consider more if from the wound there is bloating when the patient stops breathing; then know that the wound is fatal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is not depth to it and the wound is recent with its blood, then you place on it powder from the first hour and don't tighten that so that the blood isn't retained in the depth of it and return to the heart and weaken the patient, but anoint that with attractive ointment, and loose it twice a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the ointment is not available to you, then place on the orifice of the wound a woolen cloth so that it sucks up what there is in humidity; and let the patient sleep on the wound so that it runs what is retained inside it.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	But if from the wound three days or more have passed and there does not come to the patient spasms or trembling of the heart or tightness of the chest, and you see the other good dispositions of it, then know that the wound is healed; and then cure that with cauterization and with the other cure until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	But if its healing is prevented and it is already open for a long time then know that a fistula has already been made; cure therefore that according to its chapter.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is by a strike of a spear or a lance and it is simple in its surface on the foot or the head then cure that with what precedes suturing if it is large or powder if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	But if force has already been made on the bone and only pieces of it are broken then you twist the wound and cut to extract those pieces if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	But if they are not separated then let them be until the wound becomes pus-filled because the extraction of them is alleviated.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other wounds that are accidental in other members the increase in cure is the increase of what we have already said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of wounds of the belly.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The disposition by which a wound occurs in the belly is either large or small or medium-sized.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	Of the large ones sometimes you see the intestine or nerve of the intestine, because there is infiltration of them and their suturing is more violent and more subtle.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And a small disruption is made difficult in another way and it is seen that its reduction is more difficult if you don't cut off the infiltration of them to their own place at once, because it opens and becomes swollen so that its insertion is made difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the best disruption is medium-sized because in it the reduction of the intestine is not difficult as in the two mentioned before.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And know that there are four types of suturing of the belly, but two sutures are common and convient in suturing of the other wounds of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other sutures are proper to each other in the suturing of the belly, but they are also proper to the suturing of the other wounds.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	I will now describe to you each one with its explanation.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore I say that when the wound is small and some cause of the intestine has exited through it, and its reduction is difficult in one of two ways: either by smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when to the intestine is given inflammation by chill of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And therefore when that is so then you must scorch it with a sponge or cloth moistened in lukewarm water alone or by gathering in tepid water and cyperus, and spikenard, and myrrh, and embrocation over the intestine until the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And sometimes it does this with that in which there is contraction and it is better than lukewarm water in resolution of the inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And therefore when you see the inflammation resolved then you moisten the intestine with water in which is steeped alder and mallows because through that the insertion of it is alleviated by a little cause.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if the intestine is not relieved by this cure then split the disruption a little with an instrument with which its membranes are cut.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first cure is better when it is proper that there is no incision and no occupation to dry up afterwards and deficiency of food.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument its form is:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One end of it is bent acute and the other end not acute, and its extremity is subtle but not with the subtlety of a spatula, but rather blunt a little.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And therefore when the wound is enlarged and you see it exiting the intestine then know that its reduction be according to its natural form in its proper place if possible because that is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	But when the rupture is wide, and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, then you should make the patient lie on his back, and place his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then you should place his head and the feet highest of all.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And likewise if the rupture is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then direct your intention and attention to this, so that the part which has the wound is higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And you should administer this for large wounds and small wounds alike.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And for small wounds, apply what you have prepared, and let the minister hold it between his fingers, who should have the rupture in his hand and close its lips, and he should discover to one or another whether there is any cause for sewing.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of sewing: take a needle, or count of needles according to the amount of the amplitude of the wound; and leave off at the extremity of the rupture of the little finger, and tighten the needle one, then that you do not put thread in both extremes of the gut, with two extremes of the needle which is below the gut of the parts within, while you make it penetrate from this part; and you have already joined two extremes of the gut and two extremes of the needle, and so are made four turns.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And you tighten with double thread around the needle, and some times from two parts together, and you join two lips and the wound by decent gathering; and leave off at the thickness of the little finger and put another needle in that, and tie that with thread thus as is done with the first needle; and do not cease to do this if it is necessary with needles until you have completed all the sewing of the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And let the needles be smaller between coarseness and thinness, for thin needles penetrate quickly into the flesh; and coarse ones are difficult to enter into the gut, and therefore let them be smaller in coarseness and thickness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And let the needle not be pushed into two extremes of the gut next to each other, so that the flesh is not quickly pierced and that the wound opens before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And let the sewing not be prolonged so that the wound is prohibited from consolidation.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And you should insert the extremes of the needles so that they do not hurt the patient during his sleep; and you will place over the sewing powdered herbs from every part, which have the extremes of the needles; and leave them until you know that the wound is consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And these species of sewing with needles in what manner is most convenient in small wounds, for it suffices in their sewing one needle or two or around them.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	But the second sewing is communal: and it is that you administer with sewing the four extremes, of the gut and two extremes of the needle, in one go, with a needle in which is thread wrapped equal in coarseness and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And when with the needle you have penetrated these four extremes, return the needle from that part from which you began, so that the thread drawn pulls the uppermost part to the wound, so that the sewing is like sewing of cloth in which the cloth is tightened.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And place between each sewing the amount of the thickness of the little finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this sewing know men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And with such sewing I closed the wound which was done to a man in his belly, which had been pierced by a knife, and was the rupture of the wound major of a palm, and had come out of the intestines around two palms from the intestine of the middle place and was the rupture in the middle of the member; and then I returned it after the intestine had exited the wound for xxiiii hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound was consolidated in the space of xv days or around, and he healed that and is well; and appropriately this lived for many years, and is conversant in his dispositions.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And other doctors had judged that he would not be healed; and by miracle he was healed, for I did not cure him with ointment, for it was in a place where ointment was not applied nor any medicine, but I placed over the wound cotton wool two times a day and frequent ablution with water of honey until he was healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	But I will tell two species of sewing proper according to narration of Word.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And it is that you begin with sewing of the gut and insert needle from the part outside to the part within.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And so when the needle penetrates into the gut and in that you twist according to rectitude and in length of all the body, and leave off at the extreme of the needle in which you have inserted the needle; and make penetrate in the other extreme the needle from the part within to the part outside in the other extreme of the member.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And when you have done that penetrate, then you make that penetrate another go in that meteyssa extreme of the member from the part outside to the part within; and leave off at the extreme of the needle which is in this side, and make penetrate the needle in the other extreme of the part within to the part outside.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make penetrate with that your penetration which you do that penetrate in the needle in the extreme of the member in the extreme of the eye which is in the part of him within that all that penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And you begin of this member side and sew that with the extreme which is of the needle in the other side, and pull out that from the gut which penetrates, and return that in that gut and sew the extreme of the member which is in the other side with this extreme of the eye; and pull out that from the gut which is of part of him.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do that one go and another, and do that one go then another go while you sew all that is outside according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this way of sewing is that you sew with sewing of skin am which I sew the skin, in that you sew the intestine one go from the extreme of the gut, and leave off then while you have completed it.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	But the second proper species which I tell is teaching of Gualia, and that is of word of him and by him composed, is that you sew that according to semilitude am which medicine sewed that, in that they join all part to its compared part to him conveniently by nature; and apply the extreme of another of him and the extreme of the eye to the other extreme of him, and that is done according as I have composed.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	Let you put the needle in the extreme of the eye to you next to the part outside, and make that penetrate to the part within in that sole, and leave off two extremes of the intestine; and return the needle and make that penetrate from outside to inside in two extremes of the intestine.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And you return those, and make penetrate some of the part within into the part outside in two extremes of the eye others than are in the contrary side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this way of sewing is better than the common sewing, and is sewing of which precedes memory.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the word of Gualia
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And you put in these some thread, and begin with insertion of needle from that which is of you, and make that penetrate according to sewing of those whom I sewed the bodies equally.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And know that when there is a disruption in the middle part of the belly, then its suture is more difficult than that of other parts of the belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	But the treatment of medicine for plague is different from the treatments for other illnesses.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The cause of this is that when you encounter a fresh plague wound with its blood visible and the air alters it, and you reduce the hernia and dress it decently, then apply an incorruptive powder to it.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the plague wound, then apply on it some alum in unguent form which is at your presence so that it forms a hard stone and catches the pus, and is consolidated and dried; and thus you treat this as you do with other plague wounds until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	But if you do not have the medicines at your presence, then apply it immediately as soon as you notice the wound, for as long as it starts to weep, cut short hair, and change its dressing twice a day, as well as wash it with warm water, until it is healed; for in many dispositions when the plague wounds are simple, you do not need another medicine.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	But if you fear that the plague will spread to the principal members, then cover wool in lion fat of good quality, or in rose oil, and apply it on the parts between the joints and below the armpits.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if there is pain or putrefaction in his bowels, for many times this happens, then cauterize it with black styptic vinegar, especially if the putrefaction has occurred in the intestine and there is a penetrating wound within its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that which is of the large intestine is of a harder cure than that which is in the small intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is of difficult cure because the intestine called "gut" does not receive cure from the plague that occurs in it at all; and this is due to the great multitude of veins that are in it, and because of its size which is in those, and because of the subtlety of that body, and because of its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	But if what proceeds from the plague is the tissue, and you manage to get it while it's fresh, then reduce it according to your skill by which you reduce intestines equally.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	But if it has passed into it space and has already turned green or black, then that you apply bile on the place that is blackened from it, so that blood flow comes out, for in the tissue there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then insert what is another part of that dressing, and hang the two extremities of the bile from the edge below the plague wound, so that on you is alleviated the attraction of it because of the fastening of the tissue and emission of the pus of the plague.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembering of the plagues when they occur in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When disruption occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it is possible that it might be restored in some men, thus because he drank vinegar and it was a plague wound in his belly with piercing of spear, and the plague was of the right side of the stomach, and the plague was old and made into a fistula, and there came out of it pus and wind.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then he followed the cure for him which was that it was not confided in his healing, but he continued to sublimate it until it was healed and the place became consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And he put that he saw the place already consolidated, he would direct upon the patient that he should not have any accident of evil in his belly; and he did not experience anything from that evil accident, and he stayed in his own habits eating and drinking, and he went into bath and was exercised in his wits.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced men have already said that when plague occurs in the intestine and it is small, then one should tie it according to this way: and it is that you take gum from big nuts; and then you adjust the two lips of the plague wound and place one of those gums which has an open mouth over the two lips of the plague; therefore when he takes on them and tightens his mouth, cut off the gum's stalk, for it will adhere and not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then place another gum near the first one, and do not cease this until you have done with gums one after another according to the quantity of the whole plague wound.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then reduce it and close the plague wound; and let those nut stalks remain in the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not let any harm occur to the patient.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine is tied with fine thread which is made from animal intestines attached to it, since it is more in needle; and it is that you take the extremities of those intestines' threads, and let it be somewhat fleshless, and then tie the extremity of it with thread, wrapped around, and then insert that thread in needles and close with that the intestine, and reduce it in the disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this way of suture with gums is nothing but according to the way of confidence and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the plague is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the small intestines, for then there is only sublimation, and not a complete cure for it.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Of cure for ulcer and fistula.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that all plague and ulcer when they are closed up and become old, and there is made an ulcer, and it is not consolidated and continues to weep pus at all times and is not cut off, then in whatever member it is, universally it is called a fistula and we call it azucem.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And fistula according to truth is a knotted ulcer, hard, white with which there is no pain and to which there is no cavity as it is a cavity of bone; and therefore that is named some rizatz, that is pain.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And it is in some men moist, which lets out pus; and very much of the moisture is discharged in some hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And sometimes this moisture is moved, and it is little, and it is thick, and it is subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already mentioned before in the division that when I discuss plagues, that every ulcer which is not healed nor has naked flesh, it is not because of one of nine causes: one of which is for lack of blood in the body; or from malice; or because between it and its lips there is hard flesh prohibiting birth of flesh; or because it is made of moved leg; or because that ulcer within itself is infected and the matter which is within it is of bad quality; or because the medicine is inconvenient in its cure; or when putrefaction occurs in the region, and it is pestilential; or because of property of the region, as it happens when it comes to Sarragossa, in which there is made difficult digestion of the diseases, and that healing of apostema is delayed by nature; or because within it is bone, or moveable bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	I have already shown all those causes, and their signs in the division, as well as the cure for them with medicines.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And thus I will make you know the cure for fistula which is made by way of operation with hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And know that fistula occurs in all parts of the body; for from those there are fistulas which come to large veins and arteries, or nerves, or the head, or intestine, or bladder, or any of the ribs, or to one of the joints, or to some of the vertebrae of the back, or to a similar joint; and of those there is that gives proximity to the principal member and to its likes.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And thus of these fistulas which follow this manner are of difficult healing and do not receive cure, and with them is trouble and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if there is any fistula whose depth does not reach these places which I have described, and you hope for and believe in its cure, and wish to attain knowledge of it, then take a probe made of iron or steel, and if the fistula goes straight ahead, probe with it.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a probe of thin lead, for lead, because of its light weight, will be drawn and curved toward the twist.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula has horrible movements, it is not possible for you to signify anything about it with a probe.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then christen the orifice with holy water, for the moisture by which you cleanse it will go through the other orifices and flow from them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And then inquire carefully, according to what manner you are able to know whether there is bone or nerve here, and whether the fistula's cavity is distant or nearby, or whether it is a fistula whose orifices are all on that spot, and according to the nature of the pain which comes with your compression of the area with your hand, and according to the significance of the causes and the swelling.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have considered all these causes with true knowledge, then proceed to the cure according to your confidence: and it is that you consider whether the fistula appears nearby or in a salty place, distant from a joint, or of nerve, or artery, or vein, or one of those places which I have mentioned to you.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then you shall dry the fistula according to what has been said before about its description, and prevent what is in that filtration and of putrefied flesh, and what is born from the orifice of flesh, or of thorns and their likes, and heal within until it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	But if the fistula is of distant depth and goes straight ahead, then see that you insert it into the fistula as much as you can safely do so, and then cleanse it of all its putrefied flesh; and then administer hot waters wrapped in sharp medicines, and insert them into the cavity of the fistula which you have understood with iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do this several times until the sharp medicine corrodes all that is rotted in the cavity of the fistula's corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore it with ointments which produce healthy flesh within until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	But if it is not healed by this, then you shall cauterize it according to what we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you have certified this, then you shall inquire and dry it according to what we have recommended, unless you forbid any cause of vein or nerve or major member as I have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackness on it, then you shall cut away that corruption until it is all gone; and then heal it with what makes flesh within until it is healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it does not heal and the ulcer comes back as before, then know that you have not attained the complete eradication of the corruption; and then discover it again and carefully find out the reason for it and cleanse it with your strongest medicine, and then restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And therefore if it is healed, well and good; but if not, then know that the corruption is in the distant depth of the body, which you have not attained, and then you must only leave it alone.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupted bone is small or you can pull it out, then you shall pull it out with subtle forceps which are suited to that purpose.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are many bones, then carefully perform the extraction of all those, and leave behind none of their causes with your knowledge.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if you encounter any cause of moisture and in their incision there is no fear or error, then insert those limbs or flesh if they are here, and deliver the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if you are not prepared to pull the bones from your patient at this time, then pause over the wound whatever will cause it to fester, and leave it so that what is around those bones of flesh and limbs, and guard the wound so that it is not consolidated but constrained, the section which you have cut in your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Have you fear, pause over it a cloth dipped in oil, or a cloth dipped in Egyptian ointment, or one of the green ointments, for when those limbs fester and the bones are separated from their socket, and their attraction is driven away.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	But if it is a great bone like the bone of the leg or thigh, or similar, and what is corrupted is only its membrane, then cut away that membrane behind so that the blackness and corruption are removed, and then restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	But if what is corrupted is a great portion and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is a necessary cause to close that up and to cut all around where the corruption has come, and then heal that within until it is consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I remind you to fasten one end of your patient's thigh to your bed so that he may assist you in your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A young man about 30 years old had pain in his thigh, and from the parts within the jaw was matter upon the matter within the body which came to the jaw, and it is matter of ulcer with great ulcer, and there is not to him an extrinsic cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then the time was prolonged by the error of the doctors until the ulcer had opened up, and matter had collected from it, and its cure was then paused until the thigh was fistulated, and there are in him many orifices through which all oozed pus and the body's moisture.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then he was treated by many doctors for about two years, and there was not in them any relief except in the bone, where he was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw his thigh and the matter that flowed from him through those orifices, indeed his whole body was wasted away and his color was yellow.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I inserted the probe into one of those orifices and reached the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then I probed all the orifices and found them coming from all parts of the thigh.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I cut and probed one of those orifices where I discovered a portion of the bone, and found it rotted, indeed blackened and rotted; and a portion of the thigh was already rotted where it had penetrated into the membrane.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I seared that which had been discovered and prepared from the exposed bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I found that it was not in the bone but only that corruption which I had cut off and seared, and I had already removed it.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then I paused over the wound' restoration with consolidative medicine for a long time, but it was not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then I probed and discovered the bone again a second time over the first discovery, and found continued corruption in the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I seared what appeared to me from that corruption, and then I found it necessary to perform the cure of it and its restoration, but it was not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I uncovered him again and did not cease from cutting into the small bones little by little particularly and piercing through to the bone, and it was not closed up until I had cut around a palm's width of him, and that [bone] I extracted with its marrow, and then I restored that one with medicines, and it was consolidated quickly and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it is not necessary to repeat the operation on him or to cut into him again except by the disposition of his sickness and because of his lack of tolerance for it and fear of death, since at all times he fainted from the excess of evacuation.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And so he is healed by complete healing, and there is nothing in the place of hard bone; and his disposition has become good in his body and his strength has returned; and he is restored to his usual dispositions, and he has no difficulty walking or harm in any way.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	But if there is bone protruding from the body, then you should proceed in this manner: Take some ligature and tie it tightly around the end of the protruding bone; have someone else pull on it upwards while you hold it down with a piece of woolen cloth which is thicker than the first one; and then tie that over the meat below the bone and stretch out the end of it so as to draw the flesh away from the part below, and uncover the flesh at the place where you want to cut so that the saw does not cut into the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And put a board or pillow under the bone properly so that when you do this it is not forbidden for the saw to cut into the rotten flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And it is necessary that the saw be used on the rotten place little by little, because if the corruption is in the hollow of the bone and does not appear in its appearance to sensation, then it will force another cut elsewhere.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is rotten and not protruding, then it is one part continued from the other, and the corruption is in its middle or in a part of it; then uncover all parts completely; and put a board under it, and cut there in the first part where the corruption is until the cutting continues to the other part.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And the sawing should be according to the location of the corruption a little bit at a time as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, cut into that corrupted joint and saw through the bone where it continues from the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then there is not a reason for that except foolishness.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the knuckle of the hand or foot it is very difficult; however, see what the corruption appears to you like and open it up, and treat it according to whatever way that seems possible to you, and with every foolishness be corrected by you when there is no contrariness caused by a vein or nerve.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And you should know that there are many ways of cutting and the saws for cutting these bones depend on the situation of the bones and their preparation, and thickness, thinness, magnitude, smallness, hardness, rarity, and so forth; therefore, when you prepare any kind of instrument for an operation, be careful to fit it to that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And you should know that this operation tells you about the kind of instrument of which you are in need; when you have great study and long experience of the ways of this art, and knowledge of the ways of diseases, for then you already have through your own experience what is convenient to instruments for all illnesses.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And I leave it to you at the end of this chapter to count up the number of instruments with which you will be equipped, by which you will proceed in your prohibition, which you will learn about from the others.
Forma de serra:	The shape of the saw:
Forma de autra serra:	The shape of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	The shape of another saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	The shape of another large saw:
Forma de ray:	The shape of a rasp:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Let the head of this rasp be shaped like a star-shaped key, and its points be shaped like the points of an awl.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it is not convenient for it to have smooth heads except when it is used on the heads of joints which are corrupted, or on a large mouth.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	The shape of a larger razor than the others:
Forma de razori menor:	The shape of a smaller razor:
Forma de razori lat:	The shape of a broad razor:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	The shape of another saw properly made: let its bow be made of the most superior iron and the blade of it of decently made boy's dagger.
Forma de lu:	Its shape:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	The shape of a razor in which there is a hollow:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	The shape of another subtle razor:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	The shape of another razor with a curved end:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	The shape of a small razor resembling a tent:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	The shape of a chisel with which bones are cut:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	The shape of another smaller chisel:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	The shape of another chisel; this one resembling a rasp, and its end is like a saw, and it is used in many places on the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	The shape of a rasp which is convenient for piercing of bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And its end is triangular and acutely pointed.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly all the causes which we have mentioned about rasps and chisels and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of cutting edges and piercing through bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The edges may become blunt either by an intrinsic cause or by an extrinsic one, or when you have treated that corruption with those medicines and the healing does not correspond, or sometimes the corruption goes away from the part of the body in which it is not caused by any cut, then you should cut that part of the body where the corruption is located, so that the patient may escape death or a greater harm to that member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of him to whom it happens is that the member turns black while it is being healed as if fire had burned it, or it becomes black afterwards when that burning has gone into that member which feels it and which affects the whole body; therefore, be careful about cutting that.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly if the cause of the corruption is the percussion of some poisonous things such as scorpion venom, or snake venom, or adder's venom, or the like.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or the percussion is in the end of the finger, then cut the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it goes into the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly if it comes to the hand, then cut that from the knuckle of the fire-bow, and do not give space to the corruption so that it goes into the bow of the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if instead of that you cut the arm at the elbow in the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if the corruption passes over and turns around the knuckle then in that is the death of the patient; and the cause of another one besides this in healing is the quantity of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly cut the foot when corruption comes to the toe of the foot, then cut that from one of the toes.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it takes in the sole of the foot, then cut all the foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	But if it goes into the paw, then cut the leg at the joint of the paw.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already come upon the paw then there is no remedy except release, and let the patient go to death.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the way of cutting the member or of sawing it is that you tighten the ligature in the part which you want to cut, and tighten another ligature over the place; and extend the minister one ligature to the lower parts, and extend the other minister ligature above; and separate the flesh which is between two ligatures then split it lengthwise so that all the flesh be uncovered; and then let it be cut or sawn.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And have cloth placed over him from all sides so that it does not touch the affected area, and let the patient be given a poultice of heated lead and a cautery.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	If there is bleeding, then cauterize the wound or apply some powders that restrict the blood flow; then return to your treatment until it is complete.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then bind the affected limb with a bandage in a comfortable manner and treat it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	I have seen a man whose foot was affected in this way, as described by you; the cause was blackness in his foot from burning, resembling fire burns.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption began first in his toe, then spread throughout the entire foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepared himself remedies so that the treatment would go to the affected limb with his great desire and effort; he applied them until the joint was healed and the pain and burning ceased.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	For a long time, that man had suffered from that corruption in the toe of his right hand.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then he came to me, and I removed that excess with the medicines I applied to his body; thus, the purification of his body was accomplished, and the excess did not spread to the other toe but began in the hand where it had started.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	He begged me to cut off his hand, but I refused, fearing the spread of that excess and more so because of the risk of the hand becoming gangrenous due to the seriousness of the condition.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And when he despaired of me, he returned to his homeland and found that man who prepared and cut off his entire hand, and it healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have not added this narrative except that it may be an aid to those who suffer from this disease and as a sign by which it is recognized and treated accordingly.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	On the treatment of wounds and the quality of enemas with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in any fleshy part and the space of the abscess is prolonged so that it forms a collection of pus, and then it is broken and perforated, and the pus is discharged, and the wound remains hollow as if it were a vessel, and the cord-like tissue above it is removed with a thin cloth, and there is no further corruption, nor does it affect the bone or nerve or ligament, it is called a sinuous wound and not a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the space is prolonged so that corruption spreads to some part, then it is called a fistula and not a sinuous wound.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And its treatment is that the cord-like tissue is entirely removed as it is rolled up, especially when it is thinned down and treated with a cloth, and you must be careful not to cause adhesion to the affected area due to the corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	But if you expect the cord-like tissue to adhere and the corruption has not yet caused any damage, and it has extended forward, then you should treat it with enemas.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And you should consider the sinuous wound; if it is large and the flesh gives off a fetid odor, then treat it with an Egyptian medicine which is made of oil, wine vinegar, and honey, mixed together in equal parts and placed in a vessel over fire until it becomes thick like honey.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	Then take what is necessary from it and dissolve it in water and honey; treat the wound with this, close its opening, and leave the medicine in for two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	Then remove it with care; do this for several days until the wound is purified and healed.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And sometimes it is enema with water of ashes when you do not have the medicine available; take ash from a vitis vine and put water on it, then stir it up and treat the wound with this until you are sure that the wound is healed.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the ash water, then treat it with water and honey in which is mixed ground zingiber, and also with wine and honey mixed, for the property of honey is to purify and cleanse, and wine adheres to the wound, especially when there is an excess of dryness and astringency in the wine.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you do this several times and you are sure that the wound is healed, then treat it with something that makes flesh grow in it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And take some thin myrrh and dissolve it in rose oil and astringent wine; or treat the wound with other medicines and ointments that I have written about in the treatise on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the opening of the wound is narrow and the enema cannot be inserted, then widen it gradually with a small iron rod and place a poultice wrapped in an Egyptian ointment or a basilicon ointment over it until it is widened.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And similarly, if the opening is wide, then you should bring the edges together with stitches and leave a small amount inside so that the enema can be inserted into it.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the opening through which the arm extends upward is elevated above the surrounding parts, then dry that part in the pus which is below it so that the arm can extend downward; for when the arm is contract in a sinuous wound, flesh is generated in it.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if you cannot dry the wound in the bone, then you must have the limb prepared so that the arm extends outward freely according to your estimation, and there must be no cause for the arm to be retained in it.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidating medicines that are applied over the wound appropriately according to what you intend, so that they extend over the cloth.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth should be of such a great quantity that it makes contact with all of the wound; then pierce the wound on the right side of its opening with a piercing tool and make the incision wide enough so that the opening of the wound is wide, and extend over another piece of cloth with leonine ointments according to the size of the incision, and place it over the wound in a position distant from the opening of the wound so that the extension of the arm is not obstructed by the cloth and it does not cause pain.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	But that which is over the opening of the wound, let it be kept in place for as long as it takes to heal what is bound in the arm.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you may know whether what runs out of it is blood or pus, or undigested food, or digested:
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And according to this you consider the location of that wound, whether it causes pain in the patient or not, and if there is an abscess in it:
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And when your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see the matter that has been applied to the opening of the wound already adhere, or it has acquired adhesion, then you should loosen it on the third day, and when you remove the dressing, then change the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	But if from the wound a subtle pus extends downward to a great distance, then do not despair of its adhesion, for its healing is proper; for there are some men in whom the generation of flesh occurs slowly in the wounds, and others in whom it occurs quickly.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if from the wound an indigestible arm extends for several days, then know that the wound has not adhered; and if the adhesion of the wound is delayed and its cause prolonged, then adjust your medicines in desiccation, and if your medicines are moist in their substance and in their virtue, then dry them with myrrh ointment, when there is an excess of astringency in it.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the most effective medicine for this condition is to take a thin ointment and dissolve it in rose oil, and apply it on the affected area, and use it often.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And if there are no bandages available, take thin ointment, honey when it is cut and thickened, and use it; or take myrrh, aloes, and incense, grind them all into powder over the fire, and spread this powder on a cloth and place it over the wound; and spread the ointment that you have cut and thickened over the honey, and spread it on a cloth.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And sometimes you should administer to it long-stemmed aristology and roots of celestial lily (and celestial lily) and flour of oats and centaurea, and use these simples or prepare them, grind them up and sieve them into powder over the honey that I have mentioned; and use this.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the wound is prolonged and not healed by this treatment, then understand that the corruption is in the flesh of it, and make an inquiry into the bones or other hard members or to the tendons; then treat it with a fistula treatment, as has been said above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	On the treatment of nail fungus and nail scraping and addition of digit incision and section.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Panarici is an apostema which arises below the nail of the toe or finger, and very rarely in other fingers, and as it is prolonged and its cure is less valued, or it is apoplectic of apostema cauterized, or it is corrupted, and causes a pus under that corrodes the root of the nail, and very often corrupts all of it, and very often its corruption pervades to the bone within which has an offensive odor, and the extremity of the finger becomes lame, and its color becomes dark.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And therefore when you have this with what we have said in the division and do not bring about your cure, then understand that you should pour out all the superfluity that is rotted from the nail and then cauterize the wound properly, because cautery is beneficial in this case.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is healthy and the nail is healed, and the edges of the nail start to press into the flesh between the fingers, and begin to sting and irritate it, then understand that you should place a fine needle under the angle of the nail which pricks the flesh, and drive it upwards and cut that flesh with ease, and place over it something that produces burning corrosion while it is still moist; and then cure this with an ointment until it is healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	But if the corruption has already penetrated to the bone, then understand that you should cut out the bone and extract it, because the bone which is corrupted will never be healed.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you see the corrosion and corruption spreading to the finger, then cut it at one of the joints according to where the memory is, and then cure this until it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	But if the nail has a concussion or abrasion, and subsequently it causes great pain in that place, then at the beginning you should bleed the patient and then dry the nail with a sharp spatula with a transverse cut above it, and be careful that the cut does not penetrate into the flesh which is below the nail, because you will cause great pain to the patient, and this would result in the birth of superficial flesh in that location; and then cure that place until the pain subsides.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	But a finger which is attached to the hand of some men, is very rarely all flesh, or it has no bones in it, or it is only a nail.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some of them are born at the root of the joint, or their origin is in some of the fingers.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	But he who is born on some fingers does not suffer harm, and he who is born at the joints suffers much harm.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And for those which are born fleshy, the cut is easier, and you should cut it below its root with a broad spatula.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	But for he who is born at the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; and therefore beware of the falling off of it.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But for he who is born on the finger between the joints, understand that you should at the beginning cut into the flesh of it with a round incision into the bone, and then saw it with one of those convenient saws for this, and then cure this until it is healed.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	But consolidation which happens to the fingers between them very often or due to the nature of man who is born that way, or due to consolidation of pus or by fire, or similarly, therefore understand that you should dry up that consolidation until the fingers return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then place between them lint soaked in rose oil so that they are not consolidated easily, and separate these from one another, or place between them a thin sheet of lead according to where it is consolidated.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly if consolidation happens in some fingers with the palm, then dry up that consolidation according to how it is prepared and convenient for the figure of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Of cuts from time to time, these are varicose veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Varicose veins and varicose veins, are large twisted veins full of melancholy humors which appear in the parts of the body, and their greatest occurrence in the legs, and especially in the legs of travelers, laborers, and carriers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Therefore understand that you should administer a purgative to the body of black cholera several times with strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	But their cure by cupping is according to two manners: the one is that it is cut and that black blood is drawn, and the other manner is that the vein is elevated and all of it is extracted.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	Its cut is according to this manner: at the beginning soak the leg with warm water until the gross blood which is foul from the leg is resolved, and then bind up the leg of the patient at the place above the pus which is near to the part below the knee with a bandage, and then dry the vein in one place, or two places, or three places with a broad cut, and then elevate the black blood by the sole of the foot upwards to within it, and let the amount of blood which you desire and can endure be expelled, and the strength of the patient bear it.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then ligature that, and command him that he abstain from foods generating black cholera.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And repeat the cure by cupping when the veins are full and this afflicts the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	But the elevation of them is according to this manner: you who raise the leg of the patient if it pains him, and then place him in a bath and soak the leg with warm water until he becomes warm and the veins are swollen; or that he is exercised by strong exercise, if bathing is not at hand, until the member is warmed.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then dry up the vein on the outside of the leg by a cut in the thigh or at the back of it below the knee, or in the sole of the foot below the toe.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then open up the vein with tweezers and scrape the vein in every part where it appears to the sense, and it is due to the appearance that it inclines towards blackness.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And therefore when you see this and the vein, you will see it white and like corded.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then you should place below that the rayon so that it is elevated and gitted from the vein, and support that with a lion's tooth.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then cut another incision near that incision to a depth of three fingers, and then excise the vein that appears above it.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then elevate that and incise it behind the second incision down to the bone, and then extract that and elevate what is within from the second incision, and then extract that from above the incision.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And then do what is necessary to extract it from the incision that is highest or uppermost of all the incisions, so that everything is exposed; and then incise it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if it does not yield to you when you try to extract and elevate it, then insert a strong needle with a thread through it and ligature it, or insert it below the bone and move your hand over all parts where it is lodged.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And be careful not to incise it; for if it is broken, it is difficult for you to elevate that part and it has come upon the patient through that harm.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when all of that has been completely expelled, then place over the site of the ulcer wool saturated in wine and rose oil, and cure that which is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vein is contracted and twisted with an enlargement at its parts, and it does not follow rectitude according as we have said, then you should split that throughout all of its twists and the locations of its enlargement, and then suspend that with hooks so that you elevate it all.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And be careful not to incise the vein and not to harm it, for it will be difficult for you to elevate it; and use your discretion in that.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Form of the incision with which the vein is dried:
Forma de unci orp:	Form of the hook:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not accuteed with the hooks or acute at its end so that it does not harm the vein; and it has great flexibility, for if it were subtle, it would incise the vein because of its subtlety; there is superfluous thickness in it as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Of the extraction of the vein of the leg.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is engendered in the legs in lower lands like Al-Ategi in the arid and barren lands of Arabia and in the lands of India that are lower and arid with little tenderness, and in which there is not grass nor herbage.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And very rarely is it engendered in other locations of the body other than the legs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And its generation is from putrefaction that comes beneath the membrane like venom within the body of serpents and worms and snails and worms engendered between the membrane and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And a sign of the occurrence of it is that this vein happens in inflammation and swelling in the leg, and then the location becomes vesicated; and then the vein begins to emerge from the location of that vesication looking like a root of a plant.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then when you see the end of it, you must wrap around it a piece of lead weighing one drachma and a half, and keep it in place and let the lead hang from the leg.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as many times as it causes some pain at its parts going outward, wrap that with lead and hold it.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the pain is prolonged, then you incise a part of it and wrap the remaining part; and do not incise that which is rooted so that it be exposed, for if you incise that, it will contract and enter into the flesh and cause an apostema and swelling at the location and a bad ulcer.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	For it should be treated gradually and extracted little by little so that it is expelled from its end and does not cause any harm in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein some people are affected who are in their length of five or six palms and I have seen one who was twenty palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is incised at the time of its treatment, then insert the bone into its hollow and perforate it with a long hole through to the body so that everything that is in the matter is evacuated, and then administer putrefaction of the location for several days with medicines; and then cure that with the cure of apostemas.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes has ram-like pains, and mostly when it appears at the joint of the leg or in the leg, and it comes to it pains from horrible places, and is engendered from every orifice of a ram.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And therefore cure that as we have said in the division and with what is above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Of the section of worms engendered under the skin and it is called bovine illness.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This illness is named in some land because of its boun illness due to worms which are engendered between the membrane and the flesh, and go throughout the body pushing and descending, and are revealed to the sense by the movement of a member from member so that they rupture the membrane and emerge out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its generation is from putrefaction of certain humors like the engendering of worms and serpents and roundworms and tapeworms in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared for its malice, for when it goes in the body and is elevated to the head, and it has reached the throat, then very rarely does it open in it and enter and destroy the throat, and that happens sometimes.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And therefore when you want to cure that and extract it, it is not done unless through the movement of it and its appearance to the sense, and then you should tighten what is over it and what is under it with a ligature and compression very strongly, and then cut over it and extract that.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is deep in the flesh and not approaching, then you place cautery with fire over the location where it resides, and the greatest cause that is feared is corruption of it by which it corrupts the location as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	And if you want it to be brought to the head near the throat, then tighten the neck strongly with a tight ligature, and then cut over it, and extract that; and let the patient use purification of his body with evacuant medicines, and guard against food engendering putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	Of the section on infant illness.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This illness is named in our land infant, and it is a pain which comes in some members, and then it is transferred from member to member.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I will tell you about that according as he recounted to me.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	He was called to a sick woman in a village, and he saw her arm and noticed a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and after it was swollen for an hour, he saw that inflammation go up as though it were a living worm, but more quickly than if it were silver when it goes from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then it went to the pain of that location and settled in the muscle, and then it stayed there for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then it went through the rest of the body until it reached the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then he recounted to me that it moved around through the body, second as he saw it; and it was too marvelous about its transformation and the speed of member to member.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And he had seen before that in the same way, but he had seen pains which are transferred from member to member.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But I have not seen that with the arms as with the woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I did not think that was because the woman was old, being of sixty years and with veins exposed, and in her appeared to the sense that twitching transformed.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that this retro-cure not appear in those who are delicate, with humid bodies and veins hidden.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you want to cure him and the patient feels that pain, then it is not for you to appear like that as we have said, then you stretch him out and reduce him lightly and dry him on the spot from which that windiness has come out, and cauterize the site.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not see it with your own eyes, then you should treat him with a purging of the body and with that which expels windiness, and those carmine pills with foul-smelling pills and serapium pills and similar ones.
De extraccio de sagetas.	On the extraction of arrows:
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are diverse according to their species, and according to the parts of the body in which they strike, for their diversity is that some have large points, and small ones, and concave, and blunt ones, and some are solid; and among them are those that have three angles, and others that have tongues.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And that which is according to the limbs and the feet in which they strike is according to two manners: for the limbs are either principal concaves, as the brain, heart, liver, lung, intestines, bladder, and their like; and thus when an arrow strikes one of these limbs and you feel signs of death, which cause I will recount later, then you should avoid extracting that arrow in those where the signs of death appear most prominently, and if you do not see these bad signs, and the arrow is not deeply lodged in the limb, then you should extract it and heal the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And the signs of the soul are when an arrow strikes it, and penetrates the bone, and exits through the foramen which is above the brain, for then occur violent soda, and scotomata, and vertigo, and heat in the eyes, and inflammation and heat of the tongue, and spasm and confusion of the mind, and vomiting of bile, and the voice is greatly impaired and destroyed, and moisture exits from the site of the wound white like flour, and his eyes resemble water.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And so if these signs appear to you, then you should abstain from cure and extraction of the arrow unless it is stuck outside.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	But the signs of the arrow when it strikes the heart are that it is near the left nipple, and feels like it has been stuck in a hard substance, and is not a hollow cause; and quickly the movement of the arrow is like the movement of the pulse, and flows from the wound black blood, and descend all ten parts.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the signs when the arrow has wounded the lung are effusion of frothy blood from the wound, and the vessels that are near the neck are swollen, and the color of the patient changes, and he breathes in a great spirit, and demands frequent breathing.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow strikes the diaphragm which is in the chest, then the pain is near the little ribs, and a great wound is made with violent pain and a sigh, and all the limbs of the muscles are not weakened.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the arrow strikes the stomach, then quickly see the wound with some digested food.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the arrow strikes the belly and is lodged in it, see any slit of the wound, or the fabric, or intestine which has been torn, and there is no hope for cure by extraction of the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow strikes the bladder and exits urine, and processes some cause to the parts outside, and is great pain on the patient, then know that it is deadly.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	But the other members such as the face, neck, throat, shoulders and their like of the limbs, are saved according to the most prominent dispositions when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery, and is not a venomous arrow.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I will recount to you what I have seen of these arrows, so that you may understand through this about your cure.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause is, because in one man an arrow struck the lacrimal bone of his eye on the root of his nose, and he extracted it from the other side, leaving the bones of his eyebrow, and he was healed, and did not occur in his eye any harm.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And extracted another arrow from a Jew which he struck in him on the bones of his eye, below the eyelid, and the arrow was already hidden, and he did not obtain it except for a little end with which it adhered to his staff, and it was a great arrow of the pointed arrows of the Turks, with lion ferrule, in which there were no eyebrows.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And the Jew was healed, and no harm occurred to his eye badly.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And extracted another arrow from a Christian man which had struck him in the throat, and it was an Arabic arrow, and it was that to which the eyebrows belong; and then I inserted it between two fingers, and it was already submerged in his throat, and I made it thin with that, and then extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And extracted another arrow from a man which had struck him in the belly, and I considered that he would die from it; and therefore, after they had passed thirty days and no change occurred to him of his dispositions, I inserted into the arrow and probed it, and he was healed, and no bad accident occurred to him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw a man in whom an arrow struck his back, and the wound was consolidated on him, and after fire close to seven years, the arrow exited through the root of the thigh.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman in whom an arrow struck her belly, and the wound was consolidated within her, and she did not change in her dispositions for ten days, and the woman did not suffer harm in any of her natural functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I saw another man in whom an arrow struck his face and the wound was consolidated, and the arrow was broken, not causing here any pain, and similar movements.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And extracted the arrow of the king's prince who was struck in the middle of his nose, and he had already declined to the right party a little, and the arrow was all hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called to his cure close to the extraction of the arrow after three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I probed the wound of the arrow with a slender probe, and he did not feel it; but he felt a puncture below the eyebrow on the right, and then I perceived that this puncture was from the end of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I applied the place with ointment in which is verity atractive and digestive, believing from me that the place would be exposed so that it appears to me the location of the arrow, drying on it.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And no significant accident occurred that the arrow had achieved that location; and I continued with the ointment on it for several days, and no accident occurred; and the wound between time was consolidated, and he healed the exit of his nose by space of several days after which one day he felt the arrow in his nose and recognized it to me.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then I paused on the wound acute corrosive medicine for several days until fire exited, and with the probe I probed that one, and I found the end of the arrow which adhered to the staff.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then I saw the plague disappear with that sharp medicine, and after some time, about four months, it completely went away.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And when the plague became inflamed, and I was able to insert forceps into it without causing any discomfort, then I stopped trying to remove it with my hands using various techniques, and instead began using forceps to extract it gently, as you will see from the description of these techniques in the following chapter. And so I removed this plague.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors believed that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored, but I was able to restore it, and the plague was healed, and the patient recovered completely and experienced no relapses.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I will now describe to you the process of extracting certain arrows, so that you may understand the rules and significance of what I have not described, for the parts of this craft and their definitions are not fully explained in this book.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And wise artisans compare a few things to many, and what is present to what is absent, and they discover new operations and new instruments as a result of the occurrence of foreign causes in their craft.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And so I say that arrows are not removed from the parts in which they are lodged, but according to two methods: either by extracting the part in which they are stuck, or by using the opposite method of the other part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And an arrow that is stuck in a fleshy part is extracted by being pulled out from where it entered, or it is removed and extracted.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if it does not come out immediately, then you should leave it for a few days until the flesh around it has healed and the inflammation and pain have subsided.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	Similarly, if it is stuck in a bone and does not come out immediately, then leave it for a few days and repeat the extraction and movement every day until it comes out.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if it does not come out after a few days, then you should drill a hole through the shaft of the arrow in that bone, from every angle, until the hole is enlarged and then extract the arrow.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the head and has already entered one of the ventricles of the brain, and the patient experiences some of those symptoms that I have mentioned, then refrain from extracting the arrow and leave it for a few days until the person has recovered; for if the arrow pierces the brain, death will not be prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is not stuck but only in the bone of the head and does not pass into the brain, and the patient remains well for several days without experiencing any of those symptoms, then you should proceed with extracting the arrow and the cause of its extraction.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	But if it is deeply stuck and does not come out immediately, then you should apply pressure around the shaft of the arrow as we have recommended, and then heal the wound.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	But if the arrow is deeply lodged in the body and hidden from sight, then you should probe it with your fingers and, if you feel it, pull it out using some tools that are suitable for extracting it.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot reach it because of the tightness of the plague and the length of the arrow, and there is no bone or nerve or vein in the way, then cut through the plague until it is enlarged enough for you to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if there are nails involved and they are stuck, then you should loosen the flesh all around where the arrow is lodged using every technique you can think of; and devise a way to do this, if you cannot remove the arrow through the opening in the flesh created by the fracture of the nails or by twisting them.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you are extracting the arrow from any part, use your fingers with forceps in every way possible to make it yield; and use a very gentle touch so that the arrow is not broken and its extraction is not made difficult for you.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot extract it immediately, then leave it for a few days until the parts around it have healed, and then try again as it will then be easier to remove.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	But if you are faced with a flow of blood, then follow the instructions for treatment that we have given in that chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And be careful not to cut any veins or nerves, or pierce the bowels, and proceed with every possible precaution to extract the arrow; do this slowly and carefully, just as we have recommended to you.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And therefore, you should contract the arrow so that the patient is in the same position as when the arrow struck him, for this is more beneficial.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	But if this is not possible for you, then do what you can according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	But the arrows that are stuck in the opposite part, or that have already entered some part on the outside, or cause a pulsing sensation in the part above the cordian vein, then tighten the tip of the arrow by feeling the affected part with your fingers; then cut it off at the place where the forceps are holding it; and then pull it out, for it is easier to extract in this way.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	But if it is stuck in the bone, then twist the arrow according to its opposite angle until the arrow cuts into the bone and widens the opening; then extract it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	But if not, leave it for a few days and then try again until you succeed in extracting it.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the shaft of the arrow is in that part, then push it through with your fingers.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	But if the shaft is broken and you want to administer pressure, then insert your finger into the hole of the arrow so that it fits into the hollow of the shaft and then push it with your finger.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	But if the arrow is hollow, then push it with a strong instrument inserted into it, for the arrow will be pushed out by this.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the arrow is poisoned, then hollow out all the flesh around where it is lodged, if you can do so, and then heal that wound with whatever you think is appropriate.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the arrow hits the foot, or the belly, or the bladder, or the side, and it is near enough for you to feel with your fingers, then probe it and be careful not to cut any veins or nerves, extract it and then heal the wound if there is bleeding.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	The shape of the forceps used to extract arrows:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Have their ends shaped like the beak of an owl, which grip the arrow so that it does not slip out.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And they are made in various shapes, large, small, medium or thin, according to the size of the arrow and its thickness, and the width of the wound and its tightness.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	The shape of this curved end is like the beak of an owl so that it pushes away the arrow's shaft, and the pushing end is straight:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	The shape of the straight end:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	is like a rake so that it pushes away the arrow's shaft in the concavity and is pushed by that.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Of punctures of the veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins of phlebotomy from which blood usually flows are .xxx. of which are in the head .xvi., are two pulsating veins which are near the ears, called alhasisain; two herbs that appear in the temples; and two veins in the lacrimal of the eyes, which are called aspicientz; and the vein prepared in the middle of the forehead, and the vein that is at the tip of the nose; and two guidelike veins that are on the neck; and two veins that are on the upper lip; and two veins that are on the lower lip; and — these are the veins that are called algelic —; and there are two veins below the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	But the veins that are phlebotomized in the arms are 5; Among these are one cephalic vein, and is called the wild side; and the people call it “the vein of the head”, and it is deaf, and it is a middle vein, and it is composed of a ramus of the basilica, and of another ramus of the cephalic; and they name that one among the people “the vein of all the body”, and the basilica is the vein which is paused on the domestic side, and is named “citillar”, and the commoners call it “the vein of the belly”; and the funis of the arm, and it is paused over the wrist, and it is that one in which phlebotomy is performed, and it is that one that appears above the wrist by manifest appearance; and salvatella, and it is the vein that is between the great auricle and the lesser one, and there are two ramps on it.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and the leg there are three veins; one of those is that which is below the curvature of the jaw of the wild side; and the second is sophena, and its location is below the leg of the domestic side; and the sciatic vein, and its location is below the leg of the wild side; and in the leg are other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The juice of the veins which are near the ears is for ancient catarrh and emigrant and phlegmatic ulcers of the head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of bleeding those is according to what you count for yourself: it is that he should cut the head of the patient, and rub the head of the patient in the occipital at the location of both veins with a broad cloth with good friction; then tightly hold the patient's neck with a bandage where the two appear and their locations are near the ears at two places depressed from the head; and you seek that one with your finger, and if you feel the pulse of those with your finger, here is a sign with a test.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then you take the scalpel, and it is that which is incident, and then you insert that below the vein in the codicil where the phlebotomy comes to the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And then elevate your hand with the vein and the codicil to the parts above, and pierce the vein with an incident incision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And let the length of the incision be the quantity of two fingers adjusted or around that; and let blood flow as much as you want.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then tightly hold that with powder and lye until it is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And now I have preceded in the beginning of the book the incision of those and their cautery.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	But from the two arterial veins that are in the temples, the phlebotomy juice is for ancient emigrant and bad sore and constant ophthalmia and sharp body of excesses poured into the eyes.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of phlebotomizing those is according to what you count for yourself: constrict the patient' neck in motion until the two veins appear by manifest appearance and be demonstrated their pulse below your finger, and then you seek that with a test.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then you elevate the codicil above the vein to the parts above with your index finger, and insert phlebotomy incident below it, and elevate the vein above; and pierce that thus as you have done in the other two veins; and let blood flow according to the quantity of your necessity.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then loosen the constriction of the patient, and pause your finger on the vein for one hour, and then pause a poultice and powder and tightly hold that above with strong constriction until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And now has been preceded the reminder of them, and of those the incision and the attraction in the beginning of the book.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And therefore, the phlebotomy juice of the vein of the forehead is for phlebotomy of the cephalic to ancient illnesses of the face and to emigrant and heat and putrid ulcerous.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of phlebotomy for him is according to what you count for yourself; it is that the patient tightly holds his neck with a bandage until the vein appears, and then take the instrument which is named fossor, of which this is its form:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Pause the eminent point which is at the end of the fossor on that vein and stab it with a needle or with another cause in his hand, in the manner of him, and let blood flow according to the quantity which you want; and then loosen the perforation of the patient and tightly hold that until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And some times it is opened with phlebotomy lateral, however not because the phlebotomy is of acute extremity like the others, but rather it is of lateral extremity, and phlebotomize that according to the cross, because the bone is near it and strongly break it in it when it is phlebotomized if it is thin.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	But the phlebotomy juice of the two veins that are in the lacrimal of the eyes for scabies of the eye for heat and weeping in the eye, and for illnesses of the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of phlebotomy is that the patient tightly holds his neck with a bandage, and then phlebotomize those while you are standing over his head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And let the phlebotomy be made according to the cross at length a little with phlebotomies few, because in the place there is no meat; and if the phlebotomy is thin, strongly its end is broken.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then let blood flow as much as it is necessary for you, and pause a poultice on those, and tightly hold those for one night, and then loosen those.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	But the phlebotomy of the vein of the nose is for acute fever and for violent heat and illnesses of the face and emigrant and heat that occur in the face, and especially when it is ancient.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of phlebotomy for him is that the patient tightly holds his neck and then take his nose with your left hand, and take the phlebotomy thin long and insert that in the middle place of the end of the nose according to rectitude, because the vein does not appear by feeling here, and because blood begins to flow immediately.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Because you finish your hand with phlebotomy little by little and let blood flow according to your necessity; and then ligate that for one night, because that is restored speedily.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	But the phlebotomy juice of the two guide-like veins for constriction of ale and for commencement of leprosy and for many illnesses and anger and evil putrid corrosive ulcers like that with heropotomenon.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of phlebotomy for them is that the patient constricts each one under his neck with ligature; and let the artifexes stand over the head of the patient, and the patient sit on a chair.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And then phlebotomize the vein lengthwise with broad phlebotomy little by little, and then withdraw blood according to tempered quantity or according to that which you see of necessity that is at that one; and then do likewise to the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	Then untie the ligament and tighten the two veins with a ligature so that the patient is not suffocated and let him breathe so that the plague is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the benefit of the phlebotomy of the veins in the legs, leads to small swellings and pustules in the mouth and corruption of the gums, and bad ulcers and fissures, and to bad ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of the phlebotomy of these is that you make the patient bend forward towards you and tighten his neck with a band, and then open his lips and look for two veins whose one is on the right side of the lip and the second from the left; and the demonstration of each is due to the darkness of each of them, and this more because in their surroundings are small black veins; and then cut each of them by cutting.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	But if you have doubt below you and do not know which is the one, then understand the incision of the most obvious of them, and of the most evident of them.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make the appearance of the two veins that are above the lips.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	But usually it is better to cut both veins which are below the lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	But the benefit of the two veins that are below the tongue is the phlebotomy of the cephalic to prevent suffocation that occurs in the throat, to the evil of the uvula and to the evils of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of phlebotomizing these is that you follow the patient's head in front of the sun, and raise his tongue, and look below the tongue, on one side of it there is a vein and on the other side there is also a vein, and the color of each of them is inclined to blackness.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then phlebotomize each of them; and be careful that you do not end your hand in phlebotomizing these, because below these there are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the veins that are phlebotomized in the head are those which usually flow in all men, and their phlebotomy is made according to two methods, either they put on them mirtilat or olive oil with subtlety declining; or cut them with a scalpel, and call it if anessil, and this is its form:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this anessil is that it convient to section and of those are special sides and subtle according to the amplitude of the veins and according to the tightness of them.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of phlebotomy mirt:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	Be the side of him like this with vees, and it is necessary to open concave veins full of apparent large gross blood; and to those who contain thick twisted blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the form of phlebotomy olive:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this phlebotomy is of lesser latitude and more subtle extremity, and it is necessary to phlebotomize the subtle veins that contain thin citrus blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	But the benefit of the phlebotomy of the basilic vein which is one of three veins: because it draws blood from the evils that are below the throat and neck, and from what affects the feet and belly.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it is necessary for the phlebotomizer, when phlebotomizing that, to be very careful about that and to be above-fear in that, because below him there is an artery, and if he err and adjust in the puncture of the phlebotomy, he will cut that artery and he will stop the flow of blood, therefore he must not phlebotomize that with sharp phlebotomy, but cut it with alnessil.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilic does not appear by manifest appearance, then you must leave it and change to the other, or seek one of its branches; or phlebotomize in place of it at the end of the arm, because that is manifest; and cut it with alnessil phlebotomy as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	But if you want the phlebotomy of the antecubital, then you must touch the place between the wrist and the elbow in front of the tightness of the arm, and then press on it with a bandage; and then raise the arm and cut the vein with a concave section with alnessil phlebotomy as we have said; and be careful that the percussion box does not reach any space within the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you see, as you tighten the ligament, swelling in the place that you have pressed with a bandage, then that swelling is of the artery, and therefore avoid it.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you see the blood flowing in the phlebotomy like water of a child, and the blood is thin red, then you know that it is artery blood; and therefore you stop and put your finger over that for a long time; and then pinch the arm and if the blood stops, because it has stopped flowing, then you release that.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And watch over the patient during his healing, and be very careful about him and do not anger him for several days until he is healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	But if the blood is not stopped, and you see that it is due to you that there is no medicine at all, then you cut the artery, if it appears to you; because its extremity is contracted, and the blood is stopped; or take a piece of fist, and open it, and hold one end and tighten it over the place of the vein with a descent incision with a ligament and with powder in between the other day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And then if the blood is stopped, it is good; and if not, then heal that with what precedes it at the recollection of the place of the powders that stop the flow of blood.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the incision of the blood is difficult in many dispositions by the small place of the plague and the possibility of the ligament of the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	But the phlebotomy of the dark vein is beneficial that draws blood from the superior part of the head and from the lower part of the body; because it is composed of a branch of the basilic and a branch of the cephalic, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And it is necessary for the phlebotomizer to be very careful about that in the phlebotomy of it, because below it there is a nerve; and then if he adjusts in the puncture of the phlebotomy and touches the nerve, stupor will occur to him, and its healing is difficult, and it is not healed at all, and this nerve many times appears in the feeling; and if it is hidden in some men and is subtle and not demonstrated, then you must stop the phlebotomy with the one with which you phlebotomize with a section of alnessil, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then you open the vein in length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The benefit of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it draws blood from the head and refers to the evils of the eyes.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And it is necessary in this properly, if you want to phlebotomize with olive oil or mirtil phlebotomy; because it is the safest of all veins, because there is no artery or nerve below it.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	But however, it is necessary for you to phlebotomize that you must be careful that with the phlebotomy you do not poke only the head of the finger so gently, and seek the place more gently, and do not notice it, if it is not touched by the first percussion which is above it by phlebotomy several times.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	But however, it is apostemat in some men when it is not phlebotomized in the first percussion, but do not notice that apostemat.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	But the quality of the phlebotomy of that and the accidents of it are many, in which you must think about their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first of them is that you should know that phlebotomy is not administered except for the preservation of health and for the hope and precaution of the occurrence of diseases, and that phlebotomy be performed in one of the veins which are in the head, that is: cephalica, fusca and basilica; and that phlebotomy be performed at the beginning of spring, after breakfast in spring and autumn, and in winter after eating when signs of repletion appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And phlebotomy should be performed on the third day or the first after three hours have passed in the morning.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	But phlebotomy that is administered, but when it is caused by convenience and necessity for it, at night or day, in any hour and at any time.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And children should not be phlebotomized until they are 14 years old, and pregnant women should not be phlebotomized unless from the fourth month to the seventh, and the old should not be phlebotomized who have already passed 60 years.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And when someone wants to be phlebotomized for some reason, one should cleanse the bowels before phlebotomy with a lion's clyster if there is retained flatulence in them, so that the veins do not throw off the superfluities during phlebotomy of the bowels which are cleansed and that they do not harm the main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And those who are phlebotomized should not be sick with a sacred disease or drunkenness, or suffering from a disease or intoxication, nor those who have recently recovered from their sickness, nor those who are sick of dropsy, but phlebotomy should be feared when there is colic pain and vomiting, and when there is pain in the abdomen, and when there is multiplication of cough and of labor, and because of eating or waking through the night, or because of any cause that dissolves the strength, or those who are sick with a bodily or animal disease.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And consider in the subsidence of humors before it if the blood is thick, with foods and drinks, and with medicines if that is possible for it.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And enter a bath if any cause does not prohibit it, or be exercised by some exercise so that the blood is subsided.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And stop the phlebotomy of him in the feet of the day, that is around the hour of terce, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And for that the feet of him should be guarded on that day from all accidental diseases, animal, such as anxiety, anger, fear, and from all bodily diseases, such as labor and excessive pain and cough and their likes.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And at his bath make the causes present in the use of which the blood usually flows from men with aromaticity and odorant and with balms and their likes according to the quantity of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the phlebotomizer on a cushion that is put higher than the cushion of him who should be phlebotomized.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And then stretch out his arm, and rub that with his hand the phlebotomizer two or three times; and then tighten the bandage with a belt and wrap that two times.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And let the tightness be moderate, for when the tightness is equal or the tightness is with superfluity, then the flow of blood is prohibited; or it is with mollification, and then the flowing out of blood from the body is prohibited.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And then the tightness, let him who should be phlebotomized rub his hands together between them until the veins are dilated and declared to the sensation.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And then the phlebotomizer anoints his phlebotomy with a little of the ancient oil properly; and then pause his hand over that vein, below the place from which he wants the phlebotomy, so that the vein escapes a little, and the compression is lessened because from those veins from which the compression is made the blood flows out, and when the phlebotomy is paused over that it is contracted, and is extracted the phlebotomizer; and the phlebotomy does not open the vein, and if it opens, that vein is contracted.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And so, for this let the phlebotomizer be firm and be solicit in all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And then pause the phlebotomy, but if the vein is opened in one go, well and good; and if not, you iterate that again another go below that place a little, or over it with a compression, if the place is not pustule.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the place is pustule or the patient becomes scared, then you leave it for one or two days, and do not tighten the bandage, for strongly he will draw out the pustule, nor enter a bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And then iterate the phlebotomy if she desires it.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the wound is small and the blood flows subtlety, and you fear that the blood does not flow the quantity that you desire, then you iterate the phlebotomy in that vein according to rectitude and adjust in the wound a little, and do that with compression before that place is pustule, for the place is pustule in most men because of little wounds.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if he has already pustule, then do not iterate over him, for it does not excuse you any cause; and pause over that some part of the wound of oil, for it arouses the blood of the body.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better in this place of oil than the other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And similarly administer oil in every phlebotomy in which the phlebotomies of veins are with the prohibition of the flow of blood, and do that theriaca alfolic and sagzenea when it is paused from one of those over the place, for the blood is subsided and is disturbed when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if in the place of phlebotomy a large pustule is generated, because many goings occur, and majorly to him who has not stood blooded except that going, or in the wound of the vein is little, then you cut it, and pause over the place sponge infused in water and salt, a little scorched, and tighten that for one hour, for it is dissolved.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And let him who does that then cause the subsidence of blood from that vein with completion of him or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if it turns in the place for several days some blackness or viridity, do not note that; and if you desire, pause over that some cause of aloe and of myrrh dissolved, or some cause of juice of mallows or of calamine or their likes.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And many goings occur so pustules and eminences because of phlebotomy of the basilic.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And so pause your hand over that, and if you then tighten softness because of your compression over that, then that eminence is wicked and bad; and then beware that you pause over that some cause of what we have said, for strongly the blood will flow from the artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And make ointment with that in which is stiffness, so that the place is hardened, and then cure that with the other cure until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And let him who extracts blood from every man according to the quantity of his strength and according to the color winning over the blood according to what appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	For if the blood is black, then you let it escape until it is red; and similarly if you see it thick, then you let it escape until it is subsided; and similarly if it is acute, until the keenness of it is gone.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And to him who is full and strong and has need of extraction of blood in one go, let the phlebotomy of the vein be enlarged and the phlebotomies be long.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And in those who are fucked, the opposite of that should be done, and whatever extracts it should be extracted in many layers, and the traction should be tight.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best way to administer phlebotomy of a vein is that there be a transverse section, not puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this manner of phlebotomy is saved from bleeding and cutting of nerves, and is more praiseworthy and safer than phlebotomy according to latitude and longitude.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And to whom it is customary to happen a syncope after phlebotomy, and whoever you cure that before the phlebotomy with a little bread soaked in wine of pomegranates or of simple oxymel heated; and extract all of the blood in three or four layers.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if it is a paleness of complexion, then take before the phlebotomy bread soaked in myrrh syrup or in scented honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and the like, or in scented syrup and very fragrant.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if syncope happens after phlebotomy, and the cause of it is a loss of much blood, then let him take to drink water of meat and scented syrup very subtle; and use aromatics with aloes, and let him anoint his feet with that.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes that we have said in the division in the chapter of syncope by evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And who wants to open his arm and dissolve his blood second layer, whoever from whom the phlebotomy is for much evacuation, and whose virtue is cold, that evacuates the blood little by little, it is according to the quantity of the virtue in the days that follow.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	But who wants to open his arm and drain his blood second time, and his body is strong, then do that around seven or nine hours from the first phlebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	But who wants to throw the blood of his body contrary to the part to which it declines, let him be opened on the second day or the third.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	But the body in which much blood is already drained and it becomes acute and fever occurs, let him be drained of blood in one layer and let a great quantity be drained from him and let the aperture be enlarged so that syncope may occur, since you have preserved all the conditions of phlebotomy; and let you place your hand over the pulse of him due to the flow of blood, so that death does not occur instead of syncope, for many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And when you want to open the arm and evacuate blood second time, when the orifice of the vein is already closed and it has become difficult to draw blood, do not press upon it with force and have it extended slightly bent, for this is very bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Have the vein within which it was phlebotomized a second time; or remain that with the acuteness of the phlebotomy when the blood coagulates in the orifice of the vein; or place over it tyrian purple, or of sandaraca, and press that with slight compression while the blood is drawn out.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is inflamed, then leave that and do not touch it until the inflammation is settled.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if necessity compels you to evacuate blood second time, and there is no excuse, then you may bleed him on that spot or in the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called "veins of the arm" is phlebotomized in place of the basilic or the cephalic, when they are not found or are concealed, for it is composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of his phlebotomy is that the patient immerses his hand in warm water so that the vein dilates and appears obviously.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And then it should be constricted over that with a ligature with slight tightness; and phlebotomy according to the small transverse, not longitudinally nor according to length.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And let the aperture be wide and let your phlebotomy with which you phlebotomize that upon the joint of the hand be a little.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you immerse the hand in warm water and let the blood run in the water until you perceive your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	But if you are in the days of summer, then you are excused from immersing the hand in warm water, and the body is bathed in warm water in the time of winter.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And phlebotomy of this vein is safer than of all the other veins, for there is no pulsating vein nor nerve beneath it.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And phlebotomy of the outer part of the right hand is confounded with maladies of the liver.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of his phlebotomy is that you constrict the hand with a ligature or with your hand, since you have immersed it in warm water, until the vein is dilated and is fully demonstrated; and then phlebotomize it transversely; and if you pierce it from all sides, it will not harm that.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And beware of not piercing your hand with the phlebotomy, for beneath it are the nerves of the fingers bare of flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And then immerse the hand in warm water and let the blood run in that, for if you do not immerse that in warm water, the blood will coagulate in the orifice of the vein, and it is prohibited from flowing.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when the blood is drawn according to the quantity of necessity, then you place over the vein oil and salt, so that it may not be consolidated firmly; and similarly do you do in all veins tightly.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	But the youth of phlebotomy of that of the left hand is that it is confounded with maladies of the brain.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do similarly in the phlebotomy of him likewise as you have done in the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the youth of the basilic vein from phlebotomy is to maladies that are below the body, likewise as maladies of the mother, and to retention of menstrua, and to maladies of the knees and ulcers of thighs and legs, and to their like of maladies.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of his phlebotomy is that the patient immerses his leg in warm water and does over that friction so that the veins appear obviously; and he lies upon the joint of the leg with a bandage; and the place of the vein let the finger point out, and from that ramify into the fascia of the leg many branches.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And then phlebotomy the most ample branch or beneath the leg from where the ankle bone appears, for it is better and safer.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you phlebotomize that in the fascia of the leg, then beware of the nerves that are beneath that upon the fascia of the leg, and phlebotomy with which you phlebotomize it according to the transverse, as if you wanted to pierce it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And let the phlebotomy be gentle.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	But if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you immerse his leg in warm water and let the blood run in that until it is evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the phlebotomist erred in the first layer, then repeat with the phlebotomy on him a little, for the place is safe; and do not fear him malicious, but beware of the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And similarly do the other basilic likewise.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And of the sciatic vein, the place likewise as we have said is beneath the ankle bone of the part wild.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the cause of the patient's bleeding is hip pain when it comes from bloodletting.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the patient's bleeding is that the patient enters a bath, and quickly and tightly ties the bandage on his hip on the side of the wide space above the talon, in four places with one long slender bandage, for it does not appear except through this.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And therefore when it appears, then you should bleed that according to each skill that is within your ability and according to the cross, and it is better; or pierce that by incision or cut that by cutting, for the place of that is salt.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in most men very hidden; and if you pierce that, and it does not appear at all to the sense of touch, then bleed one vein of him, and it is that which appears on the back of the foot opposite the ear and ring fingers.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And beware of the nerves, and make the quantity of blood flow that you want.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Then untie the bandage and place a poultice over the site of the bleeding and bind the area tightly, for quickly it is healed.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of phlegm and of the qualities of using those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Phlegms are of horns, or of warts, or of verrucae.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And phlegm is made according to two manners: one of them is with incision and extraction of blood, and the other is phlegm without incision.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this phlegm which is without incision is according to two manners, for it is with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the phlegms that are administered with incision and extraction of blood are fourteen places of the body, of which one place in which phlegm is paused is alnocrati, and it is the back part of the head; and the middle place of it from two parts of the neck; and phlegm of the chin below the jawbone and below the mouth; and phlegm of two spatulas; and phlegm of the armpit, and it is on the end of the breast; and phlegm of two little holes, and they are of two arms; and phlegm of two joints; and phlegm of two thighs.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And phlegm does not extract blood except from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and for this it does not have the virtue through those, just as it is cauterization by bleeding; nor is it believed that phlegm be made with fire or without fire in any illness made by repletion when the whole body is evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	But if necessity prompts phlegm for illness or for continuous, we administer that in all hour at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, and in the middle place of it, and whenever it is appropriate.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause of this is that in those men is the blood multiplied when they indigest from extraction by phlegm and attrobs heaviness and hardness in their head; and in those who attrob repletion and heat in their face and head, and in their neck; and in those who attrob puffing in their face and forehead, and darkness and weakness in their eyes; and in those whose location of phlegm is gushing; and in those whose breath is multiplied; and in those who attrob taste of blood in their mouth, or that the tongue is apथमous and spits blood; and in those whose sleep is multiplied, and in those who see red and aged things, and other causes seem to them.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore when you see any cause of those, and especially if it is in the third or middle of the month, then we command phlegm to be made after two or three hours have passed of the day.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the cause of phlegm of the nape is that when it confer to heaviness in the head and to this that it is bent towards the eyes; but it should be believed that this is appropriate evacuation of the whole body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this phlegm is in the place of bleeding of the cephalic vein.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not believed that one should use that which is of complex friction, or in which is catarrh, for it gives great harm to that person.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And for this it is not believed that use of that by the old, and on the heads of which are cold illnesses.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	But to that person on whom that is continually done, then it is believed that you command the phlegm-taker to pause his hand a little with the ventose at the parts below, fearing the generation of oblivion.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	But phlegm of the ear is in the place of bleeding of the dark vein and of the basilic; and for this it confer to asthma, and to constriction of throat and to splitting of instrument of throat, and to coughing, and to repletion.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And it is believed that the phlegm of the ear be bound a little, for if it is paused below, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And phlegm of the forehead confer to accidental pains in the head and to ophthalmia, and to migraine, and to heat, and to pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the place of bleeding of the basilic.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And it is believed that you command the phlegm-taker not to press his hand with incision so that he does not pierce the artery and cause an excess of blood flow.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And phlegm below the chin confer to cold in the mouth, and to corruption of the gums, and to appearances to them of illnesses that are in the mouth, and they stand in the place of bleeding of the alar that is in the two lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	But phlegm that is made over the two spatulas confer to headache, which is made by repletion of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And phlegm of the two parts within the little holes confer to benefit of bleeding from three veins, that is, of the basilic, dark and cephalic; for it attracts blood from all those small veins that are in the flesh, and those small veins of the other large veins through which the attraction comes to the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the phlegm-taker that he does not push too much in incision, for the place is denuded of flesh, and below it are nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is phlegm with which one phlegms over the buttocks and confer to the haemorrhoids of the anus and to ulcers further below.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And it is believed that you command the phlegm-taker that it be a strong phlegm, and that it be of warts, for the place indigests from strong incision; and strongly let him phlegm with strong phlegms that are subtle incisions, and let it be scarred with incision.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	But phlegms of the legs minor for minor evidence, for they draw blood from all the body, and confer to old pains of the hips and of the mother, and of the bladder; and they provoke menstruation, and confer to cough and addam; and they stand in the place of bleeding of two sopines, and armpit, and of two joints.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, they weaken all the body and make syncopes occur in many people.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And from phlegms of the armpit the benefit is close to the benefit of phlegms of two legs.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of phlegms is that you pause the phlegm at the beginning seen and sweat through coolness, and do not prolong the position of phlegms, but pause them briefly, and let the humors come to the place by descending evenly.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease this and continue while he sees the place already red and swollen, and that the heat of blood appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	Then you gently scrape and suction the wound a little at a time, and be mindful of the patient's vital signs.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For those with tender skin, you should only scrape once and not too deeply, so that the wound does not become ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And instruct the suction device operator to increase the intensity of the scraping and take a little more, tempering the suction as appropriate.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the vein is thick, then you should scrape twice, because in the first scraping, the channel for blood and moisture is opened.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	In the second scraping, pursue the inquiry into the extraction of the thick blood.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is very filthy, then a third scraping should be done to achieve the goal.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	Finally, when we want to extract a little blood or a small amount, one scraping is enough for us.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we scrape with a deep scraping; and if we know that the blood is thick, then we should scrape with a wide scraping.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term for the scraping in which there is only the depth of the blade.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if that from which the blade is thick, tough, brown, and its pores are tight, then let the suction cups be applied gently, open and resolute; if in the summer season, also like oil of aloe or oil of violets, or oil of bitter almonds, or oil of cedar wood; and if in winter, then oil of neroli, or oil of lilies, or oil of camomile, or blood, and to those similar.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the superficiality is thick, raw, then let the oil be of marigold, or oil of balsamita, or oil of aloe, or oil of aniseed, and to those similar.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	But if the patient has ample pores of tender skin, then let oil be prohibited, and let those places on which the suction cups are to be placed be washed with vinegar or warm water of solanum, or water of cedar wood, or water of borage, and similar to those.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And that from which the blood is of great moisture, wash its suction cups with sour wine, or water of myrrh and sumac, and similar to those.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And that from which the superficialities are thick, wash its suction cups with old wine, or water of sage, which is marjoram, or of aniseed tea, or of camomile, and similar to those.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And that the suction should be guarded against bathing; have that it be administered close to bathing for an hour or two, and that he sleep with the suction applied.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What must one do who is to be bled by cupping before cupping.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	Consider this at the beginning: if the patient or he who is to be bled is choleric and has hot blood and inflammation, then let him take cooling remedies, like bitter apples with vinegar, and endive in sour wine and leeks, and secanin, and julep, and similar to those.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And give him foodstuffs like pullets, and meat of young birds that are roasted, and foodstuffs seasoned with vinegar, and to him similar.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And that from which the complexion is raw, let him take in drinking honey and alum water, or honey of sesamum seeds, and sumac, and very fragrant wine between July and August; and that he be admonished to drink little and eat little, and give his foodstuffs pullets and carnbibi and pigeons and small birds and doves.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And that on the day of cupping and phlebotomy, let his drinking be greater than his eating.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And that he be given in drinking at certain times to certain people a dose of theriac, or medicine of musk, as it is musked, or alcelita before cupping or phlebotomy, or afterwards, so that the principal members are comforted and the blood is subtilized; and let them not take those which scald.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	But the suction cups that are after scraping be over the heart, and on the liver and spleen, and over the navel, in the places of the joints, and the armpit of the broad, because those members do not undergo scraping upon themselves.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not used for those except for bloodletting from a member, as they use the cupping over the breast in the disease of flow of blood of the blood of the veins; and they use that to dissolve thick rawness invaded by the member, as they apply it over the belly and navel; because that rarifies the member and scrapes it and removes the pain from which it resolves the cupping.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is also applied to the knees when they become swollen in their joint or burst, because by strength of attraction strong its joint opilacion and eradicates the pain from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And similarly it does when it is applied to the heart and liver after cupping in those who are enclosed.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these suctions are administered dry with suction only; and some times they are administered with fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some times they are administered full of water in the diseases of the liver.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And that is why the cupping should be filled and be large, it is water alone or water in which are cut herbs to that appropriate.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of cupping administered with fire: it is the width of the orifice of two fingers, according as we have formed it; and the quantity of the fire be the length of a palm; and be in its breadth, in the place that is in the circuit, the length of him, the fire be small according to the quantity that enters it an awl.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	It is made of oak wood or citronwood, of thick edges, lions, dogs and horses in such a way that it does not lead the member by its position on him.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And be at its middle a transverse branch of oak or of iron, on which is applied candle with the fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And let this cupping be large greater than that which we have recommended; and the small less according to the diseases and the condition of him who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the cuppings of children and weakened ones be smaller than those of young people and large bodied.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of applying this cupping with fire over the member is that it extends the fire with decent fire before a few candles of wax, and apply that over the middle of the transverse branch in the middle place of the cupping, so that the fire be set around with straws so that the patient's body is not burned.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And then it be applied to the member of the patient, and his finger be over the hole that we have said, between while we hold the cupping and do not feel the finger and that the vapor rises over that hole, the cupping is dissolved as soon as possible.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And prop the fire the heat according to his manner, and repeat that if he feels it of that.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	But in cupping that is administered in the disease of pleurisy, with water, in which there is no transverse branch nor hole, and it is not administered except that it be filled with water, and it is applied to the member only by itself.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And that is its form: And this cupping when it is larger, it is better, so that it can receive great quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter 97.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Leeches are not applied to small parts of the body, but to those where it is not possible to place cupping glasses due to their size, such as the lip and gum and similar areas; or on a part of the body that has been stripped of flesh, like the finger and nose and similar areas.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those leeches that you have found in the waters of pure spring water.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And let them be left in the water for one day and night, so that they become hungry, and let no cause remain in their bellies; and let the body be evacuated at the beginning by phlebotomy and cupping; and let the patient's limbs be rubbed until they turn red; and let them be placed upon him.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are full, then.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to suck the wound with a cupping glass, it is more beneficial in healing.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, then wash the wound with sweet wine and then with warm water; and let it be rubbed and expressed.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the flow of blood continues due to the application of the leeches and it is oozing, then you dip a cloth in warm water and place it over the area so that the oozing stops.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the blood is profuse, then you powder the wound with powdered vitriol, or guaiacum and similar substances from astringent causes, until the blood stops; or place on the wound the pods of beans that have been roasted and let them adhere to the wound, and let the blood stop.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And, if necessary, repeat the application of leeches, when it is possible to change them.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if the leeches are prohibited from being suspended, then let the wound be rubbed with fresh blood or leave a needle in the wounds until blood comes out; and then let them be placed, for when they feel some blood they will immediately adhere.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to fall off, powder them with a little ground aloe, or salt, or ash, and they will soon do so.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the treatment of the third part: of restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is very necessary in the art of medicine; and it is a restoration of fracture and accidental dislocation of bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh son, learn that the foolish doctors and the vulgar and those who have never read the books of the Ancients nor understood a letter of them boast about this chapter.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason this manner of the wise men in our land is hidden; and I have not been obliged to do so at any time until now; and I have not used what I have learned, except through long study of the books of the Ancients and contemplation upon their wisdom, so that I might extract knowledge from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And also by adding my own experience and study over the course of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter everything that my knowledge and experience encompass; for I have condensed it for you and relieved you of the burden of reading lengthy explanations; and I have condensed it to the end of the explanation; and demonstrated it at the end of the demonstration; and formed many forms of the instruments administered in it, as I have done in the two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and collections from being fractured bones, from which their premise is necessary before we begin to remind the members of the fracturing and various of each.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	And therefore, we will give in the beginning of this chapter the summaries of speech; and the chapters at the understanding of which at the beginning are perhaps the artificers and to station upon the truth of those; so are you and those who are prompt that know or learn this noble art from you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore I say that when it happens to someone fracture or dislocation or twist or hernia, then you should first apply phlebotomy or bleeding of that, or any embrocation, if no counterindication, such as debility of strength, or the person is an infant, or elderly in decrepitude, or it is a time of violent heat, or violent friction.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And let him be fed on a diet of fresh herbs and meats of birds and crabs; and abstain from fattening foods and from all foods that fill the veins with blood, so that you ensure the formation of a firm scab, and if you do not fear the effusion of matter into the limb.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to his usual diet with which he is accustomed.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And therefore when the broken bone begins to be restored, then let the patient be fed on nutritious foods of light and heavy foods in which there is viscosity, such as foods made from wheat cooked in water, rice, capers, fish, cow's belly, eggs, fresh peas, wine, and heavy foods similar to these; and with this diet coagulation of the fracture is made more quickly and gently.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And know that the bones are broken when they are in the first youth and in the elderly, it is not possible for them to be continued and consolidated according to their nature due to the withering of their limbs.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are consolidated and continued according to their nature at all times by the withering of those limbs, and they are continued and consolidated in the end of softness, as are the bones of young children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	However, nature adjusts and connects the broken bone of every part any cause similar to glue in which there is thickness that adheres and strengthens together, so that it comes to an end of strength and firmness, as fire at the beginning, so that no cause prohibits it from its works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason, it is necessary to stop the patient's foods, foods in which there is weight and viscosity and thickness, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Great diversity of fracture according to the diversity of the limb.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And know that the kinds of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the limbs, for the fracture of the bone of the leg is different from the fracture of the bone of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the foot is different from the fracture of the bone of the toe; and likewise all the other limbs are diverse among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I have experienced the reminder of every kind of fracture, explained in its distinct chapter from the others.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Great diversity of fracture within itself.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the kinds of fracture of the bone in their metapyses are diverse; for there is made arcuate fracture some that occur in them stellate; and some fractures according to the length of the bone: and so are the fractures of the satagia and astragalus and accessory and non-accessory bones, as occurs in the pen when it is prepared for writing, and there is made fracture with crack and disruption in the head, and fissure fracture is made small.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And every kind has its own pain or torment peculiar in its restoration according to what comes to mind distinctly in its locations.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Great sign of fracture of the bone.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And by that is known fracture of the bone: its crookedness and its protuberance and appearance to the touch, and also when you press it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore when there is not in the location apparent crookedness nor is it made due to your touch when you press the bone with agitation and the patient does not complain of great pain, then it is not here fracture.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	There may be tortuosity or a small fissure, so do not be afraid to massage it with your hand and with compression all over; pause on it some medicines of which you will find reminder in the appropriate moment for that place; and let it be tight by subtle constriction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And know that the place where it is arched and not split into two or anything else that does not happen in it, when it is all swollen to its counterpart, then you should start by rectifying it by cauterization so that it happens to it an abscess.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if an abscess happens to it, then leave it for a few days until the abscess goes down; and then heal it in whatever way you can, with elevation and ingeniosity.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And know that restoration of it and piercing of it is worse than the pain from the bone in which it happens.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And then strengthen it according to what you will be reminded of.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	But if in the bone there is swelling, then extension of this broken member from two parts is necessary, if it is the hand or foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two strings or one string and the hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And let your position be such that you hold the member in its natural place while the parts are extended from the broken member; then you must force these joints to return ingeniously and in any way you can in their places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And watch yourself according to your strength that no pain or injury happens to the patient by your operation; and force yourself according to your power to apply one bone to another's companion according to their best forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And if you opportunely touch it with your hand and see any diverse cause, rectify it and heal it by the quantity of your skill.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid violent extension and compression, as many foolish doctors do many times make an abscess happen by their operation, or cause contraction in the member as we have seen happen many times by the operation of them many times.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And then connection, equalization, and decent operation, and constriction of that member, and rest and tranquility; warn the patient about it and make him avoid paining himself in the hours of his vigils and sleep, and watch his revolution and agitation, and attend to his excretion, and attend to all his movements with all your skill; and look to see if the position of the member is a position by which there is security from pain, the cause of which is that when he feels in the disposition of the position of the member pain or injury; then change it to another disposition by which he does not feel pain; and watch over it so that its position be straight and equal, so that no tortuosity happens to the member when it is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the constriction of the broken member is that you recognize it; because you should know that broken members are differentiated in their smallness and in their greatness and in the form of those.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And of those which are small like the arm and the finger and the elbow and similar to them, then let the wrapping be of very thin cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	But those which are large like the thigh or the leg, let there be wrapping of tough cloth, for the tough binding connects the large member and strengthens it from all parts by equal constriction, so that no stain enters it.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And then begin, and your evacuation of equalization, pause the convenient ligament over that fracture with three wrappings or four according to what the member deserves; and strengthen your hand a little with the ligament.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then go to it at the most superior part of the place of the fracture, and strengthen so that your constriction with which you have strengthened the place of the fracture is not relaxed.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And then lengthen yourself by wrapping the place of the fracture a little, and soften the constriction little by little as you take from it a great part.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And then take another bandage and wrap that other part over the broken place, and then go to the wrappings at the most inferior part of the fracture; and let your operation be in the constriction of the wrapping and in softening that according to what we have said above about the first wrapping.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then pause between the wrappings of cotton or cloth with which the tortuosity of the fracture is equalized if there is tortuosity; and if not, do not pause in it for any cause.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then pause another bandage over it, and then heal it over these decently made strips just as much, if there is no inflammation or abscess in the place, and then pause on it what seats the abscess and which eases the inflammation; and leave it for several days; and then strengthen the strips over it.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And let the strips be of the thickness of a thin rod, and be cleverly formed; or be of wood of pine; or of reeds of palm ; and let the width of each strip be according to this form and figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, let the strip that is paused over that fracture be thicker and tougher a little than the other strips; and the length of the strip according to how it lies on the member in greatness and smallness; and then strengthen over the strips with another bandage according to your first constriction; and then tie above it with a decent thread according to what we have said about constriction, and let your constriction be less as the member is more lengthened from the fracture.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And let the threads be thin in thickness and subtle, and let them be of tough thread; and if the threads are thick like how I have seen through the operation of some foolish doctors with their threads of rope twine, it is a great error when constriction is unequal.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And thin threads are not convenient, because you will not accomplish by constriction with them what you want, and there will not be room between strip and strip for a finger.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is hurt by the ends of the strips when you tighten the constriction in its places, then pause under them cotton or wool so that it does not hurt him.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Sometimes the fracture is in a vein, and disruption happens in the tendon, and I come to remembrance in that in the head according to uniqueness.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And know that every broken member is not tightened with strips on the first day; the cause of which is that the member, when it is large, let no strips be paused over it except after a few days or seven or more, according to your security from happening of an abscess.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the manner of the splints with which the Ancients restored, which were paused over fracture and dislocation and twist.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Manner of splint as a dressing for restoration of fracture, convenient to many complications and especially to women and children, because it is that about which there goes no heat nor friction: and let be taken from flour dust, and the bran is the meal that comes from the movement of the mill in the walls of the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And dry it as it is, except that you moisten it with egg white, and do not pause the application of it thick nor subtle; and then use it.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method of an ointment for healing fractures and dislocations and twists: take assafetida, frankincense, acacia, enula, and mastic which is ground from wild myrrh, all in equal amounts of one drachma each; add myrrh and aloe at half a drachma each, and mix them with oil of helichrysum or with egg white if the patient's complexion is scaly; and then use this ointment, for it has a good composition and quickly restores broken bones, and confers health to many people.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method of an ointment that confers health to fractures and twists: take mastic and white mustard in equal amounts of one drachma each; add myrrh and aloe at half a drachma each, acacia at six drachmas, and bol armenic at twenty drachmas.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	Let all be sifted in a mortar and pounded together, and let them be mixed with honey or the white of an egg and applied.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Method of plastering for joints and bones separated from their sockets, and also for wounds and fractures: take soft wool which has been dipped in warm wine and oil and place it over the affected area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	Let this plaster be used not only for healing, but also for preventing suppuration and drawing out pains justly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another way of making a plaster which heals broken bones: take the leaves of the wild fig tree and the leaves of the wild poppy; pound them all together to make a plaster from them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Method of plaster which heals broken bones and also resolves suppuration from a wound: take the roots of horehound, camomile flowers, violet flowers, and bran, each one part; let all be pounded together and mixed with wine, if the patient's skin is not scalded.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	But if it is scalded, then use this with water of coriander or with water and use it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another stronger method of plaster for resolving suppuration which is more effective than the previous one, when suppuration happens because of a broken bone: take the roots of horehound and of larkspur, and of mallows, and of marjoram, and violet flowers, camomile flowers, all in equal parts; pound them together and mix with water of vinegar or warm water, or wine, depending on the quality of the affected member and its color.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	But Hypocras does not dry on its own, so it should be placed over the broken member for its healing, unless a poultice is made of wax and oil for some other cause; and let it remain between the thickness and the thinness.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	But it is seen that plasters are placed over the broken member for its healing and the causes in which there is dryness with a little warmth are also like those that we have counted.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Method of plaster which works for wounds and pain: take powdered myrrh, cedar wood, human hair or owl feathers, horehound, and salt, all in equal parts; pound them together, sift and mix to make a plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	But the quantity depends on how large the wound is and how it has healed: consider that if there is no pain or swelling, and the bone has not been broken and has not come out of its socket, then you do not have to wait for many days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if violent pain or swelling or inflammation happens in the affected area, then you should stop it there and then, and remove the plaster from it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take a linen cloth and sea sponge which is damp with lukewarm water, and dip the affected area in the lukewarm water and wash the wound until the swelling and pain cease; then let the member rest for an hour, and place soft wool which has been dipped in wine and oil or rose oil over it for one night so that suppuration is secure from cauterization, and so that the inflammation of the member is reduced.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat this gentle compression and small plaster, and not tighten it with your first compression, and gently with that until it is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if the suppuration and redness and pain and inflammation and all the accidents are already reduced by now, and you have removed the plaster and compression as we have said before, then you should repeat that just as we have said before.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if none of the causes that we have mentioned happen to the member, then do not remove it but rather leave it for three or four or five or seven days; and some times it is left for twenty days according to how it appears to you from the appearance of the affected member, as we have said, until the fracture is healed and the meat closes over that.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then adjust the compression according to how it was before in your first compression, and adjust the thickness of the bandage on the patient's body, according to how his memory precedes it.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	But if you see the fracture already dried and exhausted but not closed, then know that food is prohibited from coming to it; and therefore moisten it with lukewarm water for three days totally, and loosen the compression a little, and through this operation draw the member's food, and it will heal quickly.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	But what the foolish healers of a broken member do when it is not healed at first, as it appears, and is healed according to tortuosity, is error according to their operation, and great fear; and if they were right-handed those who increased the Ancients in their sockets and fought against them.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen any of them do that, for it is more reasonable that they do not do so.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter according to: Of fracture when it happens in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The species of fractures are many, and the figures of them are diverse, and the causes are distinct; for some fractures are caused by blow of a staff, and the blow pushes all the bone inside the head, which is below the skull, just as it pushes in the trunk, and because of that this species of fracture is called compression; or the staff penetrates one part of the bone, and penetrates the flesh around it, and the penetration does not go through the end of it; and this species of fracture is called absolute elevation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the wound of these two fractures is large or small, and the fracture which is compression or crushing; and the cause of it is blow with fists or clubs on stone, and to them similar.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is penetrating so that it approaches the membrane which is below the bone; or it is in the bone's face, and the wound of these two fractures is large or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And of fracture which is dulled in the bone, in the thickness of the hair, and because of that this species of fracture is called capillary fracture.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And of fracture which is caused by blow or penetration of stone to them similar, and makes some lamina of the bone enter into the gaps between the teeth, and is caused in the concave place just as it happens to the fingers when a blow is struck and is split into the gaps between the fingers.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And this happens mostly in bodies of fat people, as well as children's heads.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And there are all these species of fractures, they are like broken stars.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And then you will have the memory of everything in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And know all these species of fractures by examination on these and by inquiry with their fingers and appearance of the corrupted flesh that is on them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And hairline fracture is known by what is uncovered over the bone, and it is wiped away, and liniment is applied over it, because the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	But in the cure of fractures consider at the beginning the accidents of the patient, and then if you see through the accidents that indicate by obvious indication fear, such as vomiting of cholera, and extension, and loss of understanding, and loss of voice, and fainting, and acute fever, and sweating of those, and appearance to them of the accidents in the greater dispositions, six days are not healed.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you see no-running accidents, then you expect health, then you begin the cure of it.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The reason for this is that if the victim has come to you in the beginning as he was victim and that is in the days of winter, then you should study in the appearance of the bone before day fourteen according to all disposition.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if in the days of summer, then you should cut the bone before the seventh day, having that what is under the skin be corrupted from the padding, and that the accidents we have counted happen.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the padding covering the brain, and it is in minute pieces and crushed, then you should insert the crushed and ground up piece according to what I will recount to you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And it is that you shave the head of the victim who has been victimized, and uncover over the bone according to habit and manner possible to you according to the figure of the plague, and that be lighter on the victim.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if you have to do the detection of the bone, blood flow or pus cauterize, then you should oppose it with what covers, and it is that you dress the place of drapes infused in wine and rose oil, and let the plague rest while the pustule is settled, and be certain of the blood flow; and then begin in the circuit of the bone and in its removal.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And that be according to one of two manners of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the one manner is that you insert the bone with a narrow incision knife, and this is its form: And then administer another incision knife this, a little wider than that; and this is its form:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then administer the incision knife wider than the second.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And it should be that you have many incision knives, of which some are wider than others; and some are shorter than the others and are in the thickness of their sharpness, and are of iron sharpened or filed.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them with facility in percussion over the incision knife so that it does not rattle the head and lead that one.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard, then you should bore in the circuit of it before you administer the incision knives with the drills, which are named non-deep drills.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are not named so but because those do not stop the end of the bone to it that is aprop it, so that to the drill is round extremities or margin over that which is under the head of it sharp resembling a margin or small circle, which prohibits being submerged and passing the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take of these drills great number of which each suits the thickness of each bone, while being present in all bones of the brain the extremities of which are acute, the quantity in length and brevity is according to the quantity of thickness of this test.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form of three species of drills: The quality of drilling in the circuit of the broken bone is that you pause the drill over the bone and rotate it with your fingers while you know that the bone has been penetrated; and then change the drill to another location, and pause what is between all the way the amount of thickness of the ray or environment that.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then you insert with incision knives what is between each crack of the bone, and make that more subtle than you can over that at end of elevation, as we have said, within erradiques the bone, or with your hand, or with any other cause by some tools which you will have equipped as pins and forceps subtle.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And it should be that you keep with great care that the incision knife does not touch any cause of the brain.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And then when you have bored the bone perforated, and separated from the brain if it is continued with it, and have that extracted, then shave and bite that in the roughness of it from what is in the bone with another instrument similar to an incision knife, but however let it be thicker and more subtle than the other incision knives.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if any part of the small and broken bones, then take that with facility with what it is due to you of the instruments; and then that cure the plague with poultices and ointments which we have said.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the other manner of operation is gentle, distant from fear; and it is called Gualia and is called by great laziness; and that is the name of it: it is necessary for you in the beginning to begin to uncover the part of the bone of the place where is the fracture most violent and most manifest, and then when you have uncovered that part and have paused below it the end of this incision knife long and gentle of which this is its form:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And the lenticular part is round and does not insert any cause, and the acute part is of it in two sides in length, as you see; that the lenticular part be fitted to the brain with the facet of it inscribing acute in the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then you pierce on the incision knife of one part with a small needle within that you insert all the bone with facility as it is rotated, and be certain of the padding that no accident happen to you in any manner which you fear in any way, and if the patient was the most foolish of all men and most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he was sleeping.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	Then if it penetrates any cause attached to the bone of the padding in some locations of bone, pierce that from it with the end of the incision knife lenticular, and loosen that from it with facility, because it is loosened from it without harm and without fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate within the padding, and what is severed or is left of the bone is the facet of it, and you have in it roughness and minute cracks, then shave that roughness and loosen those cracks with subtle rasors by which you have prepared the number, of diverse quantities so that be to you possible to administer them in all locations the most convenient of them and the most direct of those according to what in which you are involved your operation that broken bone and the form of it.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And it should be that you administer in your reason by which you shave the bone at the beginning the wider of those rasors, and then use after it the most subtle of them, and do not cease doing that according to continuity until you arrive to administer the most thick and the most subtle of all those.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	But in each of the other small and fine fractures and subtle fracture, let you administer cure according to what you have arrived at rectification of it.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is caused by not being removed from all those who have studied in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And as for this, what we write about, we have shown in great fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the skin is stretched when you remove the bone, then take a piece of cloth according to the amount of the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and place that on top of the opening of the wound; and then take another piece of folded or doubled cloth, soak it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first piece of cloth, and do this lightly with pus on that, so that you don't press hard on the head. And then apply salt water to it, and do not tighten it except for the amount that the wound is, only.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And let him remain with this treatment for one or two days until you are sure of cauterization; and then loosen that, and administer medicines that get rid of superfluous moisture, like flax and linseed flour, and powder of fennel and of aristology, and of similar things to those.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And it is that you make of these medicines powder that is sprinkled over the wound, as they are dry; and generally, administer in that all medicine of the property of which is that cleanses and does not bite.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And be careful according to your virtue that the wound in your treatment is clean; and let there not be in it any filth of ointment or other; nor let you allow virulence to accumulate on it; for when it is applied to the membrane of the brain, it corrupts it and destroys it, and malicious evil occurs over the patient accordingly.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And accidents occur in the head, as the bone is removed from it and especially when the treatment of it is diminished, and there is blackness on its surface; and therefore consider if the accidents that we have said occur to the patient, know that they are fatal without a doubt.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if blackness does not occur but from the medicine that is placed on it, and it is due to that medicine that causes that blackness, then take honey in one part and rose oil in three parts. And soak a piece of cloth with those, and then place that on the head; and then cure that with the spices of treatment that are convenient until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter .iii.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that the nose is not broken except in two parts, both above, or one of those some few times, because in it there are two bones, and the lower part is cartilage, and is not broken, and nothing occurs to it except curvature and twisting and sinusitis.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	But if one of the two parts of it is broken, then you must put your thumb in his nose and close that fracture with your index finger and your thumb, so that the nose returns according to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And let it be done by you with facility, and be careful that it does not hurt the patient through that operation.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the highest part of the nose and the finger does not reach it, then let it be split with a sharp edge at its tip to make it a little thicker.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then you do the same thing.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And try to restore it in the first day of the fracture, if possible; and if not, then you must allow the cautery wound to heal for two or three days.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And then insert at the end of the nose a plug of linen cloth, if the fracture is in one part, or insert two plugs, if the fracture is in two parts, and let there be in the plug thickness of such quantity that it fills the crack in the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And some of the ancient restorators say that the plugs are wrapped in fat, and are changed every day; but I have not seen it; I had rather that the plug be wrapped in yolk of egg with powdered sugar, and let the bone be bound and the cartilage hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And sometimes let a plug be inserted in the nose instead of a plug, which is a goose feather wrapped in linen cloth; and let the fracture of the nose be very strong, and let the patient not be prohibited from breathing.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you want to do it, then do it, and if you want to do plugs.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another cautery wound occurs, plaster the nose with a poultice or with cotton soaked in wine and rose oil, or with diaquilon.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	But if a cautery wound does not occur, then plaster that outward with sesame flour and fennel powder mixed with yolk of egg; and then place on it a plug of linen cloth, and do not tie the nose for any reason.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or are crushed, then split them and extract them with instruments that are appropriate for those; and then sew the wound, and cure it with something that causes flesh to grow and harden, and with plasters that are convenient for that.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if a wound occurs inside the nose, then cure that with plugs and administer lead tubes so that it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter .iiii.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the restoration of the jaw when it is broken.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw is broken and its fracture is not with pus, then be careful if the fracture is outward only and is not split in two and curved inwards, then its cognition is obscure.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, then insert your left index finger in the mouth of the patient; and similarly if the fracture is on the left side, then insert your right index finger; and push with that the crookedness of the fracture inward with facility from the outward sides, with your other hand from the inward side of the bone; with that decently split that.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated in two, then let the extension of its two parts be according to rightness so that the equality of it is possible.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if tooth concussion to disruption occurs, then strengthen those of which you expect they will break with thread of gold or silver or gut; and then place on the broken jaw a poultice, and then place on that doubled cloth, and place on the cloth great star-shaped holes decently made, or a sole ingot at its length; and then ligate that above according to how you are equipped for its application, so that it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to have rest and tranquillity, and give him wine to drink.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you think that the figure is already altered in some way, then cover and loosen it on the third day; and then rectify what is already altered of it and plaster that with sesame flour, with yolk of egg, or with farina of sesame, after you have removed its poultice, and place on the plaster wool of linen.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then when that plaster and bandage are on it, and the disposition of the bone is not altered, leave that, so that it is not loosened until it is healed and the fracture strengthened; for many times this fracture is tightened in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another cautery wound occurs, then administer what we have said many times in its swelling so that it is healed, and let the cautery wound be cleaned.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	If the fracture is compound, then consider whether the bone is separated or shattered. Then you must skillfully move those shards with what is convenient in the removal of those [shards] with instruments.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the opening of the wound is narrow, then widen it with phlebotomy according to the amount of your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	Then, when you have moved those shards, and none of them remain exposed, then close the opening of the wound if it is wide; but if not, place one of the appropriate ointments over it, which will help it to heal.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5:
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	Of the restoration of the collarbone when it is dislocated.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	Many times the furcola of the front part is broken due to a blow from a muscle, and that fracture happens in one of three ways:
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	Because it is broken, or separated, or separated into two parts without shattering; and its restoration is easier; or it happens that shards occur in it, and its restoration is difficult; or the fracture is compound.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation on it, when the fracture is compound, is that you have two assistants, so that one holds the joint and follows the broken collarbone, and the other pulls the neck towards that side.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	Then, attach the fracture with threads so that it is made according to its shape, and there is not a little prominence or concavity.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you need more extension, then place a cord made of cloth or wool under the patient's armpit, and let its size be according to the amount of your need; and extend and raise the collarbone, and hold the cord with your hand so that it ties the fracture according to its shape.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot bring the end of the collarbone to the sides outside, because it has been reached by the shoulder, then let the patient be supine on his neck, and place a cushion under his armpit, half in size.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the assistants press his armpit down to the sides below so that the collarbone bone is elevated higher than the shoulder above, and then you straighten the fracture and attach it with threads.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	But if you feel shards of the collarbone and they are exposed, then cut there and extract those shards with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is retained in the bone, then you invent an incision on it with one of the instruments which you have prepared for that, after having placed under the collarbone the instrument which serves the ciphac; and the instrument is of wood or iron, of which this is the shape of it:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it is like a spoon of which this is the concavity; and its breadth should be according to your need for it, according to the size of the bone or the thinness of it.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	But the length of it should be according to what is possible for you in the operation; and let it have two ends thus divided, and one end be broad and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the opening of the wound which you have cut when you extracted the shard is broad, and it is sure that there will be an abscess, then bring together the two lips of the wound with a suture.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the opening is small, or you fear an abscess, then fill the wound with cloths and powders according to the amount of the split in the wound.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if an abscess occurs, then soak a cloth in hot vinegar and oil, and place it over that.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	But the straitening of the bone when it is compound and severed, is that you pause an ointment made from flour of mill with egg white, and place over that a stopa made of lion's tongue, and then place the cord under his armpit if needed, and then take humemate, which is the one they call in Turkey, and let its length be of a palm or around that; and then spread powders doubled over the stopa and the ointment; and then take a subtle stake of wood, of which the breadth of it is three digits and its length similar; and then wrap that in cloth, and that cloth with the stake in the place over the fracture; and then pause the humemate as it is turned over, and turn that over the neck of him and under his armpit on both sides, and reduce that to every part, and when you see that the straitening of the fracture by straining, it does not hide from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And altogether, that the stake is not exposed over the broken bone; and so that you see the patient every day, that when the ligament softens or you see the stake already exposed, then you straighten that and strengthen the binding.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And if the patient is broken in two or three parts, then make a stopa over which you have spread powders doubled with rose vinegar, and place that over the collarbone, and then attach it with threads.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not loose the ligament unless an abscess occurs in the place or pus, until 12 days have passed.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And renew the ointment if you have seen its need for that, and tighten in the binding and restore that and leave it until it is restored and the fracture of the collarbone has clotted.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is tightened and comforted according to the month in 28 days, and in some people it is done in less time than that.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	Of the restoration of a broken shoulder.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The spatula is broken in its middle and not at its edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And when the bone is broken — and it is broken in its middle —  and it is not known except by touch, then according to how the fracture appears, you shall prepare it and reduce it according to its natural figure in every way that is possible for you.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	Then place on the site powdered white alum and a stopper made of lion's tooth; then place on it powdered linen folded twice; then place over it a thin piece of slate according to the quantity of the spatula, or a little more.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	But if the slate is hollow in one of the places of the spatula, then fill that hollowness with lion's tooth and then raise the slate evenly.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	Then tightly bind it above with a long bandage with appropriate pressure, and firm the slate so that it does not slip from its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the healing every day; and when it is soft in any place, bind it again and tighten it and equalize the slate if it has slipped from its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And keep the patient on his side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spatula is restored in 20 days or in 25. [The number here varies depending on the manuscript].
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And therefore when this number is complete, then you shall dissolve the bandage and know for sure that this is of the bones of which the beginning is not feared nor their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you see that the place of the bone is swollen and you put under it a cord, then you shall split it over it and push it and do according to what we have said in the fracture of the collarbone with pus cauterization if it occurs here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7. [The following chapter begins a new subject].
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Of the restoration of a broken foot.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot is sometimes broken in its middle and this is evident there, but its ends are most often crushed and comminuted.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And of its accidents when the middle of it is broken there is a decline to the ends within and pain occurs in it, and difficulty in walking and coughing and great vomiting blood, and it is evident in it hollowness in the broken bone and is not concealed by sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And its restoration is that the patient be laid on his back and a cushion placed between his shoulders, and pressure applied to the muscles of him, and the ribs adjusted with the hands of two people, and subtle in the operation of it and in the equalization according to every way that is possible for this and what is convenient for this, so that the figure of the bone returns according to how it was.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	Then place on it plaster and wool and place on that subtle slate of willow or of holly, or something like them in levitation, after you have wrapped that in linen, and subtle the binding over the broken bone so that it does not slip; and go around that with bandage according to roundness to the back sometimes, and tighten that with appropriate pressure; and consider the bandage at every hour and when it is soft, tighten that.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if necessity demands the removal of that you must cut away the callus or growth, or pain, or pus that occurs in the site, then you should cut and dissolve that and eradicate the plaster and correct what has occurred by way of healing of it; and reduce the plaster, if you see this is necessary for the face; and tighten on him the binding so that it may be healed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8. [The following chapter begins a new subject].
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	Of the restoration of ribs when they are cracked.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Know that the fracture of ribs does not occur except in large places that go along the back; and from their ends at the front, pain does not occur to them unless they are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And the knowledge of it is not concealed by sensation because of the inquiry of it with fingers.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And its restoration is to be done by gripping the fracture with fingers according to the possible way, so that it may be swallowed according to how it was, and then plaster and tighten on him the broken bone if it demands this.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of ribs inclines to the ends within, then there occurs to the patient vehement pain and stabbing, such as that which occurs to him who has wept, and because of that the bone puts the veilment; and occurs in it difficulty of breathing and coughing and vomiting of much blood; and this is of difficult cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And already the ants are made in it with moving things.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And from them there is this advice: that you place foods for the patient that generate inflammation and fullness so that the belly may be swollen and extended, and the fracture be driven to the outward ends.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	But we abstain from it so that it not be cause to generate pus cauterization, unless it occurs; and if it does occur, then it already helps.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And some of them say that the wind should be applied over it and that it suck with strength; and is like a ratiocination, but nevertheless is feared that the wind sends the superfluities to the site by weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And some of them say: that the site be covered with wool that has been submerged in hot oil, and that powdered linseed be placed between the ribs so that it may be filled, so that the binding be wrapped around it according to roundness; and then let the patient be cured with a poultice of food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if it causes violent constriction of the patient who does not suffer, and the bone puts the veil over him with piercing pain, we should fear for the patient; then let us split open the site, uncover from the cracked rib, and then place on it instrument that conserves the cephalic, the memory of which is preceded, and that we pierce the bone with facility, and extract that.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And then let us adjust the two lips of the wound if it is large with cauterization and cure that with plasters so that it may be healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if pus occurs within, then you should cut and pour powdered linseed in warm oil over the site, and that the patient be cured of that by what it does to the pustule within.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And let him be laid on his side on which he slept so that he may be healed.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9. [The following chapter begins a new subject].
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	Of the restoration of fracture of the spine of the back and of the neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Sometimes the bones of the neck are fractured, and they are evident in their compression, and likewise the vertebrae of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when this occurs in any of them and you want to know if it will be healed or not, then consider, for if you see the fingers are already soft and dead and do not move those nor extend them and when they constrict them with your fingers or prick them with an awl and do not feel pain in them, then know that it is not healed, and in the midst of their dispositions is deadly.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if you constrict them and they feel pain in their piercing, then know that the neck of the bone is saved and that the patient will heal by its cure.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see the vertebrae of the neck like this and want to know if it will be healed or not, then consider the feet of him.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	Then if you see that they are already soft and pain occurs in them as it did in the fingers, and then when he lies on his back, feels hollowness and egestion according to his will, and sometimes is resupinated over his back and wants to urinate but cannot, then know that it is deadly, and therefore do not trouble yourself with its cure.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	But if these causes do not arise, the cause is better and closer by.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the cure for it is that you pierce into the swelling of the boil with a cautery needle that you heat over a warm charcoal fire, or with a needle heated in oil; place this on the swelling several times a day until the boil is healed.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then apply one of the comforting and soothing plasters, and apply a bandage over it; and order the patient to take rest and tranquility, and not to sleep on the side that causes pain until he is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if it happens that the bone is separated from the socket or any other cause, then you must cut on the tendon and tie up the bone; and then sew together the two lips of the wound, if it is large; and then treat the wound with a poultice of garlic, until it is healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	But if the back of the elbow is broken, and it is the end of the bone that is broken, then you must insert the tip of your left hand into the hole, and bite the broken bone with your other hand as hard as you can by closing your fist; and then apply a plaster and bandage on it, if necessary, and then bind it.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel broken bones in it, then you must cut on it and tie up the bone, and treat the wound with the cure that has been described until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10:
De restauracio de la ancha.	On the restoration of width.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the pelvis are often broken, and if they are broken, their fracture is nothing but a separation at their ends, and they are ingrown in length and decline towards the inner parts; and the patient feels pain in the place and piercing, and the leg is numbed when it is fractured.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And its restoration is that you extend your hand over it so that it is above the fracture, in whatever way that is; and then place your other hand under the fractured bone, and press hard on it towards the first hand.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is only at its end, then you bite it according to how it appears to you by closing your fist until it is reassembled into its natural shape.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	But if the fracture is in its length or inclines towards the inner parts, then you make the patient lie on his stomach so that you can restore the fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And when you have reassembled it, apply a plaster on it; and then place a bandage made of wood or rope over it, and tie it tightly so that you don't fear the puncturing of the fracture or the removal of the bandage.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And fill the cavity with something that fills it so that it takes on the tightness according to its equality; and order the patient to sleep on his back or on his side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	But if there is a boil, then cease from extending it and restoring it until the boil is healed; and then return to its restoration, and bind it thus.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if they are broken or crushed, then you treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11:
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On the restoration of the fracture of the thigh.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The adductor is what is between the hip and the head of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, then its restoration is in one of two ways, one of which is that you take a wooden board of moderate thickness according to this shape:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And let there be two ties at both ends, and then it is suspended from the elevated place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And let the patient walk on crutches; and then let him push out his broken arm over the board so that it reaches the tip of the board in the place to which the curve of the board is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And then let something heavy be suspended over it, or the servant extend it towards the inner parts; and then the doctor press the fracture with his hands, until the fracture returns as it should.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other way is that the patient lies on his neck and suspends his arm from the collar of his neck with a rope; and then command two servants, one of whom holds what is above the fracture with his hands, and the other holds the lower part of it; and each of them extends it towards its side.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then you press on the fracture with your hands and also with another hand, and each of the two servants extends it towards its side.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, then you must place half of the bandage on the tip and the other half below the fracture above the hip.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly, if the fracture is near the hip, then you must place the bandage on that place and over the hip.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Bite it with ease and without pain, and then when it is reassembled according to how it should be, bind it if there is no boil.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	But if there is a boil, then loosen the bandage on the seventh day, and apply wool soaked in wine vinegar and oil over the boil until it rests, and then bind it.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the way to bind it is that you apply a plaster on the fracture, and then place a wrapping of new cloth over the plaster; and then lift up his arm over the adductor, and let him hold his hand open over his muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And place the cloth and bind it over the adductor so that the arm is in its place, unless something prohibits it from the broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And then use bandages.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And it is that you place over the fracture the bandage that is wider and stronger than the other bandages; and place between each bandage the width of a finger, and let the length of the bandages be according to the fracture with an addition of three digits of the whole hand.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then bind over the bandages with the tightness that was said at the beginning of the chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And it is that your binding over the place of the fracture be very tight.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the fracture is longer, then let the binding be lesser.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And thus if you see the placement of the bandages and the binding as we have said in the time in which you restore the member to its position, then you do it.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear a boil, then you loosen the bandages and the binding on the seventh day as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then consider the bandage in all parts for three days so that it does not come to the place of pressure or swelling; or food is prohibited from coming to the member due to disposition of excess of binding; and then rectify all that according to what we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	But if you are sure that nothing happens, then do not loosen the ligature except after three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient sleep on his back, and let his hands be over his stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place over the adductor a poultice of wool wrapped in, and consider throughout the night or day that it is not loosen or dissolved, or that the figure of the broken member is softened, then rectify all with your skill.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And let the patient eat according to the order that we have previously mentioned, so that the food is subtle in the beginning so that it is started binding; and then let it become coarse for him.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	The custom of the adductor and of his bed is that they are bound for 40 days, and then let them be loosen and let him take a bath and be anointed with ointments which rectify that.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is fresh, then you must not remove that ligament and the splinters within one or two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	On the restoration of a fractured arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is made up of two bones which are called two beams; one of which is small and is that which lies under the elbow-joint, and the other is large and is that which lies under the small one from the part further down.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And often only the larger beam is broken, or the smaller one, and often they are both splintered.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the smaller beam is broken above, then its restoration is easier, and its healing is even easier.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the beam is broken below its fracture is bad and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And worse than that is when two bones are splintered at the same time.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, when the broken bone is the smaller beam above, then it is appropriate for the doctor, in performing its restoration, to apply slight extension with ease so that it may be enswathed.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the larger beam is what is splintered, then one must ensure that there is more violent extension.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both beams are splintered at the same time, then you must apply motion with the greatest strength.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And you must apply the hand-position during its restoration and extension over a cushion, with the palm of the hand towards the upper parts, further out than all the others, and with the auricular finger further down than all the others, and with the patient reclining on his back over a raised pillow.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And if the fracture is of the shoulder-joint, then you must bring it to rest and apply great extension over a raised pillow.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	Then one minister should extend the arm from below with his hand or with a ligament, and another minister should similarly extend it above.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And the doctor should enswathe the bone in such a way that he reduces it according to the best possible figure.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if there are gaps in the bone, then you must reduce all of the pieces into their location with your skill.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if it appears to you that there is a gap which puts the tendon in danger and it does not seem to you hopeful regarding its restoration, then you should stop at that place and treat it according to the manner we have described above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is with a wound, I have already written about that topic in a previous chapter, and so you should take its cure from there.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if pustules appear at the beginning of your restoration, then you should take a cloth with ointment made from rose oil and white wax, and let it be softer between being thin and firm, and tightly place the cloth over that pustule with gentle pressure so that the pustule yields; and then remove the cerot and apply plaster prepared from ground mullet with egg yolk, and then apply splinters; and let the splinter which is placed over that fracture be the firmer and thicker.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And know that the number of splinters of the arm is seen in the greater dispositions, or whether the fracture is in one beam or in both beams at once.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And then apply your extension over the location of the fracture more strongly and violently, and when you extend it to the upper parts of the fracture or to its lower parts, apply the extension a little softer according to how it was preceded in the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths that are wrapped over the fracture should be soft moist cloths and not hard or rough, and the thread with which it is tightly bound should be of the appropriate thickness between being thin and thick as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the member and the ligament after several days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if some cause occurs by which correction is necessary, as when it happens to the member, then you should bathe the member in warm water so that that pain ceases.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And let the member not be constricted while resting, and then return the extension.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the stricture is already softened and the bones are already relaxed and resembling those [bones], then rectify all of that with your virtue.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider more if the nutrition is prohibited from coming to the member by superfluity of stricture, then you must soften that a little and leave it for several days so that the nutrition can run to it, and then strengthen it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	But if no cause happens to the patient from those we have mentioned, then you must not dissolve it within about 20 days or so.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And let the hand of the patient be suspended by your virtue of movement, and make that one sleep on their own back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or 32 days, or quickly it is restored in 28 days, and all of that is according to the disposition of the complications and the dispositions of virtue.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	Of the restoration of a fracture of the thumb and fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that in the palm of the hand and the knuckles of the fingers there is a great tendency to fracture, and not much happens to them except for a few times.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when fracture or sprain happens to the hand, then you must make the patient lean forward and lie down according to equality, and then place his hand over that extended.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And let the minister extend the broken bones and the doctor heal those until they are united with good conjunction.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And then you must place plaster and bandages if pustule does not happen cauterize; and then place a splint over it according to the quantity of the place, and you have already wrapped that in linen cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	But if the fracture is in the parts within the belly of the palm, then make a bandage of linen cloth, and command the patient to strengthen that with his own palm fractured; then it must be strengthened with long cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And let the splint of flesh with cloth be in which it is raised, so that the flesh is applied to the palm; and strengthen that according to how it should.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	But if the fracture is at the parts outside, then you must place over it splint and another splint of the part below in the palm, so that the hand is open and straight; and then pause the stricture, as how the hand is rolled to the ratchet between the fingers with ligaments.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if fracture happens to one of the knuckles of the fingers, then if it is the thumb, it must be healed as how it should and then strengthened with the palm; and if you want, pause to him small straight splint so that the fracture is elevated and not mauled.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	But if the fracture is in the other fingers, as well as in that of the middle finger, or the index, or the auricular, or the ring, then it must be healed and bound with the finger to which it belongs; or all are bound according to continuity, and that's better; or pause over it small splint, as we said in the thumb.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider in your restoration and then that, the disposition of pustule cauterize and oppose — with your operation — with what happens when any cause from those, according to how it is iterated his account.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter 14.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	Of the restoration of a fracture of the bone of the thigh.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bone of the thigh many times is broken and it is declared to the feeling according to how it is converted to the party in front and to the upper pustule.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And its restoration is done so that the ligament is strengthened over the fracture and another ligament below the fracture, and the patient lies on his belly and face down.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And let the minister extend all the ligament to its party according to quality when the fracture is in the middle place of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	But if it is near to the root of the thigh, then let the ligament be near to the armpit at the party of the little finger, so that the extension box in itself, and the other ligament below the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly if the break is near to the armpit, then let the ligament be made near to the armpit, and let the extension be at the parties below.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And let the doctor heal the bone with both hands until it reduces that according to the natural resemblance and the bone is joined by good conjunction; then you must place plaster and bandages if pustule does not happen to the member.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	But if pustule happens to it, then you must leave that for several days until the pustule cauterizes, and then return to your cure.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The bandage of it must be done so: cover over the fracture a hard bandage, and fold that two or three times, and absorb from it superfluity; and then wrap the leg so that it reaches the ankle and the root of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And interject long thread between the thigh and the leg near to the armpit at the parties below, and let the ends of the thread come from the party above the two parts, and then roll over the leg and the thigh that which absorbs from the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And then pause over the thigh in the place of that fracture splints, and pause from those a splint over the bone of the leg.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill the emptiness between the leg and the thigh with soft cloths, so that the stricture is coagulated.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then begin with strong bandage of the middle over the place of the fracture with three or four wraps, and when you are more away from ligament of the place of the fracture, your bandage is less and looser and moister.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then extend two ends of the thread at the parties below until it reaches the ankle of the foot, and strengthen both ends of the splints on the other side so that the ligament is not relaxed from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then leave the bandage over that, where it is so that no pustule happens to the member or cauterize or inflammation and resembling those; and if any cause from those happens, then you know of its dissolution, and rectify all that happens to it totally, according to how we said many times.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	But if in the bone is bone of the bone which you put, then you heal that according to what it is possible for you; and if not, leave it and heal that, and cure with that from which the account precedes so that it heals.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And some times this fracture of the thigh is strengthened another with which they are tightened to it, as we said in the helper and in the arms.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	But however in the restoration of it is made not happen to the patient claudication; and if it is restored alone, then it must be applied to him the other leg, then it is necessary that he limps from which he limped.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And know that the thigh is strengthened in 40 days or a few months or a few months, and all of that is according to the diversity of the complications and of the other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	Of the restoration of a fracture of the ankle of the armpit.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Know that a fracture of the ankle of the armpit happens many times, but attains to it much sprain.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	But if fracture happens to it, then it is not but fissure or crack in its parties, and that is with spot or with spots, and over all it is state by feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of it is that which is broken in the parts of it with the said things between which it is united and joined, as much as possible, according to equation and facility and fabrication.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	Then apply plaster and place it over the round wound, if you need to; and tighten it above with a bandage as is convenient.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	Then consider all the dispositions which we have recommended in other fractures, as well as an ulcer cauterized and similar to those by which it opposes all incidents with what is convenient to it until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter .xvi.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the leg: and when there is a fracture of the bone great or small, with whatever you like, place the patient upon the manes of a horse or ox or camel or donkey, and let the head be in the middle between two manes, and thus he shall be borne towards the rim of the sun until he is healed.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Know that in the leg there are two bones of which one is thick and is named by the name of the leg; and the other is thin and is named the shank.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And it happens to both kinds of fractures what happens to the two bones of the arm, and by that is made the restoration of it just as the restoration of the arm similarly, and the operation of it is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if both bones are broken together, then the leg is turned into all parts.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the thinner bone is broken, then the leg is turned to the rear.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the thicker bone is broken, it turns that way below, and it is of those causes which are not to you unknown.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	Then administer extension and equation and ligament of the stars according to that similarly.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	But indeed, if the fracture of the leg is loose having many splinters, then let the extension be less and more distant, and draw it with your virtue.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the leg there is some cause of operation on the arm, and it is when you equalize the stars and that you complete all your operation, then you shall take weights of wood of pine which is placed below the causes which are placed in soles, and are made splinters of white of palm; you shall attach those to which is a small thickness, and it shall not be of the fingerless, and the length of those according to the length of the leg, and of the rear within to the most distant.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	Then wrap around each one in two wrappings according to the length of it, and place one over the fracture of the leg on one side and the other on the other side, and they shall be within the most distant location of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	Then tie the two stars in three locations of two extremes and in the middle location, for with this string the leg is prohibited from tilting to the right side and left side, and it stands in good position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And a brace of wood has been administered according to the length of the leg; and it is placed upon it so that it conserves that from movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And indeed, it is better that you do that in fracture, and when with that is plague properly.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And indeed, consider the leg in each day and study it with that for the last study, and keep it from ulcer and inflammation or other similar causes; and when any of those causes happen, then treat it with what is appropriate until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter .xvii.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of the fracture of the leg and of the shank and of the bones of the foot and of the toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	To the talo no happens fracture of all; but to the bones of the foot happen fracture some times; and to the toes of the foot rarely happens fracture, and it does not happen to them except in the months of disposition.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if to the bones of the foot happens fracture and those bones are made to be elevated upon each other, then let the patient put his foot upon the earth prepared thus:
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then place one foot over what is elevated of those bones, and indeed press and equalize those within that they turn in the locations.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Then apply plaster and stop it above, and place below the belly of the foot a small table to which are two pegs planted.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	Then tighten that with the foot with a descending string, more than you have wrapped it with cloths and with other causes of which you need.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when to it have passed three days or four, then you unbind the string, for you shall find the bones equalized or broken or dislocated, and the operation in those is thus with what is known.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if any toes are broken, then restore those and equalize them just as you and instructed in the restoration of the toes of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	Then place to the toe that is broken a star according to the length of the toe, and let it be more bent from it a little; then below the foot this table which is to you instructed, and tighten that with descending string.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	But if what is broken of the bones are two or three or more, then you place upon each toe a star of its quantity wrapped in linen cloth, and tighten the table at the bottom of the foot, and let it stand on one of the pegs of the table piercing the belly of the foot so that it has good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is convenient to you that you do not forget that you do not consider all the causes which are to you told in the other fractures of the accidents which we have said; and treat every accident with what is appropriate.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter .xviii.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of the fracture of the heel and of the bone of the instep and of the staff of man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the heel is broken, then let it be made to bend in a shoe, and indeed let it be tilted to the side of two little, and let it be held behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And indeed the midwife fills the heel with cotton, and it is made in the heel thus as sperry; and indeed let the instep be bound, and elevate both little by little, for all that is bent until it is before the fracture thus with sperry and the broken bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	Then place powder upon the instep and when he wants to urinate let him moisten the heel with facility and indeed urine, and reduce it and return that according to the way according to which you measured it at the beginning, and indeed return to his first powder.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do thus for seven days or environ those, for that is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you want, take a woolen bag and tighten over the hole of it a tube of reed; and insert the whole bag in the heel, and indeed blow into the tube with strength until the bag is inflated within the heel, for the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	Then let it be filled with cotton and stay for some days according to that we have instructed, until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bone of the instep of man or woman is broken, then administer in the restoration and piercing of it what we have instructed in the bone of the hip.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And what is straight is not hidden in these close fractures and that hardly comes to mind, indeed listen best to my free speech; for that fracture indicates to you in the greatest dispositions way straighter in the restoration and in the string of it, and therefore understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	But when the penis of a man is broken or fractured, take a gourd of walnut wood and insert the penis into it; then wrap a cloth around him, and have him wrapped up, and leave him for three days or so, and he will be healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Of the restoration of fractures in bones when they are infected.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for the person to whom a fracture happens to have the plague, and especially if the bone is large as it is in the thigh or the adjutorium, or similar to that, which you treat with cauterization and bleeding as soon as the conditions of cauterization indicate to you, as we have said above.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the plague flows with blood, then you should take care to stop it in such a way that you powder over it powdered alder bark, unless another cause is present.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And then begin to restore the fracture on the same day, and do not prolong it, if an abscess does not occur.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if an abscess occurs, then you should postpone the restoration of it until the ninth day, while the abscess subsides, and do not approach it on the third and fourth days at all, for you will cause ill effects.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the broken bone protrudes above the skin, then take care to reduce and draw it back with your hands with ease and with little extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	But if extension is not ready and the position of it with your hands, then you should reduce that with your hands using this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, its length is seven digits or eight and its breadth is according to the quantity of the plague; and it is necessary for the doctor to take one or two of these, according to the quantity needed in the cure in every kind of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And it should be round and not have much thickness in it so that it is not bent under the pressure upon it during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And its upper part should be thick and its middle part should be thin and into the edges.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the shape of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And in Greek it is named “labro volenz atelarem”, and it is a little spatula.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	For it is necessary that the end of it be placed elevated upon the end of the prominent bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And push it into a groove until it returns to its position and let it be drawn into any position.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And then try to draw the ends of the fracture together; and if the end of the broken bone is thin and does not take in that instrument well, then you should insert the end of that bone so that the instrument can do its work.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you cannot reduce the bone at all with what we have recommended, then insert that into whatever is convenient for it of the chisels which we have mentioned; or saw that with one of the saws in whatever way is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And then smooth that which protrudes in the bone with roughness and tiny scars.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced and especially when the reduction gives the patient great pain, then know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and therefore do what you confer to the patient great benefit.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When you have completed your restoration which you do to the bone, then immerse cloth in black vinegar and especially if it is summer, and do not put ointment or any other cause on the plague in which there is oil, so that you will not cause rot and corrosion on it.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then administer stars in the hour of your completion of the restoration of the bone, and leave the plague uncovered so that you insert the thread with forceps and use bandages according to the quantity of the plague.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And beware that you do not strain the plague with the fracture, for many times they have done this the foolish doctors, and have caused death or corrosive putrefaction or putrescence on their patients, and it is a sickness.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if your grip is loose, soft, different from the grip of the other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the plague is large or evil, and you fear some ill effects on that which we have recommended, and it hurts in the place, then do not put stars over that but put on that bandages of hard cloth in place of stars and bind it with those.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when one or two days have passed and the plague has begun to become heated with inflammation, then take off the cloth which you had put over that with oil of vitriol, and then apply warm poultices, as from our custom is that we medicate plagues, thus with tetrafarmacon poultice and similarly.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And it seems good to you that you loosen the bandage and consider the plague every day morning and evening until it is consolidated and closed, and let the member be prepared in such a way that the putrefaction runs from it to the ends below with ease.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	But if days pass on the plague and it is not consolidated or the inflammation is not removed from it, then know that there are hidden things within that which cause you to tent the plague.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And from those things which are separated and extracted, those that when they are not separated cause the member to be in pain, then pierce them according to what you can do it possible.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if the plague becomes suppurating or ulcerous, it is putrefying or another kind of corruption and putrefaction occurs, then do not pause over either one of them what benefits him in the cure of which there is a precedent in his chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And about that in which there is the middle term and you make your own judgment: when a bone is broken, protrude over the member like the bone of the thigh or the adjutorium and similarly to those of the large members, and do not presume attraction on it, nor its extraction for many times death occurs from this; have left that as it is so that putrefaction occurs, for it falls very firm by itself after twenty days or thirty. And then cure the plague if you see it, and if not, leave it alone.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	Of the cure for knots which happen in the path of a fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Knots often happen in the path of healing from a fracture, especially near the joints, and it changes the shape of the limb; and it strongly prohibits the limb from its natural function.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Therefore, consider if the knot is recent and administer to it medicines which have a styptic effect like aloe, and aloes, and myrrh, and similar things; and take some or all of them and mix them with white vinegar, or with sour wine, or with sharp wine, and apply that to the knot on a piece of cloth, and constrict that around it with a good constriction.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And let the constriction not be loosened for several days; and then loosen it and repeat this, while the knot is being reduced; or place a sheet of lead over it, leaning downward, because lead has the property of reducing anything that is swollen in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if the knot is already converted to stone and it is constricted and necessity demands cutting out that knotted part completely, then split that from its most upper part, and cut away the excess and prominent part, or pierce it with some sharp resoring instrument until it is reduced; and cure that as it heals.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	Of the restoration of a fracture when it is restored and the limb underneath it is subtle and fragile, not according to its nature.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is restored, and the limb underneath it is subtle and fragile, that is not done but for several causes: one of which is too much solutio of the ligament and of its ligature not according to how it should be; or by excess of constriction of the ligaments so that nutrition is prohibited from running to the limb; or by too much superfluous embrocation; or by superfluous movement not at the right time; or by lack of blood in the patient's body and by weakness of him.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the cure for this is to give the patient food and make his heart tender so that blood is multiplied in him; and administer a bath; and apply heat and lard on it.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And then place a plaster over the limb so that the plaster brings it much nutrition, or continue embrocation of it with warm water until the nutrition runs and returns to its natural shape.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	Of the cure of broken bones when they are restored crookedly and prohibit their operation from that which is natural to them.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When it happens to the limb already restored that its healing is crooked and prominent at the broken bone and knotted, and it is fed by form of the limb, but nevertheless the limb is not prohibited from its natural function; yet do not believe the word of him who examines that limb that it is newly broken.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	But there have already been several foolish doctors and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is very reproachful, presenting great danger, the sign of which is deadly.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	But if the claudication and knot are recent, then let them be embrocated with warm water in which soft herbs are steeped, like leaves of holly and roots of it, and mallows, and similar things to those medicines that are named, brother consolidatio; or let it be plastered with a plaster made of mucilage of roots of holly and let it be bound with linen rags or with cotton wool, and let it be plastered with that; or let them be bound with fat figures and bound with dove droppings, and similar things to those medicines.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And some times it is dissolved by constant gentle friction which should be done with the hands moistened, and movement of the limb in every direction at all hours should be administered.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	But if the crookedness has already gone forward and is made strong and converted into stone and necessity demands curing it with iron, then let the pus be removed from above and the continuity of the bone be dissolved, and that which superfluously knots the muscle at that bone be cut by subtle incisers, and facility be administered in that by solicitude and study.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De sermo en dislocacio.	Of speech in dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is dislocation of one of the joints of its place, so that it is prohibited from movement, and changes the shape of the limb, and brings great pains and injuries to the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when dislocation happens, then let it be forced to be reduced immediately, and do not delay its reduction, because if it is delayed, the joint will become inflamed, and very difficult to reduce the dislocation.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for that reason let it not be bent or stretched during the inflammation, because many times it causes spasms and pains in them.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	But when that happens, let you care for the phlebothimia of the patient, and then let it be left until the inflammation subsides; and then the limb should be embrocated with warm water and oil, and then reduced with facility.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And every limb should be cured by that of which the remembrance will come to its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And you have ordered the chapters of dislocation according to that which precedes in fracture, from the highest part of the body to the lowest part.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Of the cure for dislocation of the lower jaw.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	Both mandibles are dislocated if not tart; and the dislocation of both is done according to one of two ways: that they are swollen from their place by little motion, and become soft a bit; or are dislocated by entire dislocation and complete, so that they are swollen at the joint where saliva runs from the patient and he cannot hold that nor close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped in its speech.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	But when the dislocation of it is little, then in the major dispositions it returns by itself for little cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	But if the dislocation is entire and complete, then let the reduction of it be administered gently, and not be delayed at all.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And let the minister hold the patient's head, and let the doctor insert his finger of one hand in the root of the dislocation of the mandible within the mouth of him if the dislocation is on one side; or that he inserts both fingers together if the dislocation is on two sides, and the other fingers be out with which he hugs; and command the patient to cease his mandibles and release those from every part; and let the doctor hug the mandible and press the mandible so that it returns to its place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction of it is difficult, and especially if both mandibles are dislocated together, then administer embrocation with warm water and oil, so that the reduction of both be made gently and do not delay the reduction of both at all, as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And then when they return and are hugged, and the mouth of the patient is closed and not made soft, then place over them powders of cloth with cerot, and let it be made of wax and rosin rubbed; and then let it be bound by facility with mild ligatures.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on his back, and his head be between two pillows, so that he does not turn to the right nor to the left; and do not force him to open for any cause; having his food be lean meat, so that when the pains are reduced and the mandibles are swollen, then let him open what he will.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And let this be administered with ease, and do not labor over the opening of the mouth because of eating, drinking, and speech, while the jaw is numbed and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if it is difficult to reduce both mandibles when they are dislocated at any time and are not returned to their places, then often sudden fevers occur, as well as continuous vomiting, and the belly of the patient quickly becomes swollen, and he vomits pure bile.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see this, then know that it is lethal; many times the person upon whom this happens dies within ten days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	On the reduction of a dislocation of the collarbone and of the end of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The collarbone is not dislocated on the inside by its connection to the feet; and sometimes it is dislocated at the outer end, and this is indicated by sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And its restoration is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	Then press the spot hard with your palm, for it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And apply plaster and powder to that spot, and strengthen it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	But the end of that which is connected to the collarbone and continued from it is not dislocated at any time; therefore it must be reduced and bound as we have said, and as your tools allow.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And apply plaster and powder and a binding to that spot, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until he is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And by this treatment the end of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the reduction of a dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, of which one is that it is dislocated at the end of the tendon at the lower part.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it is dislocated at the upper part of the muscle, and this occurs seldom; it is not dislocated at the sides by the shoulder, nor at the front by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And mostly it is dislocated and exits out at the lower parts by the tendon, and mostly in those of whom there is little flesh, it is dislocated with ease; but in those in whom there is much flesh, it exits out with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And quickly occurs in some men by concussion or blow, and the muscle of them is apoplectic from apoplexy, and it is cured because it has already been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Therefore know this while you are in supination of it, and then proceed in the cure of it.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And the dislocation of it is known when it is at the lower parts by the tendon; so that you may distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the sound muscle, for you will find between them manifest difference; and you will know it in the head of the muscle concave and below the tendon because of touch, and the patient cannot reduce his hand to his ear on that side, nor move it at all.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated behind or inside, and you feel touch clearly and it is not concealed.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And this dislocation has an easier reduction when fresh and the patient is young.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And its reduction is that the minister lifts the arm of him up above; and then place your fingers below the tendon of him, and elevate the joint with strength towards its place, and the minister lifts the arm of him, and extends it upwards; and then place that below because it will return easily.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	But if by what we have said it does not return, and only after the dislocation occurred, then let the patient be bathed in warm water and be administered an embrocation that softens and lubricates as if his thigh were razor-cut, with fenugreek, and honey in water, and be administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And then the patient is supinated on his back and a pillow is placed below the tendon of him, and he awaits in elevation and compression, and the doctor places his heel over the joint, and lifts the head of the muscle with strength, and pulls the hand of the patient so that it is not pulled down to the lower parts; and another minister holds the head of the patient so that it is not pulled down, for then that returns at once to its place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, reduce it according to this manner: and have a man present who is taller than the patient, and let him stand on that side, and insert his muscle below the tendon of the patient and lift the tendon of him up above while the patient is suspended in air; and another minister pulls the hand of the patient from the lower parts of his belly.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	But if the patient is light, then know that with him who for another cause is suspended, for gravity brings about the return of the dislocation at once.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced likewise according to another manner: and let a long post be placed in the ground, the head of which is round in figure, like mortar, that is not thick nor thin; and then let the patient be placed below, and let sheets of linen be placed over the head of the post, and the patient stand according to the length of the post, and then let his arm be extended from the lower parts on the other side with strength, for the joint returns to its place with swiftness.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if its reduction is difficult for all the causes we have said, then use this cure: and take a post whose quantity is in the length of two cubits, and the breadth of it is of four digits, and the thickness of it is removed in the length of the tendon according to this form:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And then over the round head are tied linen sheets so that the patient does not slide down.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And then the tendon of the patient is placed below, and his arm or hand is extended over the post to the lower parts; and the post is tied over the helper, and the arm and the end of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Then the arm is placed over a rung of a ladder according to its breadth, and the hand is extended to the lower parts; and the other body is suspended from the other side, for the joint enters at once.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the instrument of it is completed according to whatever manner is possible for you, and then know that you place below the tendon a sponge of wool of equal quantity; and then place plaster prepared from powder of moly with honey over all the muscle, as it is rolled above; and then bind it below the tendon with binding decently; and the bandage is rolled over the plaster, and his hand is attached to his neck, and he is let loose, and his hand is not pulled for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And know that the food of the patient be lessened while the member is comforted, for it is easier for the cure of him.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And then food is given more freely, and exercise is added; and if it is firm and not soft, then it is healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	But if the joint is dislocated many times by moisture that occurs in him or for another cause, then know that in that be administered cautery with three punctures, according as it is said before in the chapter of cautery.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all of this is done, and then after seven days the bandage and binding are removed from him, and the joint is not firm, and it is cut and catched, and he cannot lift that arm to the upper parts, know that the nerves of him which are in the head of the muscle are already incised or extended or soft, and know that the joint never returns to its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	From the dislocation of that which is done from behind the feet and the breasts or the parts, the reduction is done by impulse and extension with the hands, while returning.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And be administered in that other constriction, and cure that one until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if the healing of the body part happens slowly and with difficulty in its movement, then the patient should take many warm baths until that heaviness is relieved and the body part returns to its original state.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the treatment of dislocation of the neck.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Know that the neck joint is dislocated with difficulty and returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated from all sides, and especially from the front to the back, and its dislocation is not hidden from you because when you move the neck joint or touch it according to how it is dislocated, this will be made clear to you, for the joint is hollow and cannot bend the arm, nor can it reach with that hand.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And when you see this, and reduce the dislocation immediately before it comes to an abscess, for if it comes to an abscess, its reduction is difficult, and often it will not be healed at all; and especially when it is on the back side, for it is worse than all other kinds of dislocations, and more painful, and many times results in death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And its restoration, when it is possible to reduce it, is for the hand to be extended with two hands, and for the arm to be expanded, and for the doctor's hands to be on the neck and below it, and for him to push the joint with his finger tips, or with the edge of his palm until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	But if the dislocation is on the front side, then it returns as he bends his hand with his own hand, while he strikes the neck with the edge of his palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not obey reduction, then administer a violent extension and a very strong push.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And two ministers should extend the arm and hold that joint so that it is not wrenched because of the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	Then the arm is wrapped around with a long piece of folded cloth or bandage.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, he should smear it with some oil so that it may be caused by those things which help in lubricating the joint with ease; and then push the joint with a violent impulse until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And then its reduction should be made over that plaster in which it has been stiffened and dried with white of egg, and tightened with a descending bandage, and the arm suspended from the neck, and left for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then it should be unwrapped, and if the joint is formed in its place, then you should unravel the bandage from it and leave it.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see that the joint is not stronger, then you should repeat the plaster and bandage, and leave it for several days until it is tightened, and then unravel it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	But if it happens to him that the heaviness remains after the reduction of the joint, and its disposition is for movement, then administer moistening in a bath and subtle friction, and compression, until he is relieved; or pause on the joint, olive oil so it is a fat of quick action; and then bandage it, and leave it for the day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then wash that one and put him in a bath; and when he has bathed, then you should rub the joint with tempered friction, and then repeat on that olive oil, so it is of quick action, once, and the second, and the third.
corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denolam intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Corruption has already come upon the inner part of the brain, as it were a membrane.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, place over that cow's udder which is wet and warmed with butter and stretched over it; and do this several times, for this is wet and reduces to its disposition.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	On the treatment of dislocation of the elbow joint, which is between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	The elbow of the hand sometimes becomes dislocated, and its reduction is easier than that of other joints, except when it happens in the hour in which it is displaced, before the place becomes abscessed or an abscess comes to it.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of its dislocation is that you place the joint of the patient's hand on a table and the minister extends his hand from him, and the doctor places his hand or his palm over the prominence of the joint, and pushes it until it returns to its place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	But if it is considered that the palm has already been placed on the belly of the hand, then the patient should place both of his hands on a table because of extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is preceding from the hand, then let the position of the hand of him be intrinically over the table, so that the hand of the doctor falls on that prominence of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And therefore if it returns immediately, it is good; but if not, then tighten that with plaster, let the abscess pass and leave it; and do not repeat this, for otherwise, he will not bear nor be able to endure the reduction of it more than days have passed.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	But if the joint becomes twisted according to its tortuosity; and the patient feels no cause, except that his hand is made soft and cannot be tightened for any cause; then know that the nerves are torn or cut, and then there is not pain in him except that it is tightened with cautery near the place of it and very often this indicates no cause.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Then when the elbow is returned, then place over it the plaster which we have recommended, and let it be left and tightened for a few days; and then unravel it and leave it, and the hand of him be exercised.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	But if its movement is hindered and some heaviness comes to it, then loosen that with warm water and with friction several times, until he is relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	On the treatment of dislocation of the fingers.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Sometimes they are dislocated on all sides.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when some finger is dislocated on the side of the palm or the belly of it, then push the finger and drive out its dislocation with your fingers, until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then support the head of the finger, and suspend that from the part to which it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then suspend that and extend that until it is straightened out in that its day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when evening comes, loosen that according to that narration, and do not cease to unravel it in the day and exercise with movement, and loosen it at night; and do this for several days until it is tight.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And make it like that if it is dislocated on the belly of the hand, and loosen it to that side and do to it its first operation, until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And likewise do to that when it is dislocated on other sides.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder joints.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When dislocation comes to one of the shoulder joints or the neck, and only dislocated joints remain in their places, then there is no cure for this, for death draws near the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And a sign of this is that the patient's excrement is discharged without their will, and they cannot retain it; and sometimes some of his limbs or both legs or both arms, or one of those, are made soft, or a vertebra in his spine is dislocated, for many times it is dislocated and many times the removal of those [vertebrates] is done in four parts.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Thus that which has been dislocated to the back is called scoliosis.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	But its treatment is that when you consider if the scoliosis happens in children, because then there is no cure for it nor any healing at all.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	But for that which comes from falling or hitting or similar to those, the Ancients spoke of many ways of treatment with lengthy speech, of which the most beneficial is to return it [the vertebra] with profit; but I have abridged that of which little excuses itself through too much of it, due to my proximity to its intention and exposure, by which I have expounded and formed from diverse instruments of that by which I will show and space out that.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And I say that in scoliosis that happens from the front in the feet, there is no remedy nor healing for it; and similarly in that which is done on two sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of those there is no cure except that which happens specifically in the back with what I will account.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And that the patient should be laid down on his back close to a wall, and that he be extended downward by his feet being raised so that they are not bent.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And then a straight post should be placed and fixed in the ground at the end of the bed near the patient's head, and another post under his feet at the other end of the bed.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And the minister should hold the post, and it should not be fixed in a hole; and another minister should hold the other second in that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then wrap around the patient's head and down under his armpits a lion-skin firm; and extend the end of the skin to the post which is near the patient's head, and attach that there; and then tighten the other strap over the patient's hips and his knees, and attach those to the other post which is near his feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And then each minister should extend the strap to the end of the post, and that the two posts and the straps at their locations where they are attached are not dislocated, but rather are tightened as I have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor should place his palms on the vertebra with strength while he returns it, or that he leans over it on a table, and then that he tightens his feet over the table as he returns it.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	But if it does not return by this form, then take a table of which the breadth or length is in the direction of three cubits, and dig into the wall of which we have said that is near the patient a place in which fits the end of the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And then place the middle of the table over the vertebra, and the doctor should place his feet over the other end, and tighten well while the vertebra is constricted and returns to its place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, open with a turn which is rolled by the hand; and it that you fix in the ground beneath the patient's head two posts, the length of which is one cubit, and fix the patient's head at the end of the bed two posts; and let the length between each post be a palm, and now there are made in each post holes in which runs a rope, and each should be tightly fixed in the ground so that it is not dislocated.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And there should be another round post in which is the turn, and it should be rolled in the two holes of the two posts.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at its end is a hole in which is formed the post, the length of which is a palm by which it is rolled; and in the other two posts there is similar to that.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then tighten the straps which you have tightened in the patient' s feet at the hole by which is his head, and the straps which you have tightened in his thighs at the turn by which are his feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then fix each turn and have a minister who twists the turn by his hand, and the doctor similarly the vertebra as we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the form of the turn:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And after the vertebra is returned and the location is warmed, then put that you apply a plaster of honey with albumen, and then stop it; and then lean over the plaster a board of which the breadth is three digits or surrounding those, and its length is quantity that takes up the location of the scoliosis, and over the end of the vertebra as well.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then it should be tied with the strap which we have said, and let the patient take subtle food until he is healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if there remains any swelling in the location at the end of the healing, then put that are administered medicines which moisten and smooth with administration of the table for a long time, which we have recounted; and now is administered in that location leaf of lead.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And sometimes swelling occurs in the end of the vertebrae of two, and it is caused by that dislocation; and it is that bone which now causes so that there should not be made protrusion to him with this medicine, because strongly he will cause death to you.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter .xxxi.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Of the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle do not occur unless dislocation only, and it does not happen to those which happen to other joints of small removal and concavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four ways, for it is dislocated at the inner parts, or at the outer parts, or at the front parts, or at the back parts.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And mostly it is dislocated at the inner parts, and seldom at the front or back parts.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the sign of its dislocation at the inner parts is that when you straighten the patient's leg with the leg, it is longer and the tendon is more prominent than of the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend his foot due to the tongue, and the location which the tongue comes from has become pus-filled here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the sign of that to which dislocation happens at the outer parts is that its accidents are contrary to those accidents.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And the sign of that to which dislocation happens at the front parts is that it expands his leg according to compliment, but it cannot bend without pain that is in the tendon, and if he goes forward and does not bear weight on his foot; and his urine is retained and his tongue is pus-filled, and he bears weight on his heel.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And the sign of that to which dislocation happens at the back parts is that it does not expand the tendon, nor can it bend without that which bends the tongue, and his leg is shorter than the other one, and the tendon is softened, and the head of the hip comes from that location.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	But the reduction of the kinds of this dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and antique, as it is aged by having been given for a long time, then there is not in that a cure at all; and thus there should not be made protrusion to him.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	But in the case of a recent dislocation which is one of the four species of dislocation, you must apply to the joint what makes it return and extend it to those on the inside and outside, and especially to that of the right and left, for it quickly returns and does not need another treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	But if it does not return in this way, then you must prepare a strong minister and extend the leg of him from the part most below, or with his own hands, or with a bandage which is tied over the leg above the pain; and another minister extends the hand of that one above so that he puts his hands below his ticklish parts; and then tighten with a lion's hide over the root of the thigh, and have another minister hold the end of the hide.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And it should be extended from within to the angle of the breastbone, or from behind to the part of the chest.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And all of these should be extended while the patient is elevated from the ground and his tongue is hanging out.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this species of extension is common to all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And if the dislocation returns with what we have said, it will be good; and if not, then it is necessary in every species to direct the appropriate cure.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the proper reduction of a dislocation, when it is to the inner parts, the patient should be laid on his side; and then place the bands over the root of the thigh in that spot between the head of the thigh and the part below the tongue; and then extend the band up from the angle of the breastbone to the highest part of the furcula.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And then another strong minister should take the arms of him and press on the large part of his thigh and extend it to the outside by violent extension, for that will return to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this species is the quickest cure with which this member is reduced compared to the other species.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	But if he is unconscious and doesn't obey you when you try this species of cure with both, then you should tie both feet of him together with a strong band, quickly, over both heels and over both toes.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And the length of each of his parts should be the quantity of four digits, and the leg that is dislocated should be extended more than the other by a quantity of two digits.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And then the patient should be suspended over the head of the beam and in the middle; and his length from the ground should be the quantity of two arms.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And then command a strong young man to lessen the head of the thigh, and another young man should be suspended with the patient; and the other young man, lessening the thigh with strength, should push, for the joint will return to its place quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	But in the proper reduction when it is dislocated to the outside, he should lie on his back as we have recommended in the part about having coldness; and the band should be tightened over the thigh properly and over the feet of him.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And then two beams should be placed, one under his feet and the other under his head; and then beams that are close to the middle of the beam that is laid over which dampened sheets are wrapped should be placed, so that the patient is not damaged by the beam being between his thighs, for then the extension to the lower parts will not be drawn up.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And then each minister should extend to his part, and the doctor with his hand should guide the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Therefore, if he obeys when reversed, it will be very good; and if not, then pause over that diligently and in the way we have said to warm him, for that will aid him.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	But he should lie on his side quietly.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is to the front parts, then the leg should be extended quickly, and according to this narrative it is in this way on the beam; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand over the tongue of the patient, and then he shortens that with his other hand, and with that shortening he extends it to the lower parts to the part of the toe.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is to the back parts, then it is not necessary that the patient be extended to the lower parts, and he is elevated from the ground; but he should be placed on a hard cause, just as we have said when the shoulder is dislocated to the outside, according to what we have said about his placement on two beams; and he lies on his face and the bands are extended, just as we have said, without delay.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And let compression be administered with a board over the place to which the joint extends.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Therefore, when the reduction is completed according to what you have — and the sign of the reduction of him is not hidden from you, and it is that you extend both thighs, and when you see those angles and the patient stretches his thigh and expands with no excuse, then know that the member according to which he has returned — and then you adjust both thighs and pause compression and tighten with a band so that the broad part is not bruised in either of the parts; and let the patient rest for three or four days.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And then loosen the band and the paste, and compare one leg to the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	And then if you see those angles in view, then know that the dislocation is already stopped, and let him leave after.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any cause of softening, then return and plaster that, and tighten it according to your first tightening, and let him leave after three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And then loosen that, and let him delay walking on crutches for several days, until he is comforted.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter .xxxii.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	Of the cure of dislocation of the toe.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The toe is dislocated according to three manners, for it is dislocated to the outside, and to the inside, and to the lower parts more than to the back parts; and to the front parts it is not dislocated.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of dislocation of him is that you command the patient to apply his leg against his thigh; then know that the toe is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all his manners is that you make the patient lie straight, so that he extends his leg, if he can on that; have him adhere his toe to the face of him, and pause his foot between his feet; then let him adhere his toe with your palms, and hold those between your fingers over the toe of him with strength, and another minister extend his foot while the toe returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of redemption of him is that his leg adheres to his thigh with non-laborious elevation.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then plaster that and let the band adhere to his thigh, and then have him lie those together with a band for three or four days, and then loosen those.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not use the patient for walking for several days until he is healed and comforted.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	But if his reduction by you is excused, then administer strong extension with bands of which in the cure of the shoulder preceding narrative was spoken.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter .xxxiii.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Of the cure of dislocation of the toe.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The toe sometimes is bruised by minor removal, and sometimes it is dislocated according to compliment, and its dislocation is made either to the inner parts or to the outside.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of his dislocation is that you see the talus [ankle bone] swollen proceeding from the part where it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	But the cure for his removal is a gentle reduction and that he be extended with ease by hands and wrapped while he returns [to his normal state].
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	But in the cure of him when he is dislocated according to nature, one should make the patient lie down straight and have a strong and valiant minister from behind hold his hips in the middle of his back in that very spot.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	Then with your right hand take the foot from its highest part and with your left hand from the lowest part of the foot in the spot of the ankle.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand and with your left twice, then extend it with your left; and press the bottom of the foot with your right behind the leg as you work.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And do this twice according to what we have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	Then press the bottom of the foot to the leg on the third round and you are at the ankle.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	So if it returns in one or two rounds according to this manner and you see the foot wrapped, it is good; but if not, then repeat the operation upon him until he returns.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if it is prohibited to you to reduce him with what we have recommended then let the patient lie on his back on the ground and stretch a mat firm on the ground and place a pillow between his thighs and wrap a cloth around him so that he does not turn over.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And let the minister of him have his thighs and let another minister extend the foot with his hands or with an instrument that lies upon the neck of the foot; and let each minister extend against the extension of his party, and let the pillow be extended between the patient's thighs holding it there so that the body is not drawn to the parts below its extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And let the doctor wrap the dislocation with his hands and let another minister hold the healthy thigh at the parts below, for the dislocation returns with ease.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And therefore when the dislocation returns and you see the health of its reduction, then pause plaster and stretch that with strong instruments and tie the foot to the leg.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And take care of or guard against the nerves which are behind on the talus that the instrument upon it is not violent and lead that strongly.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	Then let him leave it for two or three days and if the instrument is softened then stretch it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And let him loosen it on the third day or fourth and prohibit the patient from walking for 40 days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if he is forced to go before that space it is not secure that the dislocation is not dissolved and corrupted upon him and let there be no cure upon him.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if there happens to him pus by cautery then let you minister to the ceasing of him that in which we preceded our narration, in another place of cure and embrocation, until it is cleaned out.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter .xxxii.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	Of cure for dislocation of the toes of the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	Let him who is dislocated be wrapped with little extension without difficulty and before it is easier.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	But if the dislocation is in any part of the neck of the foot then let him lie down with his foot straight on a flat place upon the earth or table and be standing there as if he were walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And let you stand on your feet and place your toe upon that which protrudes from the joints and let you press it with your foot with strength until he returns and see that it is wrapped and there does not appear in the spot any eminence.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And let you place beneath the belly of his foot a table which takes up all the foot and let it have two ends, and let you stretch that with decent and firm strength for three days; then loosen him and let him rest from walking for several days until he is stretched out and his reduction is secure.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter .xxxv.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Of the kinds of dislocations which are made by blow or by fracture or by any other impaction.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When that happens for any cause and you are proficient in the cure of that and in the restoration of him, several times succeed death.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And for that not let you presume upon the cure of him but he who is wise in the art, long experienced, merciful and compassionate, tardy, not hasty nor presumptuous; and let him use in the commencement of medicines which yield pus by cautery only, and let him examine the patient to the divine judgement, unless one from whom you expect salvation, from wickedness alleviation, and in which appears some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And therefore make haste to do the reduction upon him at the commencement of the cause, before he goes into pus by cautery.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And therefore if the member returns according as we will let you then minister regime which yields pus by cautery and cure the wound with that which suits him of the dry unguents.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if dislocation is by fracture and impaction happens in the bones separated let you be proficient in their setting and do in that what we have said in the simple maladies of those which are preceded in their places.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And guard and avoid according to your strength that of the instrument in ways of fear according as my prediction is preceded for you are better before your creator, and more permanent to your glory, and healthier to your body will be seen those in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus end the words of Albucasis perfectly of which God be beneficent.
Amen.	Amen.
